Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Grammar of Hupda Maku
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0111550

Award Number: 0111550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4593               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve Danziger danziger@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Eve Danziger, Ms. Patience Epps will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on Hupda, a
              little documented language of the Maku family, spoken in the Vaupes region of
              the northwestern Brazilian state of Amazonas. The investigation will produce
              materials for a grammar, orthography, lexicon, and collection of texts. Most of
              the estimated 1500 speakers of Hupda follow a semi-nomadic lifestyle and rely
              on hunting, gathering, fishing, and the cultivation of bitter manioc for
              subsistence. Given this relatively small population of speakers and the
              uncertain future of the cultures and lifestyles of indigenous groups like the
              Hupda people, the Hupda language may not be viable for many more years.

The
              significance of this documentation of an endangered language is twofold. First,
              such efforts add to our understanding of what is possible in human language.
              Second, such efforts contribute to language preservation. The preservation of
              the world's linguistic diversity is important both for the continued richness
              of human knowledge and for the communities of speakers themselves, whose
              cultural knowledge and artistic achievements are often closely intertwined with
              their linguistic heritage. The creation of an orthography is especially desired
              by the Hupda community, and this will be an important step toward
              native-language literacy and the creation of pedagogical materials, which in
              turn will encourage the community's language preservation efforts. This
              research also addresses questions of language contact and intergroup relations
              in the history and prehistory of the region.

