Title       : The Colonization of Land by Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0111001

Award Number: 0111001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan C. Wright jcwright@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Carefoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although several groups of animals have colonized land, the evolutionary changes
              that have made this possible are only superficially understood.  This is due in
              large part to difficulties in resolving the evolutionary relationships among
              terrestrial taxa within a particular group, and their relationships to aquatic
              counterparts, problems that leave the status of both the aquatic ancestors and
              transitional or 'prototypal' terrestrial species unresolved.  In the case of
              the three most successful terrestrial taxa, the tetrapod vertebrates, the
              insects, and the arachnids, it is clear that living descendents of these
              ancestral groups no longer survive.  This greatly limits our understanding of
              the adaptive transitions that have made terrestrial life possible.   
              

Terrestrial isopods, commonly known as woodlice or sowbugs, provide
              possibly the best 'model system' for studying the evolution of physiological
              systems accompanying the aquatic-terrestrial transition.  In contrast to the
              other major terrestrial animals, they are represented by living groups that
              occupy diverse habitats from marine aquatic to 'transitional' intertidal and
              fully terrestrial.  The evolutionary relationships of living species have
              recently been elucidated in considerable detail from comparative anatomy and
              molecular phylogenetic techniques, and these indicate that the aquatic and
              intertidal species are more basal, and thereby more closely related to other
              marine isopods, than the more 'derived' terrestrial species.  Furthermore, they
              indicate at least three independent origins of a terrestrial habit.  Taken
              together, these factors provide an excellent basis for comparative
              physiological studies.  By reconstructing an evolutionary lineage from marine
              to fully terrestrial, and comparing specific physiological traits across
              species taken from that lineage, it is possible to understand the physiological
              transitions involved.  Building a picture of the physiological changes in this
              way allows us not only to study specific changes that have accompanied
              terrestriality, but also to compare adaptive solutions among the independent
              terrestrial radiations.  

Studies will focus on five main physiological
              systems.  Water vapor absorption (WVA) is known from only one group of
              terrestrial isopods and allows animals to recover water in ambient humidities
              exceeding approximately 87%.  The condensation of water vapor involves the
              secretion of concentrated salt solution by the gills to generate reduced vapor
              pressure.  A key question in explaining the evolution of WVA is to unravel the
              ancestral functions of salt secretion in intertidal or terrestrial species. 
              Like WVA, both nitrogenous excretion and ion regulation are closely associated
              with water balance.  Terrestrial isopods excrete nitrogenous waste as ammonia
              gas, and this presents an intriguing solution to water conservation by
              potentially eliminating simultaneous water losses.  Ammonia volatilization
              does, however, cause acidification of the gill surface and buffering of
              accumulated acid is essential for the process to work.  Understanding the
              buffering mechanism, and its possible preadaptive functions, is thus essential
              in explaining how ammonia volatilization evolved.  

Most terrestrial animals
              possess efficient mechanisms for regulating blood solute concentration,
              protecting the tissues against osmotic hydration or dehydration and resultant
              changes in cell volume.  Aquatic isopods are capable of regulating blood salt
              concentration in both elevated (hyper-osmotic) and depressed (hypo-osmotic)
              external salinities.  Recent studies have shown that intertidal species
              counteract increasing blood salinities imposed by dehydration by excreting
              salts across the gills, as in aquatic species.  Fully terrestrial species
              cannot excrete salts, however, since dietary salts are impoverished.  One group
              has been shown to down-regulate blood salts by sequestration in the hindgut
              during dehydration.  Although regulation has been demonstrated in other groups,
              the mechanisms await investigation.  At least one group appears to have lost
              the ancestral capacity for osmoregulation.  As well as osmotic concentration
              imposed by dehydration, isopods may face osmotic dilution during rain showers,
              a danger exacerbated by their permeable cuticles.  The mechanisms by which
              excess water is eliminated are essentially unstudied, though recent work
              indicates a role of the maxillary glands in producing dilute urine.  

The
              remaining areas of study will focus on reproductive physiology, specifically
              maternal regulation of the embryonic environment and ion regulation of
              periembryonic fluid by the eggs.  The eggs and newly hatched juveniles (mancas)
              are brooded in a fluid-filled marsupium.  Marine isopods flush this with
              seawater, but terrestrial species either fill it from external water sources or
              from the blood.  Desiccation and thermal stresses on land demand either
              maternal regulation of the marsupial environment or high physiological
              tolerance in early developmental stages.  Recent studies have shown extreme
              tolerance of osmolality, pH, temperature and ammonia extremes in embryos of
              terrestrial isopods, and pH and ion regulation appears to employ a greatly
              enlarged embryonic 'dorsal organ'.  Studies will investigate ion transport
              mechanisms in this organ.  Comparisons within lineages will reveal whether the
              enlargement of the dorsal organ is a unique terrestrial innovation and will
              test the hypothesis that its ancestral function was calcium uptake for
              mineralization of the cuticle.  

