Title       : Genetic Analysis of Root-knot Nematodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0111080

Award Number: 0111080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie M. Williamson vmwilliamson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Root-knot nematodes are tiny, parasitic worms that infect a wide range of plants
              and cause major yield losses to the world's crops.  Changes to the plant after
              infection include the formation of galls or root-knots on root systems. 
              Complex molecular signaling between the host and parasite mediates this
              interaction.  Analysis of the roles of the nematode's genes in causing root
              galling and crop loss has not been possible because of the lack of genetic
              analysis of the nematode and the lack of knowledge of nematode's genome
              structure.  A major constraint has been that several species of nematodes do
              not reproduce sexually, making genetic analysis very difficult. However,
              isolates of the nematode species, Meloidogyne hapla, do reproduce sexually,
              making this species an excellent model to gain information on what genes in the
              nematode are responsible for its destructive properties.  The goal of the
              current research is to establish a genetic system for M. hapla.  Nematode
              strains with differences in DNA markers and in ability to reproduce on
              particular plant lines have already been identified.  In this study, the
              inheritance of ability to reproduce on a wild potato isolate with the gene Rmc1
              will be investigated.  A protocol to carry out controlled genetic crosses will
              be developed and segregation of DNA markers will be monitored.  Segregation of
              markers and virulence in the presence of Rmc1 will be assessed to initiate a
              genetic linkage map.  A DNA library representing the entire M. hapla genome
              will be produced.  DNA hybridization to nematode chromosomes will be carried
              out to aid in determining the genome structure.  The linkage map and markers
              will be a resource for cloning nematode genes associated with ability to
              parasitise different plant species.  Information gained from these studies will
              facilitate understanding of mechanisms by which parasitic nematodes circumvent
              plant resistance genes and may lead to environmentally safer means of nematode
              control in agriculture.  



