Title       : Fundamental Studies of Electron Transfer in Supramolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0111435

Award Number: 0111435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Waldeck dave@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor David H. Waldeck, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Pittsburgh, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              for his studies of electron transfer in supramolecular systems. Time-resolved
              fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to study photoinduced electron transfer
              in well-defined supramolecular systems. The studies will explore fundamental
              issues of solvation and electronic coupling that are important to chemical
              reactivity and supramolecular chemistry. By studying electron transfer in a
              rigid unimolecular system which has electron donor and acceptor units on
              opposite sides of a molecular cleft, the importance of non-bonded contacts
              between the electron clouds of the donor and acceptor groups and other
              molecules can be assessed. Studies will be performed for two types of systems,
              one in which a molecular moiety is covalently bound to the rigid bridge and
              lies in the cleft and one in which a guest molecule hydrogen bonds to a
              receptor located on the bridge. Molecular solvation models, the dependence of
              coupling on electronic character, the transition from weak to strong coupling,
              and the influence of nuclear motion will be explored.

Electron transfer
              between distinct molecular units is the primary event in many natural (e.g.,
              photosynthesis) and technological (e.g., corrosion) processes. In addition,
              electron transfer is a relatively simple chemical transformation amenable to
              rigorous and quantitative study. On a broader level, electron transfer and
              charge displacement are central elements of most chemical reactions.
              Nonetheless, our understanding of how the two electron clouds of non-bonded
              molecules interact with one another, an essential element of any chemical
              transformation, is not well understood. With the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor David H. Waldeck, of the Department
              of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh, is carrying out studies designed
              to investigate and quantify fundamental aspects of electron transfer reactions
              that involve electron tunneling through non-bonded contacts.
