Title       : Entry, Learning, and Industry Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0111429

Award Number: 0111429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Klepper sk3f@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Three projects concerning the conditions that lead firms to enter new industries
              and that cause industries to be concentrated in narrow geographic regions are
              conducted.  
The first project analyzes the circumstances that lead employees
              of existing firms to leave and start competing firms in the same industry. 
              Employees of incumbent firms are assumed to learn useful technical and
              marketing knowledge in the specialized domains in which they work for their
              employers, which they exploit in starting their own firms.  Better performing
              firms are assumed to be richer learning environments, leading them to spawn
              more and better-performing employee startups.  Employee startups thus serve to
              diffuse knowledge to new organizations, thereby increasing the strength of the
              competitors in an industry.  These ideas are tested using data that builds on
              data collected in a prior NSF project on all entrants into the automobile and
              laser industries.  For each industry, various predictions concerning the types
              of firms that spawn more employee startups, the market conditions that are
              conducive to such startups, and the relationship between employee startups and
              the prior experiences of their founders are tested.
The second project
              analyzes the potential of a rare chance event, namely the location of a few
              very successful early entrants in the same region, to profoundly affect the
              evolution of the geographic structure of an industry.  This can occur through
              the employee startup process envisioned in the first project.  If employee
              startups drive regional concentrations, it implies that regional public policy
              efforts to promote industry concentrations should focus on facilitating
              employee startups.  The importance of employee startups in regional industry
              concentrations is tested using the data compiled in the first project on the
              automobile industry, which became heavily concentrated around Detroit,
              Michigan.  The location and heritage of every automobile producer is traced to
              test the extent to which the success of the Detroit producers was concentrated
              in firms that either directly or though other employee startups can be traced
              back to four of the most successful early automobile entrants, Olds Motor
              Works, Cadillac, Buick, and Ford, all of which located in the Detroit area. 
              
The last project explores how learning from experience leads firms to expand
              the repertoire of activities they conduct within industries.  It is conjectured
              that as firms learn about the core technologies of an industry, they expand
              their efforts into new activities that are more challenging to master.  This
              perspective can account for patterns in the way firms grow and also why the
              leaders of industries tend to produce the broadest array of the industry's
              products.  It also implies that older and more qualified firms are the first to
              diversify into new industry domains created by innovations, which contrasts
              with recent theories about how innovations can lead to turnover in the leaders
              of an industry.  The theory is tested using the data for the automobile and
              laser industries and also using data for part of the history of the tire
              industry developed in the same prior NSF project.  The empirical examination
              probes the kinds of innovations that pose the greatest challenges to an
              industry's leading firms versus those that reinforce the positions of the
              industry's leaders.  

