Title       : Social Identity and Subgroup Social Dilemmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0111326

Award Number: 0111326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay W. Jackson jacksonj@ipfw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When each individual in a group benefits more by defecting than cooperating, the
              situation is a social dilemma. For example, giving blood is irrational in a
              purely economic sense because it is costly in terms of time, effort, and pain,
              and because people who do not donate are still permitted access to the blood
              supply in a time of need. It is often the case that the economically rational
              response to a social dilemma is defection, because no matter what others do, a
              defector ends up in a superior position, whereas contributors risk being taken
              advantage of or exploited. However, if most act this way, everybody is worse
              off than if most cooperate. Theoretically, the extent to which people identify
              with a group should lead to more cooperative responses to a social dilemma.
              However, research on this relationship has been equivocal. A recently developed
              multidimensional model of social identity will be applied to this controversy.
              In the first phase of this program of research (10 studies), a multidimensional
              scale of group identification will be developed and evaluated. Standard
              psychometric procedures will be followed to establish the validity and
              reliability of the scale across various types of real and contrived groups. In
              Phase 2, hypotheses regarding the relationship between the dimensions of social
              identity and cooperative responses to social dilemmas will be tested across
              three types of groups (large-scale, small-scale, contrived) using standard
              laboratory procedures. Hypotheses regarding how critical sociostructural
              variables (group size, group status, and group assignment) affect the different
              dimensions of social identity and cooperative responses to social dilemmas will
              also be tested. Although real life social dilemmas often involve subgroups, or
              people with varied social identities, little empirical research has directly
              examined these particular social situations. Therefore, in Phase 3, laboratory
              experiments will test hypotheses regarding how people respond to subgroup
              social dilemmas compared to interpersonal or superordinate social dilemmas, and
              the cognitive and emotional processes underlying such responses. The impact of
              resource inequality between the groups and attributions regarding the
              inequality will also be examined. Finally, in Phase 4, the ongoing interactions
              between individuals caught up in a social dilemma will be examined. Both intra-
              and inter-group interactions will be examined. Overall, this program of
              research is designed to integrate and be applicable to theories of social
              identity, social dilemmas, intergroup relations, and small group decision
              making. The broader goal is to further our scientific understanding of real
              situations that are increasingly prevalent in society: When people with diverse
              backgrounds make decisions that affect both the members of their own group and
              the members of other groups.

