Title       : Genetics and Plasticity in Adaptation to Altitude in the Deer Mouse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0111604

Award Number: 0111604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Hammond kimberly.hammond@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Chappell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0111604  Hammond & Chappell

Life at high altitude poses a dual challenge to
              mammals.  First, energy demands are greater because environmental temperatures
              are generally lower than at low altitudes in the same latitudinal range.  At
              the same time, however, low oxygen availability (hypoxia) limits an
              individual's capacity for energy expenditure.  One of the physiological
              mechanisms animals use to cope with the low oxygen availability at high
              altitudes is to increase the amount of oxygen that can be carried from the
              lungs to the cells by increasing hemoglobin oxygen binding capacity (hemoglobin
              oxygen affinity).  These changes can occur within the lifetime of an
              individual, but there are also known genetic differences between animals,
              within a species, for hemoglobin / oxygen binding ability.  Alternatively, many
              animals are known to have the capacity to reversibly increase the size and
              functional capacity of various organ systems (including the cardiovascular
              system) in the face of increased demand (phenotypic plasticity) and some
              animals use this plasticity to cope with both low temperatures and hypoxia at
              high altitudes.

A model animal for the study of hemoglobin genetics is the
              deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) which has been shown, in classic studies,
              to have genetic differences in hemoglobin type that are strongly correlated
              with native altitude, affect oxygen binding, and positively influence
              short-term exercise performance.  Deer mice have also been shown to display
              increases in the size of the lungs, heart and digestive tract at high
              altitudes.  One limitation of the work to date on both deer mice hemoglobins
              and organ phenotypic plasticity, is that it did not incorporate the influence
              of the site of gestational development and maturation (birth site), because it
              was performed on animals that were born and allowed to mature at low altitudes
              before they were moved to high altitude. It is known, however, that the
              gestational environment can be crucial to determining the anatomical and
              physiological capacity of adult animals. Thus the first goal of this research
              is to determine how energy expenditure (aerobic performance) is affected by
              gestational development at specific altitudes and if the hemoglobin genetics
              are still significant in determining the individual's physiological capacity to
              cope with life at high altitudes after accounting for plasticity of organ size.
              To test this, aerobic performance trials will be performed on mice with
              different hemoglobin genotypes born and reared at either high or low
              altitude.

Another unanswered question is the effect of hemoglobin genetics
              on long-term energy expenditure (i.e., over periods of days or weeks).  This is
              an important issue new research has shown that sustainable energy demands of
              mice living at high altitudes can be nearly as high as previous measures of
              short term aerobic capacity.  Young animals face an even greater challenge. 
              Newly weaned juveniles are smaller than adults but have correspondingly higher
              mass-specific energy demands.  Therefore it seems reasonable to expect that
              growth rates might be influenced by hemoglobin genotype and site of gestational
              development.  Accordingly, the second goal of this research is to determine if
              hemoglobin genotype influences growth rates and sustainable metabolic rate
              under conditions of cold exposure and high-altitude hypoxia.  To test this,
              mice with specific hemoglobin genotypes will be reared in semi-natural
              conditions at high and low test altitudes.  We expect that mice with the
              appropriate hemoglobin genotype for a given test altitude will have the highest
              rates of sustainable metabolic output (measured as food consumption) and
              growth.   


