Title       : Advice and Beliefs in Experimental Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0111640

Award Number: 0111640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaw Nyarko yaw.nyarko@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Schotter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The decisions of economic agents are many times made on the basis of the advice
              they get from others. For example, people choose doctors based on the
              recommendations they get from friends, buy stocks on the basis of tips from
              strangers, choose schools for their children on the basis word of mouth advice
              etc. In short much of what we do is done by incorporating advice from others
              into our decision process. But little is know about how and why people follow
              advice. Do they do so because they think that others are better at doing the
              task demanded of them (i.e. investing their money, choosing a school for their
              kids) or do they do so because they think that others have access to better
              information? What are the characteristics of advice givers that make us more
              eager to accept their opinion? Is it their characteristics (i.e. gender, area
              of expertise, grade point average or IQ, etc.) or their track record on the
              task at hand (i.e. how they performed in the past, how experienced they are)?
              Does advice increase the efficiency of group decision-making or markets?
	In
              this experimental research we try to isolate what it is about advice that makes
              it so valuable to us and try to measure exactly how informative a piece of
              advice is. For example, in the experiments we run we present a decision problem
              to a subject in a computer lab where others have tried this problem before.
              These predecessors will furnish a pool of advice givers for the current set of
              subjects. The current set of subjects will be asked to make their decision
              under a set of different circumstances. For some subjects we will auction off
              the advice of subjects who has done the decision problem before them and try to
              infer from the winning price what the value of the advice is to them. We will
              also auction off the time series of decision made by the advice giver in his or
              her previous interaction in the problem. In other words, the advice giver may
              have played the game 60 times and made 60 decisions for which he or she was
              paid accordingly. Instead of auctioning off the advice of this advice giver, we
              might auction off the right to observe their history of play in the game. If
              advice were more valuable than information, we would expect that the advice
              would sell for more on the market. This would also indicate that people feel
              that others are better capable than they are of processing information.
	These
              types of experiments are aimed at investigating the value of advice to
              individual decision makers. Advice is also important to groups in the group
              decision problems they face. In this part of our experiment we will see if
              games played with advice from people who have played the game before is
              efficiency increasing. In other words, do societies make better and more
              efficient group decisions when they are able to get advice from people who have
              played the game before them?
	We think that this research is important because
              while advice is such a ubiquitous phenomenon, it is practically ignored in
              economics since economic theory is so eager to assume that all economic agents
              are both fully rational and perfect calculators. In such a world there
              obviously is no role for advice (everyone is an expert). Hence, if advice is
              efficiency decreasing then it would be important to know this and be able to
              increase our ability 

