Title       : New NMR Methods for Investigating Structure in Inorganic Oxide Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0111109

Award Number: 0111109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Grandinetti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Philip J. Grandinetti of Ohio State University is funded for his research on
              new NMR methods for investigating structure in inorganic oxide glasses by the
              Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.  Advanced magic angle
              spinning (MAS) techniques, such as rotor assisted polarization transfer (RAPT)
              and fast spinning gives transfer enhancement at rotary resonance (FASTER),
              developed at Ohio State University and elsewhere will be refined for
              applications to structural determinations in glasses.  RAPT quadrupolar
              sensitivity enhancement schemes will be refined for obtaining maximal
              enhancements for a wide range of spin couplings and resonant offsets, and for
              obtaining RAPT enhanced versions of dynamic-angle spinning (DAS) and
              multiple-quantum (MQ)-MAS. Numerical and experimental studies of the dependence
              of the FASTER rotary resonances on parameters such as nuclear spin, quadrupolar
              coupling, asymmetry, and chemical shifts will be done in order to compare
              FASTER with other MQ-MAS methods.  Sensitivity enhanced versions of DAS and
              MQ-MAS will be used to study binary (metal oxide silicates ) and ternary
              (bimetal oxide silicates) glass compositions, with a view towards quantifying
              Si-O-Si bond angles, coordination numbers, and geometries around bridging and
              non-bridging oxygens.

The understanding of inorganic oxide glasses obtained
              from this research will impact researchers in several areas.  The potential
              importance of solid-state NMR methods in structure determinations has long been
              thwarted by sensitivity issues.  Many of these issues are being overcome by
              accomplishments from Dr. Grandinetti's group and by others, and will be further
              overcome by the the research done at Ohio State University.  The methods that
              will be developed for enhancing solid-state NMR sensitivity will have a broad
              impact on researchers wanting to take full advantage of quadrupolar nuclei as
              structural probes.
