Title       : Labor Market Compensation and Economic Behavior: An Experimental Examination of
               Team Production and Tournaments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0111789

Award Number: 0111789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Vandegrift vandedon@tcnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The College of New Jersey
	      P.O. Box 7718
	      Ewing, NJ  086280718    609/771-3255

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In the standard economic theory of labor markets, employees are compensated
              based on the value of their individual contributions to output: the relative
              performance of co-workers does not affect compensation. But corporations are
              increasingly instituting compensation arrangements that do not reward employees
              in accordance with the standard theory of labor markets. In one arrangement,
              often referred to as a tournament, rewards are based upon the relative
              performance of the participants rather than their absolute performance. In
              another arrangement, often referred to as team production, teams rather than
              individuals are responsible for a set of tasks. If firms are able to measure
              only team output, firms cannot compensate team members in accordance with their
              individual contributions.  

Despite widespread incidence of tournaments and
              team production in labor markets, the economic literature contains relatively
              little on behavior in tournaments and under team production. These experiments
              assess behavior, performance, and risk taking under tournaments and team
              production. Such experiments provide a better understanding of behavior under
              various compensation schemes as well as a basis for the design of contracts.
              

The research in this proposal provides three separate studies. The first
              study considers whether tournament participants are overly optimistic regarding
              success in tournaments (i.e. overestimate their relative performance) and
              whether this causes too many individuals to enter tournament markets. If too
              many individuals enter, we may implement public policies to reduce the
              inefficiencies related to overcrowding. The second study considers whether
              performance under team production varies based on: i) the number of team
              members; ii) whether team members have information about the performance of
              other team members; and iii) whether the firm sets production targets and
              rewards the team when they exceed the target. A better understanding of team
              production helps in the design of public policies concerning contractual
              relations within and between firms. The final study considers whether an
              irrational desire to avoid losses, referred to as loss aversion, is an
              important determinant of performance in tournaments and whether this effect
              diminishes over time. Such information is important in the design of labor
              contracts.  

To assess performance and risk taking in tournaments and under
              team production, we conduct controlled experiments using students at The
              Pennsylvania State University as subjects. Subjects complete a computer-based
              numerical forecasting task to measure performance. To simulate labor market
              decisions, subjects are paid based on the accuracy of their forecasts at the
              end of each experimental session.  



