Title       : IRCEB: Nitrate Uptake and Retention in Streams: Mechanisms and Effects of Human
               Disturbances from Stream Reaches to Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0111410

Award Number: 0111410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Mulholland mulhollandpj@ornl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. Tank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1356,9169,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Human activities are flooding the biosphere with nitrogen (N), changing the
              biogeochemistry of terrestrial and aquatic environments. The fate of much of
              the anthropogenic N load to the biosphere is uncertain because mass balance
              studies of major watersheds show that most of the added N is not exported to
              the oceans but is missing, having disappeared from our accounting somewhere
              within these watersheds.  Most of the inorganic N entering streams is in the
              form of nitrate. Traditionally, nitrate has been thought to flow freely
              downstream to coastal ecosystems. Recently, however, mass balance analyses for
              the
Mississippi drainage have shown that large quantities of nitrate are lost
              as water travels through its tributary streams. This conclusion is consistent
              with earlier findings that smaller streams are most retentive of ammonium. 
              This project will be an intensive, inter-site study of the fate of nitrate in
              streams. The investigators will evaluate whether streams are indeed important
              sites of N retention in the landscape and how human disturbances affect that
              retention. Field 15N-tracer experiments will be used to determine the rates and
              factors controlling nitrate uptake and retention in relatively pristine streams
              and in disturbed (agricultural and urban) streams.   The experimental results
              will be used to develop a process-based model of nitrate retention in streams.
              The results will be extended to larger spatial scales using GIS approaches to
              predict nitrate retention in large river basins at each of eight study sites.
              These predictions will be tested with synoptic field measurements of stream
              nitrate concentrations within each basin. The validated river basin model will
              be an important land-use planning tool for controlling the N loading of lakes
              and coastal ecosystems. The work will have broader implications to society by
              explicitly evaluating the effects of human disturbance on N retention in stream
              networks, contributing the new knowledge needed for a more sustainable
              management of watersheds. 

