Title       : Uncovering Long-Run Economic Relationships in High-Frequency Financial Data --
               An Accomplishment Based Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0111802

Award Number: 0111802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim Bollerslev boller@econ.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Torben G. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The advent of computerized communication networks and automated trade execution
              systems have resulted in the recent availability of real-time prices and
              information variables for a host of different financial markets and
              instruments. This project aims to expand on the ability to extract useful
              information about important economic phenomena from this new rich source of
              data.  Specifically, the high-frequency data hold the promise of delivering:
              (i) a much better understanding of the type of information that induces
              important price movements and their relation to the underlying market
              microstructure; (ii) a deeper understanding concerning the functioning of
              markets and the effectiveness of various macroeconomic policies; (iii) the
              development of new and more accurate risk measurements; and (iv) important
              information about the longer-run interday volatility dependencies that play a
              crucial role in asset pricing and risk management.  Meanwhile, it has become
              increasingly clear that the satisfactory empirical analysis of high -frequency
              data presents a host of unique and challenging problems, requiring the
              development of new modeling paradigms and specialized procedures relative to
              the techniques employed in traditional time series econometrics involving the
              analysis of daily or lower frequency macroeconomic and financial data. The
              previous NSF-sponsored research (award SES-9730440) has been at the forefront
              of these developments. Many of the ideas and methodologies put forth in our
              various papers have already been successfully implemented and applied by other
              researchers and finance practitioners in academia, government, and the private
              sector. Most immediately, our findings have allowed for the construction of
              more accurate financial market volatility forecasts and ex-post volatility
              measurements. Our proposed research agenda in turn holds the promise of
              improved procedures for risk management, monitoring, and oversight, and should
              also result in a deeper understanding concerning the efficiency of markets and
              the effectiveness of different macroeconomic policies. The general results of
              the proposed activity should therefore be of relevance to applied
              macroeconomists, time series econometricians, financial researchers,
              regulators, and practitioners alike. 
