Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Psycholinguistic Investigation of Second
               Language Lexical Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0111733

Award Number: 0111733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11681              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll JFK7@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Kroll & Sunderman 0111733

With National Science Foundation support,
              Ms. Gretchen Sunderman will collect data for her doctoral dissertation under
              the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll. Her research will investigate the
              development of second language lexical fluency. Although it is common practice
              to have second language learners attempt to suppress their first language in
              classroom contexts, recent psycholinguistic research suggests that it is
              impossible to do so. Words in the first language are active and compete for
              selection even when learners intend to read or speak in the second language
              only. Ms. Sunderman's experiments will include three groups of native speakers
              of English at different stages of second language proficiency in Spanish. Her
              goal is to examine the activation of the first language as learners acquire
              Spanish. One set of experiments will examine the first language in
              comprehension, and another set of experiments will examine it in spoken
              production. Participants will also take a battery of individual differences
              tests in their first language. Comparisons of these second language learners to
              monolinguals matched on the individual differences measures will provide an
              examination of some cognitive consequences of second language learning for
              first language performance.

This research is important for several reasons.
              First, it will advance our understanding of the cognitive processes involved in
              second language lexical acquisition. Second, it will advance our understanding
              of cross-language competition at different levels of second language
              proficiency. Finally, in examining differences in individuals' ability to
              suppress the first language during second language comprehension and
              production, this research will inform second language pedagogy and enhance the
              success of learning and teaching of second language vocabulary.


