Title       : Travel Grant for Second Eastern Mediterranean Chemical Engineering Conference
               for Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0111159

Award Number: 0111159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacques L. Zakin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Baird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

CTS-0111159
Zakin, Jacques, Ohio State University (PI); Baird,
              Donald, Virginia Polytechnic Institute (Co-PI)


This award supports an
              international group travel grant for US academic researchers invited to the
              Second Eastern Chemical Engineering Conference for Collaborative Research to be
              held in Ankara, Turkey, May 20-25, 2001. The conference participants are from
              the eastern Mediterranean countries of Turkey, Greece, Israel, Jordan, and also
              include participants from the United States. Collaborative research between
              Turkey, Greece, Israel, Jordan, and the United States will be very much
              encouraged as the key by-product of this conference. Chemical engineering
              research sub-disciplines to be covered at the meeting include:  catalysis,
              advanced materials, separations, systems engineering, and biotechnology.  NSF
              funding will be used for travel costs for about twenty Unites States chemical
              engineering faculty including partial support for five prominent U. S.
              researchers to serve as discussion leaders in their respective areas of
              chemical engineering.  The USA participation plan for the Conference is
              designed to help assure the participation of young faculty and graduate
              students through an approximate 50% target for this group.  Five,
              sub-discipline reports summarizing the activities and accomplishments of the
              meeting in each of the five areas will be provided to NSF after the meeting as
              part of the final report. The Turkish organizers will pay for local
              arrangements as well as pay for the travel of seven additional U. S.
              researchers in areas and for individuals they particularly want to attend.
The
              U. S. will benefit from this program by virtue of the productive relationships
              that are expected to emerge leading to the transfer of expertise.



