Title       : The Effect of Internet Car Shopping on Prices and Discrimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0111885

Award Number: 0111885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona M. Scott Morton fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Florian Zettelmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Internet referral services (IRS's) are web-based businesses that provide
              information about the characteristics and market prices of new cars to
              consumers, and allow them to request a price quote from an affiliated dealer in
              the region. If the quote is satisfactory, the consumer can buy the car from
              that dealer without further negotiation. IRS's sell subscriptions to one or two
              dealers in a region in exchange for giving the dealer a stream of customer
              leads. If the dealer does not sell to a sufficient proportion of the leads, the
              IRS may terminate the dealer and contract with another dealer in the area.
              
Our dataset combines referral requests from Autobytel.com (the leading IRS)
              in 1999 with new car transaction data from J.D. Power and Associates that
              contain prices, car characteristics, and customer characteristics. We compare
              the prices paid by consumers who did use Autobytel.com and those who did not.
              We conjecture that online shoppers pay lower prices because the IRS "bargains"
              on behalf of its customers by being willing to move the group's purchases to
              another dealer. Also, the web site provides  information about current market
              prices, and this may also reduce overcharging. In addition, the IRS may be
              contracting with more efficient dealerships that sell at lower prices to all
              consumers.
We find that IRS users pay about 2% less for a given car than an
              "offline" consumer. However, in that analysis we do not formally distinguish
              between a causal role for the referral service and a selection effect. If
              customers who use the Internet are more educated, for example, we expect them
              to achieve lower than average prices regardless of the Internet. Alternatively,
              the Internet could be educating customers who were previously not informed so
              they pay lower prices. This is obviously a very important distinction both for
              social welfare and industry structure. We therefore to use two different
              econometric techniques to establish what the causal effect of an IRS is on the
              price that customers pay for new cars. A second goal of the expanded research
              program is to create an index of competition in the local dealer market to see
              if the IRS is "creating competition" in markets where there is little existing
              competition. 
The second project examines whether there is race and gender
              discrimination in new car prices. Since we have individual-level information on
              gender as well as on whether a consumer is Asian or Hispanic, we test if
              female, Asian, and Hispanic buyers pay above or below average for a new car. To
              analyze the prices paid by African-Americans we have no individual-level data
              and thus rely on the probability that a customer is black according to census
              block information.
The final aspect of the project is the most exciting: to
              integrate the race and ethnic discrimination results with the use of the
              Internet. We plan to find out a) if minorities and women who use the Internet
              pay prices that are closer to those paid by whites and men, respectively, and
              b) if the Internet is causing the change. Our results have very important
              policy implications. If use of the Internet can reduce the effects of racial
              discrimination then the so-called "Digital Divide" is of even greater
              importance and concern. Our results may demonstrate the benefits of Internet
              usage to minority consumers, and inform the choice of policies to help
              disadvantaged groups get Internet access.

