Title       : Processes of Change in Agricultural Systems: Impacts of Intervention in Ivorian
               Rice Cropping Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0111526

Award Number: 0111526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence C. Becker beckerl@unk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Kearney
	      25th Street & 9th Avenue
	      Kearney, NE  68849    308/865-8441

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technical changes to agriculture in Africa have long been promoted and
              introduced with the aim of improving food security in the region.  The results
              of recent research on the relationship between technology transfer and
              agricultural production in Africa south of the Sahara are, however,
              inconsistent at best, indicating the need for new conceptualizations of the
              problem. This project examines changes to rice production systems in Ivory
              Coast in the context of the neo-liberal reforms of the 1990s in order to
              determine the conditions under which rice growers have responded positively to
              the new policies.  The research will test three main hypotheses:(1) that the
              reforms have had little impact on national rice output but that they have
              affected regional market orientation of rice production; (2) that farmer-led
              innovations can be expected in commercial rice systems but that the macro-level
              economic reforms will have had little impact on the regional rice cropping
              patterns; and (3) where small-scale milling operations provide a market outlet
              for rice producers, positive farmer response to the reforms will be greatest. 
              The research will include a mix of techniques involving both qualitative and
              quantitative information.  The methods to conduct this study include
              establishing accurate information on current rice production and area from data
              provided by local extension service offices throughout the country and
              interviews with local extension workers responsible for rice, rice farmers,
              millers, and traders.  From these updated data, the project will use survey
              research techniques in selected villages using a farming systems approach and
              in selected urban milling and marketing centers using a commodity chain
              analysis approach.

This project will contribute to debates on the role of
              technology transfer and market incentives to stimulate production, and in
              particular on the potential role of intermediary regional commodity chains in
              the development and diffusion of agricultural technology.  This research will
              be of value to social scientists, applied agricultural researcher, and
              policymakers.


