Title       : Dissertation Research: Field Work in Support of a Phylogenetic Study of the
               Mosquito Tribe Sabethini (Diptera:Culicidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9311376

Award Number: 9311376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Woolley jimwoolley@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311376 Woolley          The Sabethini (Diptera: Culicidae) are the least well
              known of the mosquito tribes, yet they are of considerable medical and
              biological interest.  Species are distributed worldwide in a circumsubtropical
              band, achieving their greatest diversity in the tropics.  With few exceptions,
              all are restricted to depositing eggs in plant held waters (bromeliads, pitcher
              plants, seed pods, etc.).  The taxon exhibits a diversity of behaviors atypical
              for mosquitoes, such as nectar stealing from ants and egg brooding by females. 
              In addition, three of the twelve genera have the capacity to vector
              arboviruses.  Lack of explicit phylogenetic hypotheses has prevented the
              examination of these phenomena from an evolutionary standpoint.  Our
              preliminary data indicate that Sabethini is a monophyletic group, however, two
              of the larger genera are polyphyletic.  The dissertation will include study of
              phylogenetic relationships on a worldwide basis.  Morphological character
              systems from three life stages will be used to produce a robust hypothesis of
              relationships.  Here we request funds for museum and field studies to increase
              coverage of critical Old World taxa and groups found to be problematic in
              preliminary analyses.  We expect our results to have an immediate impact on
              mosquito classification and other fields in evolutionary biology. %%% This PhD
              dissertation improvement award provides travel money and supplies for  a
              graduate student to do field work in Brazil and study mosquito material in
              major collections.  The project will produce a needed major worldwide revision
              of the mosquito tribe Sabethini.  Some species in this tribe transmit diseases
              caused by arboviruses, so establishing their relationships will have medical
              importance.  In addition, such an understanding of relationships will provide a
              valuable framework for addressing interesting behavioral phenomena exhibited by
              these mosquitoes such as female egg brooding and nectar stealing from ants. ***
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
