Title       : Selectivity of Partial Oxidation Reactions and Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9311295

Award Number: 9311295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lanny D. Schmidt schmidt@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rutherford Aris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Schmidt     Oxidation reactions are difficult to manage because in
              most situations they exhibit a complex interplay between surface reactions,
              mass transfer, heat transfer, and homogeneous reaction.  These factors produce
              complicated experimental behavior in terms of temperature variations across the
              reactor, flow patterns, multiple steady states, and reaction selectivity.  It
              has been estimated that one-half of all industrial catalytic processes are
              oxidation reaction which are difficult to characterize under laboratory
              conditions.  If this is done by lowering pressures and temperatures to obtain
              rates and selectivities without interference from heat and mass transfer and
              homogeneous reaction, then the results may have little relevance to an
              atmospheric pressure industrial reactor.    The principal investigators plan an
              experimental and modeling program to characterize catalytic oxidation reactions
              and reactors in situations which would be useful in designing new
              configurations for chemical synthesis by partial oxidation and for pollution
              abatement by total oxidation.  They will consider novel reactor geometries
              designed to manipulate flow patterns and residence times to adjust heat and
              mass transfer and contacting in order to attain maximum selectivity to a
              desired product.  Various types of catalytic monoliths and also fluidized beds
              will be used to achieve very high mass and heat transfer rates and very short
              residence times in adiabatic reactors so that the yields of intermediates can
              be maximized.  Reactors will be operated adiabatically to allow reaction heat
              to determine reactor temperature and to si mulate industrial reactors more
              closely.  Staged monoliths will also be examined to determine how systematic
              variations in reactor with position can be used to control performance. 
              Catalyst geometries, flow conditions, and temperatures will be altered such
              that wide variations in these properties can be attained.              n   7   
              ÕSPL152FTMP            n   7    ÕSPL1671TMP            n   7    Abstract -
              Schmidt     Oxidation reactions are difficult to manage because in most
              situations they exhibit a complex interplay b    +                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               +                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  !         !         !              D                                       
                                   +         +     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial   
                                           "             h        E   E   E  R               
               /        Maria K. Burka Maria K. Burka                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
