Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: High Performance Synthesis with Wave Pipelining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9311863

Award Number: 9311863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej Ciesielski ciesiel@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne P. Burleson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5942,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9311863  Ciesielski    This award provides funds to permit Drs. Maciej
              Ciesielski and Wayne Burleson,  Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, University of  Massachusetts/Amherst, to pursue with Drs. Whangue
              Cho and Saeyang Yang,  Departments of Computer Science and Computer
              Engineering, respectively, Pusan  National University, Korea, for 24 months, a
              program of cooperative research  on high performance synthesis with wave
              pipelining.  The objective of this  collaboration is to exchange synthesis
              techniques, tools, and benchmarks in an  attempt to discover appropriate
              methods for restructuring combinational and  sequential logic to facilitate
              wave-pipelining.  Their research tasks involve  studying methods of
              architectural and logic restructuring such that a circuit  can be optimally
              pipelined with minimum area overhead.    Wave pipelining is a method of
              high-performance circuit design which  implements pipelining in logic.  As a
              result, several computational signals  related to different clock cycles can
              propagate through the logic  simultaneously.  In the present research, the
              collaborators will undertake a  formal treatment of wave-pipelining in which
              they will describe the timing  constraints which must be met in order to safely
              propagate multiple signals  through a computational block.  The collaborators
              are recognized as experts in  the field of the proposal.  This project is
              relevant to the objectives of the  U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
              seeks to increase the level of  cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
              and engineers through the  exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  The
              U.S. scientists will benefit  from the unique research and experimental
              environments provided through access  to major Korean electronics industries
              and a nationally funded VLSI research  laboratory with which their Korean
              counterparts maintain close research  cooperation.  Korean participation i n
              the project is supported by the Korea  Science and Engineering Foundation
              (KOSEF).  This project adds an  international cooperative dimension to the PI's
              research under NSF Grant No.  MIP-9208267.  ***
