Title       : Dissertation Research: Significance of Inter-Specific Variation in Plumage
               Patterns of Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9311004

Award Number: 9311004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Bradley Shaffer hbshaffer@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311004  Shaffer    Explanations for species differences in color patterns have
              usually invoked  variation in perceptual systems, such as female preferences. 
              Because  conspicuousness of color depends upon context, properties of the
              environment  should also affect the evolution of color patterns.  Through
              observational and  experimental studies, Ms. Karen Marchetti has shown that
              differences in color  patterns among warbler species of the genus Phylloscopus
              can be predicted from  environmental and behavioral features that affect signal
              transmission.  Her  studies were conducted at one locality in the breeding
              season, and concentrated on  mechanisms of sexual selection (female choice and
              male-male competition).  Now  she will extend the study to encompass the
              non-breeding season and geographical  variation.  First, she will
              experimentally manipulate plumage patterns of one  species, which maintains
              individual territories through the winter, in order to  examine potential
              selective forces (such as predation) that could balance identified  selective
              forces in the breeding season.  Second, she will study a new locality in  the
              breeding season, measuring the extent to which geographical variation in 
              coloration (within species) is associated with geographic variation in habitat.
                Third, she will examine habitat associations and display movements in other 
              groups of birds to determine the extent to which factors influencing the
              evolution  of coloration in Phylloscopus can be generalized.    This
              doctoral-dissertation research will contribute to a number of important areas 
              in evolutionary and behavioral biology.  It will shed light on the conditions
              that  lead to sameness or difference in appearance between males and females,
              on the  mechanisms of sexual selection, and on the importance of the
              non-breeding season  in affecting the evolution of displays and plumage
              patterns.
