Title       : Thermoregulatory Capability and Temperature Effects on Foraging Success in Two
               Species of Crab Spider, Misumenoides formosipes and Misumenops asperatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9311203

Award Number: 9311203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2620               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Casey tca@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
              9311203  Casey     Temperature affects organisms at many levels and influences
              such fundamental processes as metabolic rate, growth rate, and movement
              capability. Although a great deal of research has been devoted to determining
              how temperature affects various processes within a single organism, little work
              has been done to investigate the influence of temperature on between-organism
              interactions.   Using spiders as model terrestrial predators, our research will
              focus on the affect of temperature on predator-prey interactions by asking the
              following questions: does spider foraging success change as environmental
              temperature changes over  the course of a day, and if so, can spiders extend
              the period of maximal prey capture by regulating body temperature? We will use
              two species of crab spider, Misumenops asperatus and Misumenoides formosipes,
              which mature in late spring and late summer, respectively. These spiders are
              ambush predators that hunt on flowers and physically over-power prey rather
              than ensnaring it in silk. Employing a combination of laboratory and field
              experiments, we will determine (for each species) preferred temperature, the
              temperature range over which spiders are capable  of activity, the effect of
              temperature on spider foraging success within that temperature range, the
              timing of greatest prey capture in the field, and the timing of greatest prey
              visitation to flowers used by the spiders. Using spider species which mature at
              different times during the season, and thus experience different temperature
              regimes, will allow us to make a better determination of how temperature may
              affect spiders directly  by limiting the amount of time a spider can remain
              active. Alternatively, spiders may be tolerant to a broad temperature range,
              yet may still be indirectly temperature limited by direct temperature
              limitations on prey activity time.  ***   v       s  t                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 $         $         $       
                                      (                  F                    /              
                                                                                             
                                                                   C    Dutch (scalable)   
              Symbol  " Swiss (scalable)  5 Courier New                                     "
                          h     G   H                 W         G   R:\WW20USER\ABSTRACT.DOT 
                 Rochelle D Ray Rochelle D Ray                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
