Title       : Grass-Roots Science in America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1993 
File        : a9311219

Award Number: 9311219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311219  Goldstein  The tradition of the "amateur" scientist has played a major
              role in  the history of science in the United States.  Famous "amateurs" 
              included founding fathers such as Benjamin Franklin (who presented  a major
              theory of electricity) and Thomas Jefferson.  These  traditions continue to the
              present day though most of contemporary  science is now done by
              "professionals."  Dr. Goldstein is examining  the history of "rank and file"
              scientists and their characteristic  institutions, the state and local
              academies of science.  He argues  that the trend toward professionalization of
              the sciences which  other historians have documented as part of the coming of
              age of  science in America was complemented by the expansion of non- 
              professional science at the local level.  "Grass-roots" naturalists  engaged in
              research that was important to professional scientists  but which was shaped by
              local or regional concerns that were  independent of and occasionally
              conflicted with the goals of the  scientific elite.  Nevertheless, Dr.
              Goldstein has found that the  relations between "professional" and "amateur"
              scientists were  characterized by cooperation and interdependence rather than
              the   hostility that some historians have postulated.    Dr. Goldstein's
              research is organized around the membership and  activities of local academies
              of science.  He analyzes grass-roots  naturalists in terms of their
              significance in the rapidly changing  scientific community and also in the
              context of local society and  culture.  He explains how these local scientists
              responded to  changes in the structure and methodologies of the natural
              sciences-  -especially the professionalization of science and the rise of the 
              research universities in the 20th century.  Even after the  professionalization
              of science, these local academies continued to  survive by meeting local needs,
              remaining active in natural history  research and participating in the emerging
              conservation movement.   The sources for this research inclu de scientific
              texts, published  and manuscript proceedings of academy meetings, several 
              representative samples of various segments of the scientific  community, and
              private correspondence.  He is paying particular  attention to issues of gender
              and regionalism in his analysis.  ***
