Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics of Artemisia Sect. Tridentatae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1993  
File        : a9311086

Award Number: 9311086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Watson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Riggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311086 Watson             Artemesia    (   sensu       lato   ) L. is composed
              of approximately 400 species distributed throughout the north temperate regions
              of the world.  It is the largest and ecologically most important genus in the
              Tribe Anthemideae (Asteraceae).  The genus has been the subject of numerous
              comparative biosystematic investigations, but remains poorly understood. 
              Section    Tridentatae    is native to western North America and plays an
              important ecological role in the sagebrush communities.     Tridentatae    is
              composed of 11 species of xerophytic shrubs, separated from the other North
              American species by the presence of homogamous flower heads.  The rapid
              expansion and divergence of    Tridentatae   , coupled with wind pollination
              has resulted in extensive convergence and parallel evolution.  This has made
              interpretation of phylogenetic relationships difficult.  The main objectives of
              this study are to elucidate interspecific phylogenetic relationships within   
              Tridentatae   , and to determine the affinity of    Tridentatae    to other
              subgeneric taxa of    Artemesia    and to the segregate genus    Seriphidium  
              .  Several molecular techniques will be utilized including phylogenetic
              analysis of chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA restriction site maps and
              analysis of sequence data from the ORFk (Open Reading Frame k) region of the
              cpDNA genome.  Previously proposed hypotheses of evolutionary  relationships of
                 Tridentatae    will be tested using cladistic analyses of molecular data. 
              An examination of concordance between cytoplasmic and nuclear marker based
              phylogenies of interspecific relationships will be used to test proposed modes
              of speciation and to examine patterns of character evolution.  The inferred
              phylogenies will be useful in understanding the evolutionary and ecological
              success of    Tridentatae    in the cold deserts of western North America. %%% 
                            This project will obtain molecular data (both from the
              chloroplast and nuclear genomes) for 11 species of sagebrush in the Section   
              Tridentatae    of the genus    Artemesia   .  These data will be used to decide
              relationships among these species that have been the subject of some confusion
              when morphological characters have been used to establish relationships.  These
              woody shrubs are a highly visible and important component of the cold desert
              ecosystem and understanding species relationships will enhance other research
              efforts in ecology and biogeography of these plants. ***                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
