Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Survey of Morgantina Sicily
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9311426

Award Number: 9311426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Plog sep6n@Virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Drs. Stephen Plog and Malcolm Bell III, Mr.             
              Stephen Thompson will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.              
              He will conduct two seasons of survey work and analysis in a 150               
              square kilometer area around the site of Morgantina, a large                   
              hilltop settlement in east-central Sicily initially inhabited by               
              non-Greek peoples during the Late Bronze/Early Iron Age (ca. 1000 -            
               550 B.C.) and subsequently transformed during the second half of              
              the first millennium B.C. into a prominent Greek city state.                   
              Although extensive work has been done at the site itself, no formal            
              archaeological investigation has been conducted beyond the city                
              walls. Consequently, only a rudimentary knowledge exists of the                
              site's local and regional setting and of its immediate rural                   
              territory. Through his survey, Mr. Thompson will explore basic                 
              parameters of environment, settlement, demography and land use.                
                                                                                             
              Through his work, Mr. Thompson wishes to address two basic issues.             
              First he wishes to reconstruct the social and economic organization            
              of this early Mediterranean state. It is extremely unclear how                 
              entities of this type integrate rural areas with urban centers and             
              how political and economic systems function. Secondly, he will                 
              address questions of assimilation and change. During the early part            
              of its history Morgantina appears to be an independent, indigenous             
              Sicilian development. Later however it seems to either come under              
              Greek influence or be dominated completely by Greece. How, over                
              this interval, did relations between the center and the hinterland             
              change?  How was a new set of circumstances adapted to a                       
              traditional system?                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will set an                 
              major archaeological site into a broader context. It will shed new             
              light on development and change within state level societies and               
              finally will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
