Title       : Theoretical Investigation of Diffusional Phase Transformations and the
               Possibility of Stable Nanoscale Structures in Ionic Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1993 
File        : a9311898

Award Number: 9311898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Long-Qing Chen lqc3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              9311898  Chen  A theoretical investigation will be carried out on the 
              thermodynamics and kinetics of continuous phase transformations and  on the
              possibility of stable nanoscale structures in multicomponent  ceramic
              materials.  The main objective is to develop theories and  computer simulation
              techniques for understanding the fundamental  thermodynamic and kinetic origins
              leading to the formation of an  important class of self-assembled
              nanocomposites which resist  continuous coarsening.  To reach this objective,
              systematic phase  stability analysis and phase diagram calculations for ionic
              systems  with stable nanoscale structures will be performed.  The key 
              structural and thermodynamic factors leading to the formation of 
              thermodynamically stable nanoscale phases will be identified.  Extensive
              computer modeling will be conducted of the kinetics of  atomic ordering,
              compositional clustering and microstructural  coarsening in systems involving
              both short-range chemical and long-  range Coulomb interactions.  A computer
              simulation technique will  be developed which can describe the coarsening
              dynamics of domains  interacting with each other through electric dipole-dipole
               interactions, elastic interactions and Coulomb interactions.  The  focus will
              be on the diffusional transformations in the self-  assembled relaxor
              nanocomposites.  The relation of atomic ordering  and compositional clustering
              tendencies to the atomic sizes and  charge valences of cations will be
              investigated through a  combination of modern statistical mechanics theory of
              order-  disorder transformations and atomistic computer simulations using 
              shell-model interatomic potentials.   %%%  This theoretical research grant
              involves both analytical theory and  computer simulation to study the
              properties of ceramic materials  which undergo changes of phase into materials
              having novel  structures.  The research will identify the conditions which 
              control the formation of these structures during the phase change.   The
              research is com plicated by the fact that the materials are  ionic.  This
              causes additional forces over long distances which are  difficult to handle
              theoretically.  However, the results of this  work will have important
              ramifications for understanding and  processing these technologically important
              materials.  ***
