Title       : Development of a Marine Ecophysiology Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1994      
File        : a9311043

Award Number: 9311043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Houde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guritno Roesijadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311043  Tenore, K.  The Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL) will develop a 
              facility and associated instrumentation for a state-of-the-art  laboratory
              designed to study physiology, bioenergetics, ecology  and behavior of fishes
              and invertebrates.  The facility, which  will allow research on all life stages
              of these organisms,  focuses principally on critical temperature and salinity
              controls  and on systems that will allow precise measurements of  consumption,
              metabolism, growth and behavior.  Respirometers,  swimming chambers, controlled
              environmental tanks, a dosing  apparatus, and behavior observation systems are
              the principal  items of the laboratory.  A dry lab preparation area and
              computer  monitoring and control center will also be provided.    The
              laboratory will be a multiuser, ecophysiology center  available to scientists,
              graduate students, and visiting  scientists in several disciplines.  The
              systems and instruments  will significantly enhance the range of research and
              training  programs at CBL and will be a unique facility in the region 
              available to visiting/collaborating investigators.  The CBL will  cost-share in
              the development of the proposed facility and its  specific systems, most of
              which will be constructed on site.   When completed, the ecophysiology
              laboratory will be a major  contributor to the success of CBL's mission in its
              three  programmatic areas: Ecosystem Studies, Fisheries Science/Ecology,  and
              Environmental Chemistry/Toxicology.  ***
