Title       : Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1993  
File        : a9311302

Award Number: 9311302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Supapan Seraphin Seraphin@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. David Kingery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9162,
Abstract    :
              9311302  Seraphin    This field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM)
              will be  for the characterization of the microstructure of materials in  the
              nanometer range.  Applying first the instrument to advanced  ceramic studies,
              we will monitor the distribution of additives  during heating and cooling that
              determines the properties of the  final product.  In order to develop
              appropriate models, it is  essential to image during the early phase of
              sintering the  additive particles of nanometer size, and their distribution on 
              the surface of the ceramic powder.  Secondly, in our studies of  the morphology
              and yield of carbon nanotubes, it is essential to  examine the  carbonaceous
              deposits on the cathode of the  arcdischarge with the purpose of optimizing the
              processing  conditions for the production of a desired shape and size of the 
              carbon clusters.   A third project examines biomimetic composites  with the
              same architecture as natural materials such as bones and  teeth.  The study
              aims at the development of methods to grow  various minerals into a polymer
              matrix of the dimensional  characteristics of particle sizes, shapes and
              orientation that  resembles the natural material in the nanometer range.  A
              fourth  project investigates the scattering losses in planar waveguides  used
              in optical data storage devices through the use of  controlled crystal
              nucleation at the surfaces, detecting and  identifying thus scattering centers
              in the interior of these  materials.  Copper contamination on silicon wafers
              will be  studied as the fifth project area.  The deposits, once again in  the
              nanometer range, will be directly observed and identified  under various
              processing conditions.   Examining the copper  crystals and their associated
              substrate corrosion and dissolution  patterns will facilitate strategies that
              eliminate metal  contamination during chemical processing of semiconductor 
              devices.    The five projects will serve as examples for the wide range of 
              fundamental issues in which the availabi lity of the FE-SEM will  advance
              related materials research.  Additional projects will  rapidly join these five,
              taken from medical research,  biochemistry, biotechnology, geoscience, optical
              orders of  magnitudes smaller than before, is of vital issue, especially in 
              the early phases of related fundamental processes.  Areas of  technological
              interest will advance through the related research,  giving the acquisition of
              this powerful instrument a proper  justification in terms of industrial
              advances.  ***
