Title       : Expanding Access to Census Data: The Boston Research Data Center (RDC) and
               Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9311572

Award Number: 9311572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. McGuckin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne B. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel Pakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell W. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo J. Caballero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1038,1577,9146,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9311572  McGuckin    This project greatly expands researchers' access to
              confidential  longitudinal microeconomic data.  Currently, these data are 
              available only to researchers working at Center for Economic  Studies (CES)
              offices at the headquarters of the U.S. Bureau of  the Census near Washington,
              D.C.  The project will establish a  pilot Research Data Center (RDC) at the
              Boston regional office of  the Census Bureau.  This pilot RDC will give
              researchers a second  location where they will be able to carry out research
              projects,  in a manner that serves the needs of the research community and  the
              security concerns of the Census Bureau.  The project will use  the experience
              gained at the Boston pilot RDC to develop plans  (including sources of funding)
              for establishing RDCs at other  secure locations, possibly including
              universities, and  preliminary evaluation methods to provide researchers with
              remote  access to the data.    This proposal includes four research projects to
              start the Boston  RDC, and provides for an early Request for Proposals, open to
              all  researchers, to obtain more projects.  Researchers will have  access to
              confidential micro-panel files built from data  collected under the Census
              Bureau's various economic censuses and  surveys, including data on business
              establishments ,e.g.,  manufacturing plants and firms, and including extended
              databases  on research and development expenditures, pollution abatement  cost
              expenditure data, and data on establishment emissions of  toxins, air pollution
              and water pollution. This project is  important for the global change
              initiative because it provides  researchers better access to the data needed to
              study a wide  range of issues related to industrial activity and the 
              environment.    An important objective of the RDCs, already a part of many CES 
              projects, is to combine publicly available and confidential data  sets from
              within and outside the Census Bureau to create new  databases and expand
              research opportunities.  In this way, the   RDCs will becomes secure
              repositories of a variety of datasets  for research purposes.
