Title       : Engineering Faculty Internship: Modeling of the Two-Dimensional Chip Breaking
               Process for Maching with a Grooved Tool Insert
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9311819

Award Number: 9311819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim S. Jawahir jawahir@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Quinto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9290,
Abstract    :
                   This proposed work is to develop a new cutting force model for            
              chip breaking in machining with a conventional grooved tool insert.            
              This is expected to be accomplished using a recently established               
              force model for machining with a flat-faced (non-chip forming)                 
              tool.  The proposed work will involve analytical modeling of the               
              process of chip breaking process for conditions requiring                      
              consideration of additional forces at the free-end of the chip as              
              well as at the back-wall of the chip groove.  Variable frictional              
              conditions will be assumed at the chip/tool back-wall and chip/work            
              surface contact points.  The well known shear plane theory of metal            
              cutting  will be extended to include the effects of the above                  
              additional friction forces.  Experimental work will include the use            
              of a high speed filming camera system to study the varying chip                
              curling and breaking patterns within a typical chip breaking cycle             
              while continuously monitoring the cutting force variations with the            
              use of a three-component tool dynamometer system. Based on the                 
              analytical simulations and the experimental work, it is expected               
              to model the curled chip using the finite element modeling                     
              technique for continuously varying chip loading.  The variation of             
              mechanical properties such as the tensile strain which normally                
              contribute to the chip breaking process will be estimated.                     
                   The major objective of this work is to establish the most                 
              significant factors that influence chip breaking and to develop a              
              new chip breakability criterion based on the new findings.  It is              
              hoped that the new findings anticipated in this project will help              
              cutting tool manufacturers in designing new and innovative chip                
              forming tool inserts.
