Title       : Lake Effect Boundary Layer Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9311946

Award Number: 9311946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143300             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kristovich dkristo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   Lake-effect snows are produced by cold air flowing over warm              
              lake surfaces and are known for their severity and disruption to               
              life near the Great Lakes of the US and other locations around the             
              globe.                                                                         
                   Convective boundary layers are the media through which cool               
              air masses are coupled to the warm underlying Earth's surface.                 
              Convective boundary layers responsible for lake-effect snowstorms              
              are particularly important because their accompanying clouds and               
              snow act as tracers to reveal the structure and organization of the            
              boundary layer when viewed by radar and instrumented aircraft.  In             
              addition, they are useful laboratories for study of the initiation             
              and growth of snow.                                                            
                   This project will analyze data from the Lake Snow Project and             
              will be carried out as a collaborative effort between the                      
              University of Illinois and North Carolina State University.  The               
              Principal Investigator from the University of Illinois will use                
              vertical profiles of moisture fluxes and analyses of Doppler radar             
              winds and reflectivity to obtain a better description of small                 
              scale convective elements and their cloud and snow growth                      
              processes.                                                                     
                   The Principal Investigator from North Carolina State                      
              University will use aircraft data to identify conditions associated            
              with the initial formation of ice particles in lake-effect clouds              
              and to determine relationships between cloud and snow                          
              characteristics and ambient and/or antecedent meteorological                   
              conditions.                                                                    
                   Results from this research will be of value to boundary layer             
              meteorologists concerned with convection and, cloud physicists                 
              interested in ice nucleation and snow growth, and weather                      
              forecasters striving to predict lake-effect snow storms.
