Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigation of the Northern River
               Lagoon, Belize, Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9311947

Award Number: 9311947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley B. Mock  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Thomas Hester, Ms. Shirley Mock will                
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct                   
              archaeological fieldwork at the site of Northern River Lagoon                  
              (NRL), located in the coastal region of northern Belize. Previous              
              work at the site has indicated an occupation during the Late and               
              Terminal Classic periods when Mayan civilization reached its                   
              height. Preliminary data suggest that the inhabitants of NRL were              
              engaged in intensive collection of fish and the production of salt             
              to preserve them. Ms. Mock hypothesizes that these were then traded            
              to interior sites in return for valued materials such as obsidian.             
              To test this idea Ms. Mock will conduct surface survey and then                
              intensive archaeological and geological investigation both to                  
              provide more precise dates for the site and to obtain more detailed            
              information on the material culture present. On the basis of floral            
              samples she will also reconstruct changing environment over time.              
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists want to understand how Mayan civilization arose in              
              the inhospitable environment of lowland Middle America and then why            
              it rapidly declined. In areas which today are largely uninhabited,             
              Mayan peoples constructed dressed stone temples and were able to               
              support large groups of people in relatively limited areas. At the             
              end of the Classic period this system appears to have fallen apart.            
              Monumental construction ceased and people dispersed into smaller               
              groups. Ms. Mock believes that environmental stress caused by a                
              combination of population increase and related degradation of the              
              land is responsible and she will examine NRL in this context. It               
              represents, she believes, an early stage in this sequence and that             
              the extensive trade in food which developed resulted from                      
              nutritional stress in inland areas. She thus is looking at the                 
              first stage in the process.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of human-environment interactions and will also                  
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
