Title       : The Construction of a Multi-User Data Base on the Attributes of U.S. Courts of
               Appeals Judges, 1891-1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9311999

Award Number: 9311999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Zuk osceola@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah J. Barrow  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gerard S. Gryski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311999  BARROW  The primary objective of this project is construction of a 
              definitive, multi-user data base on the personal, social, economic,  career and
              political attributes of U.S. Courts of Appeals judges  who served from 1891
              (the inception of this level of court) through  1992.  We know the presidents
              of different political parties  generally have different domestic agendas, that
              Democratic  legislators from the South often vote differently from their 
              counterparts outside that region, and that mass political behavior  is related
              to social and economic characteristics.  We are less  informed about the extent
              to which these factors influence the  voting (judicial decision) tendencies of
              appellate judges.  Indeed,  development of integrated theories about why judges
              vote as they do  has been impeded by the lack of a comprehensive and reliable
              data  base.  This type of information has been assembled for Supreme  Court
              Justices, but this is the first project to extend the data  collection to the
              far larger number of federal appellate judges.     The project will assemble
              the requisite data on federal appellate  judges and then make them available to
              the scholarly community in  a user-friendly format.  The constructed data base
              will include the  following information for each judge:  appointing president, 
              predecessor (if there was one), religion, party affiliation,  education, date
              and place of birth, state of residence, age at time  of appointment, previous
              positions held (in temporal sequence),  gender, race, ethnicity, A.B.A. rating
              (since these have been  available), and the timing and reason for leaving the
              bench.  A  complementary data base on case characteristics and votes is being 
              completed; both data sets will include a unique identification  number for each
              judge, thereby permitting the merger of the two for  appropriate research
              projects.  The merged multi-user data base  will allow the scholarly community
              to pursue important lines of  research that heretofore were impossible.  * **
