Title       : Study of Multi-Institutional Collaborations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9311121

Award Number: 9311121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan N. Warnow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer R. Weart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311121  Warnow  "Big" science has now reached the point where no one
              institution  can supply the financial resources, personnel or equipment to 
              undertake a research project.  200 or more authors are not uncommon  in
              publications resulting from these projects.  The authors come  together from
              many different institutions in order to form  temporary collaborations of
              varying durations.  How do they  operate?  How do they communicate?  How do the
              senior leaders in  the project exercise control over the more junior
              investigators?   These and many other questions need to be answered if we are
              to  understand how big science operates.    Under the direction of Ms. Warnow,
              the AIP Center for History of  Physics has completed two phases of a three
              phase study of multi-  institutional collaborative research in different areas
              of physics.   Under two prior grants, the AIP has intensively studied 
              collaborations in high-energy physics, space science, and  geophysics.  Under
              this third grant, the AIP is modifying its  approach to the study of
              collaborations in order to promote a  comparative perspective and to develop
              policies and recommendations  to improve documentation of such collaborations
              generally.  Under  Ms. Warnow's leadership, the AIP team is investigating ten
              fields  of science and technology that have used multi-institutional 
              collaborations from the mid-1970's to the present. These fields  include not
              only physics but also biology, chemistry, and computer  science. The staff are
              conducting a total of 90 interviews--enough  to develop a profile of
              organizational structure, operational  functions, and patterns of communication
              of collaborations in each  field.  Interview subjects include not only
              scientists but also  administrators and technical support staff.  They are
              using a  single question set to solicit easily compared data from  interviewees
              on the basis patterns they have seen.  Three reports  will result from this
              study:  (1) A report on multi-institutional  collaborations over recent d
              ecades to the present; (2) Guidelines  for the appraisal of records created by
              multi-institutional  collaborations; and (3) A summary and a set of final 
              recommendations to serve the needs of archivists and policy makers  in the
              scientific community. The oral history recordings and  transcripts will be
              accessible in the AIP Center's Niels Bohr  Library.  ***
