Title       : Water Knowledge and Technology in Modern China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1993 
File        : a9311823

Award Number: 9311823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Baruch Boxer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9311823  Boxer  Dr. Boxer is seeking to enhance our understanding of the
              relations  between cultural and technological aspects of the methods employed 
              for conservation, control and use of water resources in the 20th  century
              China.  In particular, Dr. Boxer is examining how the  traditional approach,
              called shuili, to control of water resources  conflicts with modern Western
              engineering approaches.  Shuili is  not simply folk-knowledge but is a
              scientific and technical  knowledge based on over two thousand years of trying
              to control  raging rivers and streams in this ancient land.  How the 
              traditional Chinese engineers have adapted shuili to meet the  demands of
              technological modernization and change is the principal  interest to be
              investigated in this project.  Dr. Boxer is  contrasting Chinese and foreign
              views over the past 70-80 years on  the social benefits and costs of water
              engineering in the Yangzi  River basin.  He is examining three cases:  the
              controversial Three  Gorges Dam, the Dujiangyan irrigation system, and
              controversies  over physical connections between upstream-downstream water 
              problems and the social and ecological effects of engineering  solutions.  Dr.
              Boxer is aiming to show how tensions between  Chinese and foreign technological
              approaches helped redefine  traditional Chinese ideas about water's role in
              mediating nature-  society relations.  A major goal is to document the process
              through  which traditional attitudes and beliefs about the human and 
              environmental impacts of water engineering change in response to  foreign
              values, technologies, and political ideologies.  Results of  this study promise
              to be of great interest for examining  human/environment interactions and for
              students of modern China,  and the comparative social history of science,
              technology and  engineering.  ***
