Title       : Workshop on the Origins of Logical Empiricism, to be Held in Minneapolis,
               Minnesota, October 21-24, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9311296

Award Number: 9311296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Giere   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311296  Giere  Contemporary philosophy of science with its current view of the 
              nature of science and scientific theory developed out of an  explicit reaction
              against the Logical Empiricist school of  philosophy that dominated our view of
              science for nearly a quarter  of a century after World War II.  To understand
              our current views,  it is extremely important to understand the positions
              against which  we have reacted.  Logical Empiricism grew out of the long 
              empiricist tradition in Anglo-American philosophy which includes  Locke, Hume,
              Mill, and Bertrand Russell.  But the new mathematical  logic, developed by
              Russell and Whitehead in the first decade of  this century, played an equally
              important role.  It provided a  language in which empiricist claims could be
              formulated, techniques  for developing empiricist analyses of scientific
              hypotheses and  methods, and, above all, a standard for rational reference.   
              The objective of this workshop is to promote research on the  origins of
              Logical Empiricism by bringing together a number of  active researchers for
              three days of discussion on previously  circulated papers.  This group of
              researchers will then produce a  comprehensive and unified volume that will
              help legitimate the  study of this history both within the philosophy of
              science and  within the broader discipline of philosophy as part of the history
               of twentieth century philosophy.    Interest in the history of Logical
              Empiricism has recently been  promoted by a number of conferences celebrating
              the births, in  1891, of the two major founders of Logical Empiricism, Rudolf 
              Carnap and Hans Reichenbach.  The concerns of this workshop is by  no means to
              continue the celebration, but to capitalize on the  interest these celebrations
              generated to promote the study of the  origins of Logical Empiricism as part of
              both the philosophy of  science and the history of philosophy.  The organizers
              hope thereby  to provide encouragement for younger scholars who have taken up 
              this important study.  ** *
