Title       : US-Polish Research on Chemistry of Phosphorus Selenium Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9311868

Award Number: 9311868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34428              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Glass rglass@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5953,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Poland Joint Cooperative Research on                                 
              Chemistry of Phosphorous Selenium Compounds is                                 
              between Dr. Richard S. Glass of the University                                 
              of Arizona Tucson and Drs. Jan Michalski, and                                  
              Aleksandra Skowronska of the Centre of                                         
              Molecular and Macromolecular Studies of the                                    
              Polish Academy of Studies.  The researchers                                    
              will develop the chemistry of selenophosphates,                                
              devise chemoselective synthesis of                                             
              organoselenium compounds as models for                                         
              selective introduction of selenium moieties                                    
              into proteins and RNA's, and identification, by                                
              comparison with authentic compounds, of P-Se                                   
              compounds produced enzymatically.  The proposed                                
              international collaboration is mutually                                        
              beneficial because the Polish group's extensive                                
              experience and expertise in the difficult                                      
              synthesis of organophosphorus-selenium                                         
              compounds is complemented by the mechanistic                                   
              and 77 NMR spectroscopic experience of the                                     
              American group.  This collaboration will                                       
              strengthen and broaden the research efforts and                                
              infrastructure of the collaborating groups.                                    
              The proposed chemoselective methods for                                        
              introducing selenium into biomolecules, if                                     
              successful, would permit introduction of the                                   
              valuable 77Se NMR spectroscopic label.  This                                   
              label would allow structure studies using NMR                                  
              spectroscopy of these macromolecules (a project                                
              in which the American group and Dr. T.C.                                       
              Stadtman of NIH collaborate).  Such methodology                                
              would also facilitate synthesis of                                             
              semisynthetic enzymes with selenium at their                                   
              active site with potentially new and useful                                    
              catalytic activities as well as synthesis of                                   
              derivatives of biomolecules for multiwavelength                                
              anomalous diffraction structural studies.                                      
                                                                                             
              This proposed research in chemistry fulfills                                   
              the program objectives of advancing science by                                 
              enabling leading experts in the U.S. and the                                   
              Poland to combine complementary talents and                                    
              pool research resources in areas of strong                                     
              mutual interest and competence.
