Title       : Physical and Chemical Properties of Aerosols in the Marine Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1995     
File        : a9311213

Award Number: 9311213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340237             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Covert dcovert@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1309,9178,9251,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9311213     Covert       The formation of sulfate compounds in the marine
              boundary  layer (MBL) from the oxidation of oceanic dimethyl sulfide (DMS) to 
              sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and methane sulfonic acid (MSA) and the  subsequent
              nucleation and condensation of these compounds is a  major source of
              particulate matter in that part of the atmosphere.   The partitioning of these
              compounds between the competing processes  of nucleation and condensation
              determines (along with removal  processes) the resultant distribution of
              aerosol number and mass  with particle size.  There is strong interaction
              between these  formation processes and the preexisting or resulting aerosol. 
              The  characteristic times for particle formation, growth and removal  encompass
              minutes to days depending on atmospheric conditions.   Particulate phase sulfur
              in the MBL and its interaction with marine  stratus clouds are hypothesized to
              have a significant role in  global climate either by altering radiative
              properties, lifetime or  geographical extent of the clouds.       This research
              will focus on physics and chemistry of particles  in the MBL.  The overall
              project goal will be to determine the  extent to which sulfate compounds
              contribute to functional subsets  or modes of the aerosol number and mass size
              spectrum and the  processes by which these particles and particulate mass are
              formed.  The ultrafine mode, (10nm in diameter) is representative of those 
              particles most recently formed in the MBL by condensation from the  gas phase. 
              The accumulation mode (80 to 1000nm diameter) is  representative of the main
              mass of sulfate and optically effective  particles in the MBL. Cloud
              condensation nuclei (CCN), those  particles effective in cloud nucleation, are
              a subset of the total  particle population defined by size chemistry and water
              vapor  supersaturation.  For marine stratocumulus they generally encompass  the
              range greater than ca. 50nm diameter.  The seasalt mode  consists of seasalt or
              modified seasalt particles greater than   100nm generated at the surface by
              breaking films due to wind and  wave action.  Due to their alkaline chemistry
              these particles may  have a disproportionately large influence on oxidation of
              SO2 in the  MBL, both in and out of cloud.  The Atiken mode, which on a number 
              basis loosely covers the range 10 to 80nm, represents those  particles that are
              several days of age and have not been active in  cloud processes.          
              Several physical, optical and chemical methods will be used to  characterize
              the distribution of number concentration, chemical  composition, hygroscopic
              and thermal properties of the particles  between 0.003 and 10um diameter. 
              Direct measurements of integral  optical properties of the aerosol will be made
              with an integrating  nephelometer.  Direct measurements of the CCN
              concentration will be  made in a thermal diffusion cloud chamber.  There is
              considerable  redundancy in the measurement scheme to constrain the uncertainty
               of the results.  Laboratory measurements will be done to calibrate  and
              intercompare the methods.       The field research will be carried out within
              the context of  larger multidisciplinary projects that will address the overall
               sulfur cycle in which gas phase composition of the MBL will be  measured. 
              Field experiments will be done at several locations,  along the NW coast of
              Washington, in the mid-Pacific and in the  Southern Hemisphere in the vicinity
              of Tasmania and the Cape Grim  Background Monitoring Station.
