Title       : AMPP: Interfacial Processing and Adhesion of Titanium, Nitride, Diamondlike and
               Diamond Films on Metallic and Polymer Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9311343

Award Number: 9311343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagdish Narayan j_narayan@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vivian T. Stannett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jagannadham Kasichainula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1374,1771,1773,1774,9162,9251,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9311343  Narayan    Diamond, diamondlike and titanium nitrade films have
              extremely  desirable chemical, electrical and mechanical properties for a 
              variety of applications ranging from corrosion and erosion  resistant coatings
              to electronic packaging of microelectronic  devices.  However, many of these
              applications are limited by  poor adhesion of these films with metal and
              polymer substrates.   The adhesion of a film is determined primarily by
              internal  stresses in the film, thermal and lattice mismatch, and most 
              importantly by interfacial bonding.  Techniques are required to  deposit these
              films, and methods based upon selective laser and  ion beam irradiation of
              interfacial regions to improve adhesion  between polymer, diamond and diamond
              like films and the  substrate.  The proposed research addresses interfacial 
              processing and adhesion phenomena in the following systems of  technological
              importance:  diamondlike, titanium nitrade and  diamond films on copper,
              tungston, titanium, titanium nitride,  and polymer substrates.  The adhesion of
              the polymer to the  metal substrate can be improved through the silane adhesion
               promoters, but the adhesion of metal to the polymer substate  must rely on
              interfacial processing.  For polymer substrates, a  very thin buffer layer of
              titanium will be used to improve  adhesion between diamondlike and polymer
              substrates.  The  affinity between C (diamond) and the underlying substrates 
              varies  from zero for copper to a very high degree for titanium  and tungston. 
              The proposed research emphasizes:  a) interfacial  processing to improve
              adhesion; b) interface characterization,  properties of thin films and adhesion
              measurement, and c)  modeling to evaluate interfacial stresses and strains and 
              toughness and to understand the adhesion and interfacial bonding  mechanisms. 
              The structure and chemical composition of the  interfaces will be studied as a
              function of laser, ion beam, and  substrate parameters.  Modeling of stresses
              and strains within  the film and t he interfaces will be carried out and the
              results  correlated with adhesion measurements of these films.
