Title       : Processing and Evaluation of Advanced Polymers and Molecular Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9311741

Award Number: 9311741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samson A. Jenekhe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  - Jenekhe    Advanced polymers, such as aromatic polyimides, aromatic
              polyamides, polyquinolines, polybenzobisazoles, ladder polymers, and conjugated
              polymers, of interest for high-performance technological applications including
              engineering structures, aircraft, aerospace, and other transportation vehicles,
              electronics, photonics, and heat-resistant membranes for efficient separation
              processes, have rigid-chain structures and strong intermolecular interactions
              that make their processing and manufacturing into products or devices difficult
              and economically costly.  The goal of this experimental research program is to
              develop new generic approaches for the processing and efficient manufacturing
              of advanced polymers and polymer-based composite materials into useful products
              produced by a range of industries.    In previous experiments, the PI
              discovered a reversible Lewis acid coordination complexation chemistry of some
              rigid-chain polymers.  Once the Lewis acid (e.g. AlCl3, FeCl3, or GaCl3)
              complexes of the rigid-chain polymers are formed, they readily dissolve in
              organic solvents to sufficiently high concentrations as to form liquid
              crystalline phases in solution.  The polymer complexes also undergo a facile
              decomplexation when treated with water or alcohol, precipitating or
              regenerating the pure original polymers.  This reversible Lewis acid-base
              complexation chemistry of heterocyclic rigid-chain polymers can be used as a
              basis of solution processing of different polymers to thin films, fibers, and
              coatings via conventional organic solvent processing techniques.    The
              project's specific aims include: (1) determination of the fundamental
              processing characteristics of rigid-chain polymers and
              rigid-chain/flexible-chain molecular composites and development of the
              complexation mediated processing for producing films, coatings, fibers, or
              sheets from solutions, gels, or melts of coordination complexes of rigid-chain
              polymers; (2) exploration of the engineering problems associated with the 
              processing of advanced polymers and polymer composites by developing the
              complexation mediated                                                          
                                                                                             
                                     processing approach for commercial processing techniques
              such as spin coating, film extrusion, and fiber spinning; and (3) evaluation of
              the morphology and physical properties of films, coatings, fibers, and other
              forms produced by this processing approach and thereby elucidation of the
              effects of processing and morphology on the mechanical, electronic, optical,
              and optoelectronic properties of advanced polymers and polymer composites.
