Title       : Democratic Institutions: Which Work? Which Last?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9311793

Award Number: 9311793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Przeworski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311793  Przeworski    Recent political transformations in many countries,
              particularly in  Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, made it apparent
              that  our knowledge of democratic institutions is not sufficient to  support
              reliable advice about the effects of alternative  institutional arrangements.  
               Institutions may have two distinct effects:  1) the specific  institutional
              arrangments that make a particular democratic system  affect performance. 
              Democracies are not all the same and what they  are matters for how they
              perform. 2) the effect of economic crises  on the survival of democracies
              depends on the particular  institutional arrangements.  Democratic stability is
              not just a  matter of economic, social or cultural conditions because specific 
              institutional arrangements differ in their ability to process  conflicts,
              particularly when these conditions become so adverse  that democratic
              performance is experienced as inadequate.    Which democratic institutions work
              and last under what conditions?   By "work," the researcher means that they
              generate economic growth,  material security, freedom from arbitrary violence,
              and other  conditions conducive to the full development of individuals.  By 
              "last," the researcher means that they absorb and effectively  regulate all
              major conflicts, that rules are changed only according  to rules.    The
              purpose of the investigation is to examine statistically the  simultaneous
              effect of alternative democratic institutions on  performance and of
              performance on the durability of democracy under  alternative institutional
              frameworks.  Two data sets will be used:   one consisting of all countries with
              the population over one  million which were independent by 1965, and the second
              consisting  of a smaller group of, principally European and Anglo-Saxon 
              countries for which long-term data are available.    The results of the project
              will provide empirical data on effective  institution building strategies for
              new democracies.
