Title       : A Model for Vasopressin Gene Construct Expression In Vivo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9311307

Award Number: 9311307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Sherman   (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Goins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9311307 Sherman  Vasopressin is a peptide hormone that is synthesized in
              magnocellular neurons of the hypothalamus and is secreted into the blood stream
              from nerve endings in the posterior pituitary.  The primary stimulus for
              vasopressin release by the posterior pituitary is dehydration.  Indeed, this
              neuropeptide is the antidiuretic hormone.  It is essential for the regulation
              of water balance.  In addition, vasopressin is involved in stress mechanisms
              since it acts synergistically with the hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal axis to
              stimulate secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone.  Much of our knowledge
              about vasopressin has resulted from work with the Brattleboro rat.  These rats
              do not synthesize vasopressin because of a single base deletion in the gene
              which is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.  As a consequence of this
              gene defect, Brattleboro rats develop diabetes insipidus.  Dr. Sherman is
              examining the use of a modified herpes virus to facilitate in vivo
              investigations of vasopressin structure- function relationships. The herpes
              virus type 1 (HSV-1) is uniquely capable of infecting non-dividing cells, such
              as neurons.   Moreover, it has the added characteristic of existing in neurons,
              under some conditions, in a dormant or quiescent state termed latency, during
              which only a small portion of the herpes genome is active.  Using newly
              developed state-of-the-art techniques, Dr. Sherman will engineer a special
              modified HSV-1 virus to incorporate a working version of the gene for
              vasopressin.  He will develop different versions of normal vasopressin gene
              constructions and various HSV-1 viral modifications to maximize the expression
              of normal vasopressin hormone in Br attleboro rats.  Results from this work are
              likely to make significant contributions both within the field of vasopressin
              research and the development and use of HSV vectors for gene expression. 
              Indeed, the ultimate goal is to correct the diabetes insipidus defect by
              specifically targeting magnocellular neurons by direct injections of the
              vasopressin-containing virus into the posterior pituitary, where the virus
              particles can be taken up by the magnocellular nerve terminals, retrogradely
              transported to the hypothalamic cell bodies, establish latency, and begin
              expressing the virally-contained vasopressin gene.  This work provides an
              important bridge between neuroscience and virology and leads the way for new
              developments in gene therapy.  ***                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
