Title       : Metal-Ligand Electron-Transfer Complexes: Experimental Investigations of the
               Limits of Semiclassical Electron- Transfer Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1995   
File        : a9311587

Award Number: 9311587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry B. Gray hbgray@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay R. Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program, Dr. Harry B. Gray and Dr. Jay R. Winkler of the   California Institute
              of Technology will explore metal-ligand   electron-transfer (ET) processes
              under conditions where semiclassical ET   theory should break down. To 
              determine the role of tunneling, a series   of Ir(I) complexes in which the ET
              rates at high driving forces are   substantially slower than theoretically
              predicted will be studied. To aid   in the theoretical interpretation of the ET
              rates, nuclear reoganization   parameters, temperature, and isotope effects on
              ET rates will be   determined. A systematic investigations of bimolecular ET
              reactions of   Ir(I) dimers will show whether electronic excited products can
              reduce the   effective ET reaction driving force. Photoinduced ET reactions in
              the   region where ET is slower than predicted tend to be faster than  
              recombination processes at comparable driving forces. Based on this fact,  
              coordinatively unsaturated metal complexes with weakly coupled electron  
              acceptors will be investigated to determine whether long-lived  
              charge-transfer states can be prepared by direct light absorption.    Some of
              the most important processes which occur in chemical and   biological systems
              involve the transfer of electrons and the rate of such   transfers is often
              critical to the operation of the process. A   semi-empicical theoretical model
              has been developed to account for these   rates. In this study specially
              designed iridium complexes will be used to   probe the factors which this
              theory uses to describe the rate of electron   transfer. Such studies are
              important both to the basic understanding of   electron transfer and to the
              development of new methods of, for example,   solar energy conversion.
