Title       : Dissertation Research: Demographic and Genetic Processes During Population
               Establishment of Silene alba
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9311635

Award Number: 9311635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa D. Brooks                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis Antonovics   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311635  Antonovics    This study will focus on the parameters that affects the
              colonization process in plants.  Specifically, the investigators wish to
              examine the role of genetic connections between small newly established
              colonies and the correlated rate of population increase.  By studying both the
              genetic and demographic factors that influence the process of colonization in a
              common species, they will gain information useful for understanding the
              population dynamics of species made rare by habitat fragmentation.  %%%  The
              process of colonization in Silene alba will be studied experimentally three
              ways.  First the investigators will establish founder colonies planted in an
              array with graded spacing intervals between colonies.  Measurements of gene
              exchange between colonies will then be correlated with demographic attributes
              such as rates of colony growth.  Secondly, they will investigate the effects of
              the relatedness of the founders and the role of isolation on colonization
              establishment by comparing artificial colonies established with genetically
              variable outcrossed colonists to colonies established with genetically inbred
              (sib-mated) colonists.  Thirdly, the investigators will investigate the
              demographic effects of varying the number of individuals that found a colony. 
              Finally, they will conduct demographic genetic studies of natural colonization
              episodes as they occur in a previously censused metapopulation of Silene alba
              to provide a natural backdrop against which to interpret the experimental
              results.  ***    tonovics    This study will focus on the parameters that
              affects the colonization process in plants .  Specifically, t            $   / 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        !         !.        !.        !.             F                       
                                                                   (    Times New Roman   
              Symbol  & Arial                             *                                 
              "             h     6  e:  e                        V    Antonovics/Richards
              abstract   Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
