Title       : JGOFS: Response of Arabian Sea Phytoplankton Biomass, Pigmentation, Growth
               Rates, and Community Structure To Seasonally Varying Physically Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9311244

Award Number: 9311244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Goericke rgoericke@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9311244  Goericke      The U.S. Arabian Sea JGOFS program offers the unique
              opportunity to  study the response of an oceanic ecosystem to strong and
              seasonally  predictable physical forcing in an environment with strong spatial 
              gradients.  Biological conditions in the Arabian Sea vary from  extreme
              oligotrophy to extreme eutrophy.  Primary production and  concentrations of
              chlorophyll a, for example, change by one to two  orders of magnitude over
              space and time.  We propose to study the  effects of the seasonally varying
              physical forcing on the  phytoplankton community as a whole and on individual
              populations of  microalgae, using primarily pigment-based methods.  We will
              test  the hypothesis, suggested by data from other environments, that 
              phytoplankton community structure and growth rates during most of  the year. 
              The exception is the area off Oman during the SW monsoon  when oceanic
              upwelling occurs.  At this time the community is  expected to be dominated by
              diatoms growing at high rates.   Phytoplankton community structure will be
              monitored by measuring  the concentration of taxon-specific chlorophylls and
              carotenoids by  high-pressure liquid chromatography.  It is proposed to carry
              out  theqe analyses as part of the JGOFS core measurements.  Using the  pigment
              14c-labeling method we propose to measure phytoplankton  carbon-biomass,
              phytoplankton growth rates and taxon-specific  growth rates to study the
              physiological response of the  phytoplanton community to the seasonally varying
              physical forcing.   Carbon to Chl a ratios will be calculated from
              phytoplankton  biomass and chl a and used to calculated seasonal maps of 
              phytoplankton carbon-biomass for the Arabian Sea from remotely  sensed ocean
              and biomass will allow us to  determine factors which  control the growth and
              abundance of the individual phytoplankton  population, such as coccolithophores
              or prochlorophytes, and their  contribution to carbon cycling in this
              environment.
