Title       : Dissertation Research: The Classic Maya Collapse and Changing Ceramic Production
               and Distribution in the Petexbatun Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9311836

Award Number: 9311836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9821               (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur A. Demarest arthur.a.demarest@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311836  Demarest    Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Demarest, Ms. Antonia
              Foias will  collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze 
              ceramic materials collected from sites in the Petexbatun region of  the Peten,
              Guatemala and which span the period from ca. 650 - 950  A.D. It was during this
              time that the Mayan societies in this  region reached their highest point of
              development and then  collapsed. Through extensive previous work by Dr.
              Demarest and his  collaborators in this central Mayan region, the major sites
              are  known, a ceramic chronology established and a large amount of  material
              excavated. Over a 10 month field period Ms. Foias will  continue her ongoing
              analysis of the ceramic remains. She will  categorize pieces according to a
              type/variety system to establish  relative ages. She will then record a number
              of observations to  determine the degree of standardization within classes and
              learn  how this changes over both time and space. These data will give  insight
              into the context of production. Ms. Foias wishes to learn  whether
              commercialization and mass production - as measured by  degree of
              standardization - increased over time and whether this  process resulted in
              smaller competing centers. She will also  determine the frequency of non-local
              materials which may indicate  invasion. Ms. Foias will also conduct neutron
              activation analysis  of selected materials at the Smithsonian Institution. The
              resultant  trace element data will provide information relevant to questions 
              of both standardization and foreign influence.    Well before the arrival of
              Columbus in the New World the Mayan  civilization flourished in the
              inhospitable tropical environment of  lowland Middle America. Many of the areas
              in which Mayans  constructed large temples and ceremonial complexes support
              only low  population densities today. After reaching a peak in the first 
              millennium A.D. monumental construction ceased and people abandoned  urban
              centers to disperse into smaller groups. Archaeologist s wish  to understand
              the causes of this "collapse" and have proposed a  number of hypotheses to
              account for it. These range from  environmental depletion through foreign
              conquest. Ms. Foais will  employ ceramic data to evaluate a number of these
              options.    This research is important for several reasons. It will provide 
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also shed light on  how
              complex societies arise, function and decline. Finally, it will  assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.  ***
