Title       : Effects of Spatial and Skills Mismatches on Minority Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9311319

Award Number: 9311319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto M. Fernandez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311319  FERNANDEZ       Two of the most prominent explanations given for
              relatively  low rates of achievement by members of minority groups in U.S. 
              labor markets have been called the "spatial mismatch" and the  "skills
              mismatch" hypotheses.  Proponents of the spatial mismatch  hypothesis argue
              that many minority workers experience  difficulties in finding and holding jobs
              because many employers  have relocated from central-city locales near the homes
              of most  minority workers to more remote suburban locations.  Advocates of  the
              skills mismatch hypothesis maintain that technological  changes in the economy
              as a whole have changed the character of  employment, leaving many workers,
              especially members of more  poorly educated minority groups, without requisite
              skills to  assume new jobs.  This project examines both of these hypotheses 
              through continuation of a case study of a plant that retooled  (creating new
              forms of jobs) when it relocated from central  Milwaukee to a suburban site in
              1992.  Lengthy interviews will be  conducted with many employees who were
              surveyed in 1991, creating  a longitudinal database that will help determine
              the degree to  which locational and employment-skill changes impeded the 
              adjustment of minority workers to the new plant.  Special  attention will focus
              on analyses of decisions by workers to  relocate their homes closer to the new
              plant (as opposed to  commuting over longer distances) as a response to
              geographical  changes and to examination of the processes by which workers were
               assigned to jobs in the new plant.       This research will provide valuable
              new insights into two  important dimensions of change in modern metropolitan
              economies.  In addition to generating a detailed longitudinal database about 
              this specific case, the research will provide simultaneous tests  of two
              controversial hypotheses using methods that can be  replicated in other
              contexts.  ***
