Title       : The Sevilleta Field Station: Development of a Library/ Computer Center and
               expansion of Housing for Visiting Researchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1994   
File        : a9311867

Award Number: 9311867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford S. Crawford ccbosque@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                    9311867  Crawford, C.  The Sevilleta Field Station serves a large number
              of research  scientists and students who study the extensive and ecologically 
              diverse region of central New Mexico.  The region incorporates  transition
              zones among numerous biomes, including Great Plains  Grassland, Chihuahuan
              Forests.  Additional biotic assemblages  within these biomes include Rio Grande
              "Bosque" (Riparian  Cottonwood Forest) and Wetlands, Subalpine Forests, and
              Subalpine  Grasslands.  Much of the current scientific research in the  region
              focuses on biotic responses to climate change at various  spatial and temporal
              time scale (seasonal, annual, and  long-term), biodiversity issues, and
              ecosystem restoration  following natural and anthropogenic disturbance. 
              Recently the  Sevilleta Field Research Station has completed construction of 
              several residences and laboratory facilities to meet the demand  for field
              logistical support.  Construction of a shop/storage  building and a plant
              lath-house is scheduled to begin in March  1993.  Additional funds have been
              used to provide laboratory  equipment, computer communication systems,
              meteorological  instruments, and a 4x4 field vehicle.    This project will
              support significant increase in the research  support capability of the
              Sevilleta Field Research Station.  The  project includes construction of a
              library/computer-center for  the purpose of increasing research capabilities by
              resident and  visiting scientists.  The library will contain books and 
              scientific jounals relevant to research activities in the  Sevilleta region,
              permitting ready access by station scientists  to current and past literature
              sources.  The computer-center will  consist of 20 modular desk-units, each
              equipped with one of a  variety of computer teminals or PC's (5 IBM-compatible
              PC's, 5  Apple PC's, and 10 Unix Terminals, all connected to the Sevilleta 
              Field Station Network).  Resident and visiting scientists and  graduate
              students can be assigned desk-units during their stays  a t the station,
              permitting readily available access to computer  networks, and providing a
              secure and spacious work area for data  anaylsis and manuscript preparation. 
              In Addition four additional  residences will be constructed.  This will bring
              the total field  station residence capacity to 48 persons.  ***
