Title       : Dissertation Research: Craft Production and the Organization of a Hohokam
               Platform Mound Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9311636

Award Number: 9311636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7780               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. James Bayman               
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct               
              archaeological excavation at the site of Marana in the Sonoran                 
              Desert of Arizona. This site, constructed and occupied by Hohokan              
              peoples, dates from approximately AD 1100-11350 and consists, in               
              effect of a vast multi-site community which spans a 146 km square              
              area and cross-cuts three environmental zones. To date, research               
              has been conducted in two of these zones and with National Science             
              Foundation support Mr. Bayman will excavate in the third of these              
              to collect comparative data. He will place 1 x 2 meter test pits in            
              four of the largest refuse middens  which appear the represent the             
              remains of separate households. He will then analyze the materials             
              recovered both to determine the kinds of production activities                 
              which characterized this zone and nature and frequency of "exotic"             
              materials. With these data he will attempt to reconstruct the                  
              social, political and economic organization of Marana.                         
                                                                                             
              By early in the first millennium A.D. Hohocam peoples had developed            
              a complex society which knit together large numbers of peoples in              
              a harsh and unpredictable desert environment. Archaeologists wish              
              to understand how Hohocam groups organized themselves to exist                 
              successfully in this seemingly difficult situation. In many areas              
              groups developed large scale irrigation systems and archaeologists             
              believe that the need both to build and then maintain canals led to            
              the growth and continual reinforcement of political centralization.            
              The Marana community is interesting because this group appears to              
              have depended on rainfall agriculture and a canal system is not                
              present. Mr. Bayman believes that a combination of economic                    
              specialization by subregion and control of exotic materials by                 
              elites served the same social function as canals and his research              
              will evaluate this hypothesis.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons. It will increase our               
              understanding of an only partially understood period in American               
              prehistory. It will shed new light on how societies at a simple                
              level of technology adapted to harsh and unpredictable environments            
              and finally it will contribute to the training of a promising young            
              scientist.
