Title       : The Settlement Pattern of Caracol
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9311773

Award Number: 9311773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Z. Chase chase@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlen F. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Diane and Arlen Chase            
              will continue their archaeological research at the site of Caracol             
              located in Belize, Central America. At an altitude of over 500                 
              meters it is among the highest sites in the Maya lowlands. The site            
              was rediscovered approximately 55 years ago and until the Chases               
              began their project little was known about it. Survey work has                 
              shown the site to be quite large. The core is conservatively                   
              estimated at 88 square kilometers. It contains at least 10 intra-              
              site causeways which run outward like the spokes of a wheel from               
              the site core. Over 3000 structures have been recorded and the                 
              number is far from complete. Excavations have provided evidence of             
              occupation from ca 300 B.C. to ca. 1150 A.D. and it is clear that              
              Caracol played a major role in the Mayan prehistory of the region.             
              What makes the site especially interesting are the carved stelae or            
              written tablets which have been recovered. These permit a partial              
              historical reconstruction and indicate Caracol emerged victorious              
              in two major battles. The two principal investigators plan to focus            
              their efforts in one of the city's sectors and conduct survey work             
              as well as both trial and extensive excavation. What they wish to              
              do is use these data, in conjunction with other information to                 
              reconstruct the demographic history of the site and to search for              
              relationships between periods of construction and warfare.                     
                                                                                             
              While much work has been done on large Mayan sites, archaeologists             
              still do not know whether they functioned as true integrated                   
              cities, how much of them were occupied at a single moment in time,             
              and how their growth and development were integrated into a larger             
              regional and political context. The only way to answer such                    
              questions is through large scale, long term excavation and the                 
              Chases have pursued just that goal for many years. The additional              
              data they plan to collect will help to illumine both the history               
              and functioning of this major Mayan site.                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data about a major Mayan center and shed new light on the factors              
              which led to the rise of urban civilization.//
