Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotically Efficient Semiparametric Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9311477

Award Number: 9311477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuly Koshevnik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal is focused on estimation problems involving infinite  dimensional
              parameters, such as cumulative distribution  functions, characteristic
              functions, error distributions in  regression models etc. Methodologically, a
              geometric approach has  been successfully developed to solve nonparametric
              estimations  problems from i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) 
              data. This approach is also applicable to a wide range of  nonparametric and
              semiparametric problems, in which the  traditional restrictive i.i.d.
              assumptions can be relaxed. The  main emphasis is on the estimation of
              differentiable statistical  functionals. For a general differentiable
              transformation of the  unknown abstract parameter, the asymptotically efficient
               estimates will be constructed using the geometric approach.  Complex
              statistical data that are collected in areas such as  medical, econometric, and
              engineering reliability studies often  cannot be analyzed using traditional
              statistical methods. The  diversity of people in clinical trials, the multitude
              of inputs  affecting economic outputs, and the intricate interaction of 
              components affecting the performance of sophisticated electronics  or equipment
              do not permit the use of simple statistical modeling  techniques. These
              applications require instead a new methodology  that is more flexible and yet
              does not sacrifice information  unnecessarily. The proposed research will
              develop methods for  estimating key features of complex statistical data. 
              These  methods do not depend on the validity of traditional assumptions. 
              Results of this work will be applicable to a rich variety of  areas, including
              the estimation of drug efficacy, a population  profile of potential patients,
              proficiency characteristics for  industrial output, and the probability of
              successful operation of  electronic equipment.
