Title       : Sensory Transduction of Blue Light in Guard Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9311042

Award Number: 9311042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Zeiger zieger@lbes.medsch.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9311042  Zeiger    The goal of this research is to investigate possible roles of
               carotenoids in blue light photoreception in guard cells.  Blue  light
              responses of guard cells include starch hydrolysis, malate  biosynthesis, and
              proton pumping at the guard cell plasma membrane.   These processes modulate
              guard cell osmotic potentials and stomatal  apertures that are quantitatively
              related to incident fluence rates  of blue light.  A study on guard cell
              pigments has recently shown  that absorption spectra of guard cell carotenoids
              closely match an  action spectrum of the blue light-stimulated increases in
              stomatal  conductances, pointing to a role of carotenoids in photoreception.  
              It is proposed that a carotenoid in the thylakoid membrane can  function in two
              alternative states.  At moderate transmembrane  potentials across the
              thylakoid, the carotenoid would operate as an  accessory pigment funneling
              absorbed light energy into  photosynthetic reactions.  At high transmembrane
              potentials, the  carotenoid would move away from the chlorophyll molecules and,
              upon  blue light excitation, would activate a sensory transduction  process
              leading to typical blue light responses.  Initial results  supporting this
              hypothesis include the characterization of  intrinsic blue light responses of
              guard cell chloroplasts, and a  specific inhibition of the blue
              light-stimulated stomatal opening  by the inhibitor of zeaxanthin biosynthesis,
              DTT.  In addition,  measurements of rates of stomatal conductances, the
              magnitude of  blue light responses of guard cell chloroplasts, and zeaxanthin 
              concentrations in guard cells of F2 plants from a cross between a  primitive
              and an advanced cotton line with contrasting stomatal  conductances and blue
              light sensitivity, showed that plants with  high conductances had guard cells
              with large blue light responses  and a high zeaxanthin concentration, and vice
              versa.  The proposed  research will use spectroscopic, physiological,
              biochemical and  genetic approaches with guard cell s and coleoptiles, to probe
              the  involvement of a carotenoid, possibly zeaxanthin, in blue light  sensory
              transduction in plant cells.  %%%  One of the most fundamental responses of a
              plant to the environment  is the response to blue light.  Blue light stimulates
              the growing  tip of a young plant to turn and grow toward light, and controls 
              the opening of pores in leaves (stomata) that allow gas and water  exchange
              across the leaf surface.  The mechanism by which plant  cells sense blue light
              is not yet understood.  As the first step in  the response, blue light must be
              absorbed by a specific chemical  photoreceptor, but this photoreceptor has not
              yet been identified  with certainty.  Circumstantial evidence has led many
              investigators  in the field to believe that the photoreceptor is a type of
              organic  molecule known as a "flavin".  Dr. Zeiger, however, has evidence 
              suggesting that a different class of molecule, a "carotenoid" may,  instead, be
              the blue light receptor.  The goal of this research is  to determine whether
              the carotenoid is the real blue light  receptor.  Establishing the nature of
              the blue light photoreceptor  would be a very important contribution to
              understanding of this   fundamental plant response to the environment.***
