Title       : Assessing the External Validity of Jury Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9311660

Award Number: 9311660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65456              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9311660  PENROD  Social scientists have studied jury decision-making in order to
               identify factors in the process that conform to the ideal model of  the jury
              in a democratic society, as well as factors that might be  changed to improve
              jury functioning.  However, access to real  juries is restricted by law and as
              a result many jury researchers  use simulated juries as the basis for their
              studies.  Simulated  juries have the advantage that researchers can carefully
              control  and systematically vary the content of their simulation to maintain 
              experimental research controls not typically available in real  courtrooms. 
              Critics within the social science and legal  communities argue, however, that
              the decision-making observed in  jury simulations may not generalize to actual
              trials and that it  may be unwise to base policies on the results of simulation
               research.  This project will test whether the research methods used  (those
              features of jury studies that arguably make them more or  less applicable to
              actual cases) are systematically related to the  size and nature of the
              results.  A number of variables (such as  jury size, jury decision rules, jury
              comprehension of legal  instructions, and pretrial publicity) that have been
              examined using  both simulations and field observations of real juries will be 
              examined.      The project will include a number of stages.  First, a search
              will  be undertaken to identify all relevant studies.  Second, existing 
              reviews of the jury literature and theoretical articles on jury  behavior will
              be reviewed to identify variables for coding.  A  coding scheme for all
              included characteristics will be developed  and tested.  Then all of the
              studies will be coded according to the  coding scheme.  These data will be
              analyzed to test the average  effect sizes produced by the independent
              variables in the full data  set and the average effect sizes for specific
              research domains  within the full data set.  The relationships among the
              various  research methods and the magni tude of the effect sizes will then be 
              tested in both the full data set and the specific research domains.   The goal
              is to identify any methodological variables that moderate  the influence of the
              independent variables and thereby limit the  generalizability of results from
              simulation studies.   ***
