Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Production of Valuable Natural Products in
               Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9311978

Award Number: 9311978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gamin M. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
              9311978 Wang  This award will support an eighteen month grant under the NSF CGP
              (Center for Global Partnership) Science Fellowship Program for Dr. Gamin M.
              Wang, Cellular and Molecular Biology Division, SRI International, Menlo Park,
              California.  Dr. Wang will undertake a six month cooperative research project
              with Dr. Yasuyuki Yamada, Department of Agricultural Chemistry, Kyoto
              University in Japan.  The research objective is to develop a scalable, in
              vitro, differentiated plant cell culture system for production of rose oil from
              Rosaceae.  Floral organs are the source of numerous valuable secondary
              metabolic products, including spices, dyes, medicinal products, and fragrances
              (such as rose oil).  Differentiation of floral organs from various types of
              plant tissue cultures has been accomplished in several species of plants, but
              this approach has not been widely used with Rosa species.  In the proposed
              research, two techniques will be tested.  The first method is based on a scheme
              designed to promote proliferation of floral organs, i.e., stigmas, from
              partially differentiated stigmas of tobacco.  The second was originally
              designed to differentiate flowers directly from thin layer tissue explants,
              also from tobacco.  The collaborative aspects of the research will focus on
              modification of the growth media, hormones, and other environmental inputs
              necessary to optimize induction and differentiation of floral organs of Rosa
              with these basic schemes.  Once flowers are formed, it will then be possible to
              analyze them for their rose oil content.    Results of the research should
              facilitate the development and production of desirable secondary product
              components.  Dr. Yamada is a wo rld renowned leader in the field of plant
              tissue culture for secondary metabolite production and his laboratory at Kyoto
              University is well equipped for the research project.  Dr. Wang also has
              considerable expertise in this area and it is anticipated that a fruitful
              collaboration will result with continued cooperation at the completion of the
              formal agreement.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
