Title       : Optically Induced Ultrashort Transient Dynamics in Condensed Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9311175

Award Number: 9311175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter E. Bron wbron@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9311175  Bron  Changes in the index of refraction of compound semiconductors
              will  be measured after optical injection of coherent optical phonons and 
              polaritons.  The injection of the phonon/polariton states occurs on  a subps
              time scale through a coherent Raman excitation (CRE)  process.  The injected
              phonons are nearly monochromatic, have known  wave vectors and polarizations,
              have initially fixed relative   phase, and are initially spatially localized to
              the overlap region  of the two pump lasers.  A beam deflection or a
              photoinduced  grating technique will be used to monitor the changes in the
              index  of refraction.  The effect will be studied as a function of the 
              intensity and frequency of the pump lasers, the relative  orientation of the
              propagation vector of the coherent phonon state  and the crystal axes of the
              semiconductor, and the effects of  lattice defects.  Other measurements of
              interest include the  coherent phonon/polariton dephasing time and the
              measurement of the  real and imaginary components of the third order nonlinear 
              electronic susceptibility.  In a related experiment, the effect of  plasma
              excess energy on the dephasing time of coherent LO phonons  will be measured
              for GaP using a pulsed (50 fs), tunable laser  source.  %%%  Changes in the
              optical properties of a compound semiconductor will  be measured on extremely
              short time scales.  These changes are  induced by two laser pulses which are
              focused to overlap the same  region of the semiconductor.  The frequency of the
              two lasers  differs by an amount which is exactly equal to a characteristic 
              frequency of certain vibrational modes of the semiconductor.  These 
              vibrational modes will in turn alter the transmission or reflection  of another
              light beam which is incident on the semiconductor.  The  experiment can yield
              important insight into the basic mechanisms  which are essential to the
              development of ultrafast optical  switching devices.  ***
