Title       : Using Parallelism and Randomness in the Analysis of Large- Scale Real-Time
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9311622

Award Number: 9311622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Insup Lee lee@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanguthevar Rajasekaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              9311622  Lee  The goal of this project is to develop efficient algorithms  for
              the automated analysis of communicating systems and  distributed real-time
              systems.  We base this research on a  general framework, called a Communicating
              Timed State  Machine with Probability (CTSMP).  CTSMPs are state machines  that
              communicate messages synchronously over one-to-many  channels.  In addition,
              CTSMPs support several features that  are useful in describing real-time
              computer systems.  Examples of such features include local variables, timed 
              state transmissions, and probabilistic state transitions.  The compositional
              semantics of CTSMPs allows a complex  system to be specified as a collection of
              simple machines  that communicate and synchronize with one another.  The 
              inclusion of both timed state transitions and probabilistic  state transitions
              allows the modeling of faults and timing  properties in the same framework.   
              The fundamental issue in the automated analysis of  communicating systems is
              the efficient generation of the  reachable state space. For finite state
              systems, the problem  is state explosion.  For infinite state systems, it is
              not  possible to generate all the states; instead, we need to  find a way of
              combining sets of states.  There are two  approaches to address the state
              explosion and exploration  problem:  1) reduce the state space either through
              efficient  encoding or by clustering sets of equivalent states; and 2) 
              generate or explore less space using probability. This  research employs both
              of these approaches and consists of  several related parts:  1) design of CTSMP
              state  minimization algorithms; 2) discovery of probabilistic state  generation
              and exploration algorithms; 3) design of  efficient model checking algorithms
              using CTSMP and  comparison with binary decision diagram based algorithms;  and
              4) improving the efficiency of the above algorithms  using parallelism and
              randomization.  This project will  implement these algorithms and evaluate
              their effectiveness  exper imentally.  ***
