Title       : Tree-structured Image Compression and Classification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9311190

Award Number: 9311190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Gray rmgray@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Olshen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gray         Tree-structured vector quantization is an approach to image 
              compression that applies ideas from statistical clustering  algorithms and
              tree-structured classification and regression  algorithms to produce
              compression codes that trade off bit rate  and average distortion in a near
              optimal fashion.  This research  is examining the explicit combination of these
              two forms of  signal processing, compression and classification, into single 
              tree-structured algorithms that permit a trade off between  traditional
              distortion measures, such as squared error, with  measures of classification
              accuracy such as Bayes risk.  The  intent is to produce codes with implicit
              classification  information, that is, for which the stored or communicated 
              compressed image incorporates classification information without  further
              signal processing.  Such systems can provide direct low  level classification
              or provide an efficient front end to more  sophisticated full-frame recognition
              algorithms.  Vector quanitization algorithms for relatively large block sizes 
              are also being developed with an emphasis on multiresolution  compression
              algorithms.  In order to improve the promising  performance found in
              preliminary studies or combined compression  and classification, it will be
              necessary to use larger block  sizes or, equivalently, more context. 
              Multiresolution or  hierarchial quantizers provide a simple and effective means
              of  accomplishing this.  Other related issues are being explored,  including
              improved prediction methods for predictive vector  quantization and image
              sequence coding.                                                   
