Title       : Using Films Deposited in Features to Establish Kinetic and Transport Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9311977

Award Number: 9311977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Cale   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. Raupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Cale & Raupp/9311977    A modeling and experimental project is
              planned to develop a method in which deposition experiments on patterned wafers
              are used to establish heterogeneous reaction kinetics and species transport
              models required for the design and optimization of low pressure deposition
              processes.  The method takes advantage of the information which can be obtained
              using film profiles inside features on patterned wafers, in addition to the
              information which can be obtained from deposition experiments on flat wafers.
              The PIs plan to use a process simulator that they have developed to determine
              the parameters of reaction kinetic and species transport submodels to the point
              where they can be used to reliably predict deposition rates, film profiles and
              film composition profiles in features on patterned wafers as functions of
              deposition conditions.  These models can include: 10 the total flux of each
              reactant from the source volume to the wafer surface and into features on the
              wafer, 20 parameter values for the kinetic model, 3) the angular dependence of
              the flux of each gas phase species, and 4) the surface diffusion parameter
              values for surface species.  The choice of submodel structures and the values
              of their parameters are determined by minimizing the differences between
              experimental and simulated film profiles.      Specifically, the PIs will
              define, develop, test, and demon                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      strate the procedure for a variety of industrially relevant low
              pressure deposition processes, including chemical vapor deposition, physical
              vapor deposition and plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition processes.  The
              choice of processes to be investigated will be guided by the changing interests
              of the microelectronics industry.  The PIs will establish the methodology to
              determine the parameters of new submodels for these processes to the degree
              required for industrial application.  Film profile and deposition rate data
              will be obtained from experiments performed at Arizona State University as well
              as in industrial and other academic laboratories.
