Title       : Response Of Microbial Community Structure And Protistan Grazing Pathways To
               Environmental Forcing In The Arabian Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9311246

Award Number: 9311246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Landry landry@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9311246  Landry         The Arabian Sea is an intensely dynamic region of
              the world's  oceans driven by strong seasonal reversals in monsoon winds.  The 
              region is interesting in the context of the Joint Global spatial  scales
              "extremes" in ocean production systems -- coastal upwelling  to open ocean
              oligotrophic -- under relatively constant tropical  illumination.  It is thus a
              natural laboratory to test conceptual  linkages among physical forcing,
              food-wed structure, biogeochemical  cycling and fluxes, and carbon burial in
              the sediments.  The  general goals of this project are to asses the roles of 
              microzooplankton as consumers of bacterial and phytoplankton  production and to
              contribute to understanding the relationships  among plankton community
              structure, new production, and  biogeochemical fluxes and their responses to
              physical forcing the  Arabian Sea.  The project is to be conducted during the
              spring  (April) intermonsoon and summer (August) SW monsoon seasons, when  the
              most dramatic differences should be evident.  Abundance,  biomass, and specific
              growth rates of bacteria and phytoplankton  will be determined by flow
              cytometric, microscopic, and pigment  analyses to determine their variations
              with season, depth and  location.  The dominant microzooplankton grazers on
              pico- and  nanoplankton will be identified and quantified, and the impact of 
              their grazing will be measured with a suite of complementary  methods including
              dilution, fluorescently-labelled prey, size-  fractionation, and specific
              metabolic inhibitors.  Results of this  project will contribute to
              understanding how global climate  changes, which may affect prevailing forcing
              winds, will alter  phytoplankton community structure and in turn how these
              changes in  structure of the food web affect carbon storage and export from the
               upper water column.
