Title       : U.S.-Western Europe Regional Workshop on Domestic Sources of European
               Integration; Tubingen, Germany; December, 1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9311657

Award Number: 9311657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Mingst   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9311657  Mingst  This award supports the participation of six U.S. social
              scientists  in a workshop with European colleagues to plan a collaborative 
              research project on the factors that affect national cooperation in  European
              integration.  The meeting is co-organized by Karen Mingst of  the University of
              Kentucky, Margaret Karns of the University of  Dayton, Bengt Sundelius of the
              University of Stockholm, Sweden and  Volker Rittberger of the University of
              Tubingen, Germany.  They will  be joined by a small but diverse group of senior
              and junior scholars  and students from Sweden, the UK, Germany, the Netherlands
              and the  United States.  The participants are specialists in international 
              organizations, foreign policy analysis, theories of cooperation and  the
              European Community.    The workshop project will apply a common conceptual
              framework  developed by the co-organizers for a set of systematic, focused case
               studies utilizing both cross-time and cross-national comparisons.   Past
              efforts at integration and institutional development and reform  have been
              products of an elite alliance of transnational officials  and pan-European
              business groups.  The difficulties experienced in  more recent stages
              demonstrate the influence of domestic interest  groups and citizens.  The
              studies will use three types of domestic  societal variables and four types of
              cooperation problems to examine  the domestic factors propelling, constraining
              or inhibiting  cooperation.    Previous work in cooperation theory has largely
              treated states as  unified actors and has ignored the interactions between
              domestic and  international politics.  Efforts to broaden the European
              Community  have made it obvious that domestic support is important and is 
              affected by a number of variables.  This project will advance the  state of
              knowledge in cooperation theory by examining how different  levels and patterns
              of domestic support affect the dynamics of the  cooperation process.  The
              organizers are active members of the  Internatio nal Studies Association (ISA),
              and are involved in its  recent efforts to stimulate greater international
              scholarly  interaction and cooperation.  This transatlantic workshop is 
              intended, in part, to serve as a demonstration project for future 
              ISA-sponsored workshops.  ***
