Title       : Dissertation Research: Environmental Context and Plant Use at San Jacinto 1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9311912

Award Number: 9311912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Sabloff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeremy Sabloff, Ms. Renee Bonzani will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze                   
              botanical and associated materials collected during archaeological             
              excavation at the site of San Jacinto 1 in northern Columbia. The              
              site is extremely important because it contains seven culturally               
              distinct layers dated from 6000 to 5700 B.P. (before the present)              
              and these include some of the oldest fiber-tempered pottery known              
              from the New World. The site is also extremely rich in floral                  
              remains and these were systematically collected by a flotation                 
              technique. What also makes the site important is its location near             
              a savannah margin. Several archaeologists have argued that it was              
              in such ecotone situations that domestication of plants was most               
              likely to have occurred. In her research Ms. Bonzani will attempt              
              both to reconstruct the environment and human use of it through                
              time. To accomplish the former she will study charcoal to determine            
              the tree species represented and also examine insect remains for               
              environmental clues. The latter variable will be addressed through             
              study of food remains themselves.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It has been                    
              hypothesized that, based on distribution of modern wild species,               
              several New World crops were domesticated in northern South                    
              America. However direct archaeological data is lacking and Ms.                 
              Bonzani's research may provide relevant information. By placing the            
              analysis in a broader environmental context the research may also              
              shed light on the causes of this most basic transformation in human            
              subsistence. It will provide information on how humans at                      
              technologically simple levels adapt to changing environments and               
              finally contribute to the development of a promising young                     
              scientist.
