Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial
               Differential and Integral Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9311406

Award Number: 9311406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars B. Wahlbin wahlbin@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Bramble  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9311406  Bramble       The investigator and his colleague study new techniques
              and  methods of analysis of behavior in existing approximation methods,  and
              introduce and analyze new algorithms for the numerical  approximation of
              various problems.  Specific areas to be  considered include:  i) Preconditioned
              iterative methods for fast solution of resulting  algebraic equations.    ii)
              Finite element methods in domains with curved boundaries and  interfaces.   
              iii) Local behavior of finite element methods in differential and  integral
              equation problems with singularities.    iv) Superconvergence phenomena in
              differential and integral  equations.    Numerical experimentation and examples
              will play important roles  in the discovery and elucidation of various
              numerical methods.  Of  course, practical application is a motivating factor
              for the  problems studied here.  One of the principal aims of the studies 
              proposed is to develop a deeper understanding of many existing  methods,
              improve them or develop new ways of treating old and new  problems.  This kind
              of understanding is central to the design of  accurate and efficient algorithms
              for the use in present and  future computer environments.         The
              investigators are researching various questions  concerning the practical
              solution of problems of interest in  engineering and science.  For example,
              such problems give rise to  extremely large sets of equations and the
              investigators study  mathematical questions related to computing their
              solutions.  One  aim is to construct methods that are faster and more accurate
              than  existing ones.  A second aim is to invent and study techniques for  the
              solution of problems heretofore beyond the scope of even the  most powerful
              computers.  Some areas of application in which the  above mentioned studies are
              very important are Structural  Mechanics, Fluid Dynamics, Groundwater flow and
              Electromagnetic  theory.
