Title       : Mathematical Sciences: One Day Combinatorics and Graph Theory Conferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1993  
File        : a9311696

Award Number: 9311696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Haas rhaas@math.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann N. Trenk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauren L. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth P. Bogart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. McKeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. Albertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Birgitte Servatius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports Professor Haas to organize a series of                
              workshops in combinatorics and graph theory.  These meetings will              
              mainly be used as a forum for faculty and graduate students in                 
              New England to meet and exchange ideas.  Meetings of this type                 
              have been held before and they have proven to be successful.  In               
              particular, they have the potential to have great impact in                    
              promoting the careers of the participants.  Since these meetings               
              have attracted a good number of women mathematicians, this                     
              represents a unique opportunity to increase the number of                      
              successful female mathematicians.                                              
                   The research is in the general area of combinatorics.                     
              Combinatorics attempts to find efficient methods to study how                  
              discrete collections can be organized.  The behavior of discrete               
              systems is extremely important to modern communications.  For                  
              example, the design of large networks, as in telephone systems,                
              and the design of algorithms in computer science all deal with                 
              discrete objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.
