Title       : Intracellular Recording from the Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9311453

Award Number: 9311453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shawn R. Lockery shawn@chinook.uoregon  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is a powerful experimental                 
              system whose potential for computational neuroscience is largely               
              untapped.  The simplicity of its nervous system, with exactly 302              
              neurons in the adult hermaphrodite, and the existence of a complete            
              anatomical wiring diagram, raise the prospect of a biophysically               
              accurate model of the entire nervous system.  Although detailed                
              genetic analyses and laser ablation studies have delineated the                
              circuits necessary for most C. elegans behaviors, it has not been              
              possible to record from the nervous system.  Thus, how these                   
              circuits function is not known.  The main objective of this                    
              project, therefore, is to expand upon pilot studies indicating the             
              feasibility of making intracellular recordings from C. elegans                 
              muscles and neurons.                                                           
                                                                                             
              One of the main obstacles to recording from C. elegans is the thick            
              external cuticle that breaks conventional microelectrodes.  Initial            
              experiments show, however, that the cuticle can be penetrated with             
              electrodes pulled from quartz glass and that dye-fills can be made             
              of a variety of muscles.  The fills are long-lasting and reflect               
              the morphology of anatomically defined muscles in the body wall and            
              other structures.  This sets the stage for attempts to refine this             
              technique for making intracellular recordings from muscles.                    
                                                                                             
              The small size of C. elegans neurons (2 mm in diameter) make it                
              unlikely that sharp electrodes can be used to make intracellular               
              recordings.  A physiological preparation has been developed,                   
              therefore, in which neurons are exposed by a microdissection                   
              technique in which a small slit is made in the cuticle.  Gigaohm               
              seals (5-20 G) can readily be obtained on the cell bodies of                   
              exposed neurons and a variety of single channel currents observed              
              in cell-attached patches.  This study will attempt to make                     
              intracellular recordings from C. elegans neurons in the whole-cell             
              patch configuration.  Whole-cell recordings will be established by             
              mechanical disruption of the membrane patch or by the perforated               
              patch technique.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Data from the recordings will form the basis of detailed                       
              biophysical models of the circuits underlying locomotion and                   
              chemotaxis.  Measurement of intrinsic properties such as resting               
              potential, input resistance, and active currents will be used to               
              construct biophysically realistic single-neuron models.  Single-               
              neuron models will be assembled into circuits as defined by                    
              previous studies and the models tested by comparing the effects of             
              "ablating" neurons in the model and actual circuits.  These models             
              constitute the initial phase of a long-term effort to understand               
              the neural basis of behavior of a single organism in its                       
              entirety.***//
