Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quasiregular Mappings and the Heat Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9311539

Award Number: 9311539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research on quasiregular              
              mappings and the heat equation.  Quasiregular mappings were                    
              introduced during the past quarter century to describe                         
              transformations of the plane and space whose distortion                        
              (dilatation) about any point is bounded.  Quasiconformal maps                  
              have the same definition except that they are required to be                   
              univalent.  Quasiregular maps are closely related to questions of              
              uniqueness in the theory of partial differential equations.  This              
              project will focus on investigations into weak solutions of                    
              elliptic and parabolic differential equations and the                          
              relationship between the branch set of an entire quasiregular or               
              quasimeromorphic function and its value distribution.  Work will               
              also continue on singular integrals and the heat equation for                  
              certain time varying domains in space.  The one space variable                 
              case is now well understood.  Current plans are to carry forward               
              recent results into the multidimensional case. The goals are to                
              study the Dirichlet and Neumann problems on these domains and                  
              seek to determine the mutual absolute continuity of parabolic                  
              measure with respect to a certain projective Lebesgue measure.                 
              This will use the method of layer potentials, the David buildup                
              scheme and singular integral estimates.                                        
                   Partial differential equations form a basis for mathematical              
              modeling of the physical world.  The role of mathematical                      
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to                    
              ....                                                            
              ..
