Title       : Optimization for Systems Under Uncertainty: Modeling, Asymptotic Analysis, and
               Recursive Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9877090

Award Number: 9877090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang George Yin gyin@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Title: Optimization for Systems under Uncertainty: Modeling,
         
                    Asymptotic Analysis, and Recursive Algorithms
Proposal Number:
              DMS-9877090
PI: G. George Yin
Affl.: Department of Mathematics, Wayne State
              University, Detroit, MI 48202
       Tel. 313-577-2496, Fax 313-577-7596,
              Email: gyin@math.wayne.edu

Abstract

Technical Description:


Focusing
              on modeling and optimization for systems under uncertainty, this
proposal
              consists of four parts. Part I proposes two types of algorithms. The
first one
              is an approximation of an analog diffusion machine; the second
one also takes
              measurement errors into consideration. Our goal is to develop
asymptotic
              properties of such algorithms. By using weak convergence methods,
suitably
              scaled sequences will be shown to converge to appropriate diffusions.
Part II
              treats a class of hybrid models. Approximation schemes for
systems involving
              singularly perturbed Markov chains with weak and strong
interactions will be
              developed, which are useful for natural time-scale
separation and reduction of
              complexity for large-scale systems.
Part III investigates asymptotic
              properties of solutions of Cauchy problems
arising from null-recurrent
              diffusions. Our focus is on obtaining convergence
and rate of convergence of
              the solutions. One of the primary motivations comes
from the investigation of
              singularly perturbed systems. The results will be
useful to the ever expanding
              applications in optimization, controlled Markov
systems, hierarchical decision
              making, production planning, telecommunication,
queueing networks, and system
              reliability.
Part IV models single-machine scheduling problems under random
              processing 
time, and/or under random machine breakdowns
and repairs, and/or
              subject to random compression of processing times.
Our objectives are to
              develop feasible models and to obtain optimal
scheduling policies for the
              underlying systems. These results will allow us
to design scheduling models
              and strategies for more complex jobshops by
considering integrated processes
              as single-machine systems.


Nontechnical explanation:

To bridge the gap
              between theory and applications, this research project
includes three
              components: modeling, asymptotic analysis, and simulation.
The ultimate goals
              are to provide useful models, to investigate their basic
properties,  and to
              develop sound and feasible algorithms.
Part 1 proposes two classes of
              algorithms with applications to machine
learning,
image segmentation, and
              various global optimization tasks.
To meet the increasing demand on robust
              design and control of systems in
speech
and pattern recognition, signal
              processing, telecommunications, and
manufacturing, Part 2 aims to reduce the
              complexity of a large-scale
system of complex structure by using a simple
              system via approximation
schemes.
The origin of the planned work for Part 3
              stems from the effort of modeling
uncertainties due to random influence  such
              as demands for a product in a
manufacturing system or fluctuation in the stock
              market. To control
the underlying system, it is imperative to understand the
              system's long-term
behavior, which is our primary goal.
In production
              planning, it is vital to provide good strategy
in sequencing the parts to be
              processed by the machines. Part 4 proposes
single-machine scheduling models in
              uncertain environment.
The proposed work aims to develop optimal scheduling
              policies.
The overall planned work represents a continuation of the PI's
              recent 
preliminary exploration in these areas. It is expected that the
              results 
will be applicable in the further improvements of optimization
              methods.

