Title       : Atomic Effects on Brittle Fracture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9877044

Award Number: 9877044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Marder marder@chaos.ph.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9877044
Marder
This award supports theoretical atomic-scale modeling of
              fracture and plastic deformation of solid materials.  The goal of this proposal
              is to learn the connection between interatomic forces and the behavior of
              materials during brittle fracture.  Most of the project effort will be focused
              on silicon as a test case.  Analytic and numerical methods will be used in
              close coordination with an ongoing experimental program.  The analytical
              methods include techniques for solving dynamical lattice models of fracture,
              while the numerical methods include molecular dynamics code written for
              high-performance computing systems and designed to study fracture. 
              Experimental work in this area is supported by DMR in the Ceramics
              Program.
%%%
This award supports theoretical atomic-scale modeling of
              fracture and plastic deformation of solid materials.  One of the central goals
              of materials physics is to relate the nanometer-scale interactions between
              atoms to observed physical properties at the macroscopic scale.   Fracture and
              plastic deformation in solids is one of the particularly difficult physical
              effects to model because they involve dynamics of defects of great
              complexity-rapidly moving structures with characteristic dimensions as large as
              meters but controlled by atomic-scale processes.  The goal of this effort is to
              show that a quantitative connection between atomic and macro scales is
              possible, and that atomic-scale simulations can be used for detailed
              predictions of realizable laboratory experiments.  The project will focus on
              brittle fracture, with additional work on ductile fracture and plastic
              deformation.  Experimental work in this area is supported by DMR in the
              Ceramics Program.
***

