Title       : Probabilistic Analysis of Geomaterials with Randomly Distributed Shear Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9877189

Award Number: 9877189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Vaughan Griffiths d.v.griffiths@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

9877189 

PI:  D. Vaughan Griffiths 
Institution:  Colorado
              School of Mines 
"Probabilistic Analysis of Geomaterials with Randomly
              Distributed Shear Strength" 

Although sophisticated techniques are available
              for risk assessment, and although such techniques are important for analyses
              involving soil materials that are inherently variable, the civil engineering
              profession has been slow to embrace risk approaches in practice.  Major reasons
              for this reluctance include the lack of knowledge about probabilistic methods,
              and the lack of confidence in the parameters which must be used as "input" to
              these methods.   

This research will address these limitations with
              particular reference to the probabilistic analysis of slope stability,
              including the assessment of stability of existing dams and embankments, ands
              especially for the particular case when the soil is weakened by earthquake
              loading.  The analytical part of this research will bring together two powerful
              tools of engineering analysis and modeling, namely the theory of random fields
              and the finite element method.  By assigning each soil element soil properties
              based on a fixed underlying statistical distribution, soil properties will be
              accounted for in a systematic way.  Nonlinear finite element elasto-plastic
              analysis will then be used to assess the stability of slopes made up of soils
              with randomly distributed properties.   

The choice of soil properties is
              crucial, and this research will also focus on the interpretation of available
              data and presumptive values in the literature.  Data sources will include the
              U. S. National Geotechnical Experimentation Sites (NGES) data bases and
              information from the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI).  The results of
              the analyses will be presented where possible in the form of charts or
              semi-empirical relationships relating probability of failure to soil
              variability and spatial correlation.  It is believed that studies of this type
              will provide guidance to geotechnical engineers in the design process and
              improve confidence in the use and interpretation of probabilistic methods. 

