Title       : IDA/WG: Improving and Assessing the Impact of Programs to Encourage High School
               Girls to Pursue Science, Engineering and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9877037

Award Number: 9877037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Davis rdavis@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1507,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Improving and Assessing the Impact of Programs to Encourage High School Girls to
              Pursue Science, Engineering, and Mathematics is a two and one-half day workshop
              for 30 to 40 participants who are currently involved in the design and/or
              implementation of a program to encourage the interest and success of high
              school age women and minorities in pursuing higher education and careers in
              science, engineering, and/or mathematics.  The proposed workshop has two major
              goals:

	o  to provide an opportunity for the participants to share
              strategies and experience (failures and                         successes) in
              order to improve the design of their programs;
	o  to develop an assessment
              plan that can reasonably be applied nationwide, collecting long term           
                              follow-up data on students who apply to such programs
              (including non-participating applicants)                     that will allow
              combination of the results from several programs in order to determine the     
                                      national impact of such programs on increasing the
              participating and retention of women in SEM.

The workshop will take place at
              Santa Clara University (SCU), where the PI, Dr. Ruth E. Davis, is a Professor
              of Computer Engineering.  Besides hosting the workshop, SCU will host the
              website to be created for the workshop and for the long term evaluation of
              programs through longitudinal study of participants.  It will take place on the
              campus of SCU in the first week of August 1999.  The timing is chosen to avoid
              conflict with summer programs to encourage women in science, engineering, and
              mathematics and to precede the start of the academic year for both quarter and
              semester schools.

