Title       : CISE-NSF-CNPq Collaboration Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9877171

Award Number: 9877171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nader Bagherzadeh nader@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fadi J. Kurdahi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1085,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project involves development of a new reconfigurable computing
              architecture, called MorphoSys, through close collaboration among researchers
              and students at University of California, Irvine (UCI) and the Federal
              University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ).  This unique architecture combines a
              reconfigurable Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) coprocessor with a RISC
              core microprocessor on the same chip.  Moreover, in order to address the
              special needs of image/signal processing applications, the MorphoSys
              architecture includes a unique image data buffer for efficient data streaming. 
              Behavioral level simulation of the M1 chip has shown the architecture to be
              quite promising for a variety of applications (MPEG-2 and ATR), achieving
              performance much more superior to the standard general purpose microprocessors
              and close to specialized ASIC-based solutions.

The UCI and UFRJ researchers
              have been working closely for the development of the behavioral model of M1
              chip.  The UFRJ research group has designed the RISC core that is used for
              controlling the SIMD coprocessor in M1. This block is considered one of the
              most complex components of the chip requiring custom-made as well as
              synthesizable circuits. It is proposed that UFRJ group handle the physical
              design of the RISC core, while the UCI group completes the remaining blocks of
              the M1 chip that is estimated to have more than 1.5 million transistors.
              

Along with physical design, the other objectives for collaboration between
              the two groups at UCI and UFRJ include development of programming and testing
              environment for M1, mapping and performance evaluation for a wide range of
              applications, and design of second version of the MorphoSys architecture. We
              visualize that this collaboration will enhance the educational experience of
              students both at UCI and at UFRJ in Brazil, by providing them an opportunity to
              work in a competitive, target-oriented, multi-cultural environment using the
              latest technology. 


