Title       : Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9877194

Award Number: 9877194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Rosay jrosay@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9877194
Principal Investigator: Jean-Pierre Rosay

Abstract:
              The first goal of Professor Rosay is to continue his study, in collaboration
              with E.L. Stout, of the theory of boundary values (in the sense of
              hyperfunctions). Indeed, the two have started developing an entirely new theory
              of boundary values. This is research in function theory, with strong
              connections to several complex variables and partial differential equations.
              Rosay's project also entails the continuation of his study of various questions
              on the dynamics of biholomorphisms of complex n-space (collaborations with P.
              Ahern and F. Forstneric). Several other topics (e.g., uniqueness in the Cauchy
              problem, the nonlinear d-bar equation) will also be explored.

Rosay's main
              area of activity is the theory of functions of several complex variables. This
              field is a central one in mathematics, with direct ties to such areas as
              approximation theory and partial differential equations that are very close to
              immediate applications (e.g., image processing, modeling, scientific
              computation). It should be stressed that mathematical results that may at first
              glance look quite abstract can in fact lead to very practical applications, by
              creating the possibility of new computational tools. (Even if, as usual in
              fundamental science, benefits may take many years to surface.) In order to
              illustrate how a shift from what seems to be purely theoretical to something
              more applied or at least applicable is possible, one need look no further than
              the present project for an example. Stout and Rosay recently gave a totally new
              proof of a very classical and fundamental theorem known as the Paley-Wiener
              theorem. This new proof was unlikely to be found in the classical setting,
              because the approach only became natural in the generalized and more abstract
              setting of "analytic functionals." However, despite the fact that it arose in a
              generalized setting, it turns out that the new proof is constructive in nature,
              and therefore much more closely linked to the possibility of practical
              computations. From one perspective, this development is not so surprising. It
              has been known for centuries that the full explanation of many basic
              mathematical phenomena (as fundamental as the convergence of power series
              expansion) is to be found only in the realm of complex numbers. It has likewise
              been known for centuries that many computations are best done with complex
              variables, even if one is interested in a final answer expressed in terms of
              real numbers. Of course, no more so than in any other science can one claim
              that all the research in the field of complex analysis will lead to
              applications, and often the applications that are found will come as complete
              surprises. But complex analysis clearly furnishes an essential tool to both
              pure and applied mathematicians.

