Title       : Deformation Rings and Group Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9877164

Award Number: 9877164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Conrad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposal is to better understand the structure of 
(restricted)
              deformation rings arising from Galois representations.  For 
example, it is a
              fundamental problem to relate algebraic properties 
of deformation rings to
              properties of the representations being classified. 
This is, at present, very
              poorly understood.  Out of analogy with algebraic 
geometry, can one define a
              suitable cohomology group whose vanishing 
corresponds to formal  smoothness
              of the deformation ring?  A representative non-trivial example  which we will
              study is the case of representations arising from finite, 
flat group schemes
              over highly ramified bases.   This example should shed 
some light on more
              general cases, and it should also have applications to 
modularity questions
              for Galois representations and elliptic curves. 

This research is in the
              area of number theory, which is the branch
of mathematics that is concerned
              with questions about the integers.
Number theory is a very old subject, but is
              full of difficult problems
and significant conjectures. Many of the
              fundamental problems in the 
subject concern either the behavior of prime
              numbers or 
properties of the integer solutions to systems of polynomial
              equations.  
These kinds of problems can be studied with a vast range
              of
analytic, algebraic, and geometric tools.  Such number-theoretic ideas also
              have important real-world applications in the  development of secure and
              accurate electronic communications systems. The elliptic curve factorization
              algorithm is one example of such an  application.

