Title       : Algorithms and Routing Schemes for Scalable Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9877139

Award Number: 9877139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Berman Ken.Berman@UC.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred S. Annexstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9877139
Berman


This project conducts research on the design,
              implementation, and analysis of algorithms for the support of scalable and
              reliable communication services in distributed networks.  The focus centers
              around important challenges that affect the national network-communication
              infrastructure and the needs of increasing numbers of network users and
              services.  These challenges included mitigating the stress on network backbone
              caused by the diminishing locality of network traffic, easing the addition of
              large numbers of geographically distributed network hosts, implementing
              fault-tolerant and congestion-tolerant communication methods, and integrating
              diverse technologies such as fast-switching and mobile communication devices
              into the national networking infrastructure.  A significant obstacle in meeting
              these challenges is the difficulty of routing, switching, addressing, and
              guaranteeing delivery of messages in such a large and growing global network. 
              This is a program of fundamental and applied research attacking these
              scalability and reliability problems using techniques of network algorithms,
              computational combinatorics and graph theory.  The analysis of the topological
              structure of networks and the algorithmic properties associated with network
              routing schemes will be the primary focus.  Extensive implementations and
              empirical studies building on the experience using the network platform
              provided by the Ohio Supercomputer Center and the OCARNet dedicated ATM
              research network will be performed.  

