Title       : Fourier Integrals and Generalized Radon Transforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9877101

Award Number: 9877101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf allan@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9877101
Principal Investigator: Allan T. Greenleaf

Abstract:
              Estimates for Fourier integral operators associated with canonical relations
              whose projections exhibit stable classes of singularities, higher-order cusps
              in particular, will be investigated. For two-sided cusps, new decompositions of
              the operators near the singular varieties will be developed. These estimates
              and decompositions will have applications to boundedness properties of
              generalized Radon transforms, particularly averages over families of curves and
              restricted X-ray transforms, on Sobolev and Lebesgue spaces. In addition,
              classes of degenerate Fourier integral operators arising in integral geometry
              and inverse seismic problems will be studied and composition calculi obtained
              for them. Real analogues of Goncharov's complexes of hyperplane sections of
              algebraic varieties of minimal degree and the forward operator for linearized
              source problems will provide important prototypes of such operators.

The
              operators analyzed in this project are special classes of Fourier integral
              operators, which have been used for the last thirty years to construct
              approximate solutions to linear partial differential equations. Such equations
              govern basic physical processes, such as vibration of membranes and propagation
              of electromagnetic fields. More recently, it has been found that Fourier
              integral operators arise in other settings, such as tomography (medical
              imaging) and geophysical exploration. More detailed understanding of these 
              operators under a variety of geometric assumptions will improve our
              understanding of both the qualitative and quantitative behavior of the physical
              systems being modelled.

