Title       : Analytical and Combinatorial Aspects of Subfactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9877067

Award Number: 9877067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dietmar H. Bisch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Bisch

Bisch will continue his investigations in subfactor theory.
              Subfactors with finite Jones index have an amazingly rich mathematical
              structure and an interplay of analytical, algebraic-combinatorial and
              topological techniques is intrinsic to the theory. Planar algebra methods will
              be used to investigate the structure of subfactors and their standard
              invariants. In pioneering work, Bisch and Jones have used these techniques to
              prove a general structure theorem for subfactors that leads to a classification
              of singly generated planar algebras with small dimension.  It is planned to
              take this classification one step further by studying a generalized quantum
              Yang-Baxter equation. New towers of algebras are expected to appear in this
              analysis. The notion of free product of two planar algebras will be
              investigated and various natural graded algebra structures on a planar algebra
              will be examined. Other directions of the project include work on rigidity of
              subfactors and the investigation of sub-systems of Popa systems.

The theory
              of operator algebras, of which subfactor theory is a branch, has been
              introduced by John von Neumann to provide an adequate mathematical framework
              for quantum mechanics. For instance, the Heisenberg uncertainty relation
              appears as a natural consequence of the properties of the abstract mathematical
              objects that von Neumann invented. It has become increasingly clear in the last
              few years that classical mathematical structures, such as groups, are not
              always sufficient to capture all the relevant symmetries present in a
              mathematical or physical situation, especially in the context of quantum field
              theory. A subfactor can be viewed as a mathematical object with which one can
              capture what one might call the quantum symmetries of the problem under
              investigation. Subfactor techniques can then be applied to describe these
              symmetries explicitly in algebraic-combinatorial terms.  For instance, certain
              graphs appear as part of this data. Many surprising applications of the theory
              of subfactors to several areas of mathematics and theoretical physics, for
              instance knot theory and conformal field theory, have been found in this way.
              Subfactors have thus contributed in an important way to the understanding of
              naturally occurring structures in these a priori quite distinct areas of
              mathematics and physics.

