Title       : Operator Spaces and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  2000   
File        : a9877157

Award Number: 9877157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong-Jin Ruan ruan@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ruan

An operator space is a norm closed subspace of bounded linear
              operators on a Hilbert space, equipped with a distinguished matrix norm.  The
              operator space theory is  a natural quantization of Banach space theory.  The
              major difference between operator spaces and Banach spaces is that one
              considers  operator matrix norms and  completely bounded maps in the  category
              of operator spaces. In 1987, the PI succeeded in formulating an axiomatization
              of operator spaces by matrix norms.  Since then, a lot of progress has been
              made in this area.  In this proposal, the PI plans to continue his research in
              this direction and proposes  the following research topics:
(1)  investigate
              the  local structure of the operator preduals of von Neumann algebras and the
              operator duals of $C^*$-algebras; (2) investigate the local structure on
              $C^*$-algebras and von Neumann algebras; (3) investigate the geometric
              structure of matrix unit balls of operator spaces;
(4)  investigate the
              application to locally compact quantum groups.


The most profound
              distinction between classical and quantum mechanics is Heisenberg's principle
              that one must represent the basic variables of physics by operators rather than
              functions. The work of  J. von Neumann emphasized that it is important to
              pursue the "quantized" forms of mathematics.  Collaborating with F.J. Murray,
              von Neumann  succeeded in quantizing integration theory during the 1940's. 
              Since then, mathematicians have tried to quantize many other areas of
              mathematics such as topology, differential geometry, analysis and probability
              theory.  The theory of operator spaces is a natural quantization of functional
              analysis, or more precisely, a natural quantization of Banach space theory. 
              This is a recently developed promising research area in modern analysis.  The
              PI and his colleagues have established the foundation of this area.  They have
              also discovered some  far-reaching applications of operator space theory to
              related areas in mathematics such as operator algebras, non-commutative
              harmonic analysis, Kac algebras  and locally compact quantum groups.  The PI
              plans to continue his research in this direction and plans to explore a much
              broarder range of applications.


