Title       : Efficient Cryptographic Protocols and Protection of Privacy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9877138

Award Number: 9877138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O. Rabin rabin@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project has two main thrusts, aimed at creating efficient and
              secure cryptographic algorithms and protocols, and providing means for
              protecting and enhancing privacy in the electronic era.

Public-Key
              Cryptography (PKC) occupies a central position in modern secure communications
              and electronic commerce.  There are a number of fundamental issues, of great
              practical and theoretical significance, related to PKC.  Let ER be a public-key
              encryption function.  Under reasonable assumptions an encryption C = ER(M)
              protects the secrecy of M.  But there are more subtle attacks on ER.  Two such
              threats which are very difficult to protect against, are the chosen ciphertext
              attack and the malleability attack.  In the latter, and adversary may replace,
              say, the ciphertext C by C* = ER(M + 3), without knowing what M is.  A
              considerable amount of profound work was invested in protecting encryptions
              against these dangerous attacks.  All the generally applicable solutions
              involved application of general Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKP) and consequently,
              while in principle of polynomial complexity, required an inordinate amount of
              computations.  Recently the PI was able to immunize any semantically secure
              encryption function ER against chosen ciphertext attacks and malleability
              attacks by considerably more efficient algorithms which do not require ZKPs.  A
              key role is played by a novel and efficient Proof of Plaintext Knowledge
              Protocol.  All these methods are generic, in the sense that they apply to
              enhance any PK encryption ER.  Further development, applications and
              optimization of these novel methods will be pursued.  The overall objective is
              to achieve a comprehensive, provably secure, and efficient methodology for PKC
              and its applications.

The electronic computing and Internet era exposes
              individuals to considerable threats to their privacy.  The second thrust is
              aimed at bringing cryptography to bear on the solution of these privacy
              problems.  Again, the emphasis is on truly efficient and provably secure
              solutions for such problems as secure and privacy preserving access to data
              bases containing personal data, privacy protection for transactions such as
              voting.  

