Title       : Problems in Regularity Theory for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9877055

Award Number: 9877055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Sverak sverak@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal is aimed at the study of regularity properties of  solutions
of
              various systems of nonlinear partial differential equations. These
              include:
(i) Quasilinear elliptic systems arising as Euler-Lagrange
              equations
of general multiple integrals in the Calculus of Variations and
              
hyperbolic systems of conservation laws. Questions arising in the study
              of
regularity of solutions of these equations will be studied from the
              point
of view of the theory of Compensated Compactness, which provides a
              unifying
platform for approaching these seemingly diverse problems. 
We
              expect that  new  methods in Compensated Compactness recently developed
by
              Stefan Muller and the PI will enable us to give answers to some relatively
old
              open questions.
(ii) The Navier-Stokes equations. Here we plan to study both
              the interior
and boundary regularity for important special classes of
              solutions.
The motivation for these investigation is the following: since
              regularity
questions for general solutions are notoriously intractable, it
              will be useful
to study some non-trivial special cases. Hopefully this will
              provide  
insights for the general case.
We also plan to study the
              relationship between Morrey's quasiconvexity
and local ellipticity conditions
              for functions on two by two matrices.
This  problem has recently been linked
              to some old and difficult conjectures
in Harmonic Analysis and the theory of
              quasi-conformal mappings, and we expect
that the interaction of ideas from
              these different areas  will be fruitful.

The main aim of this proposal is
              the study of regularity properties of
solution of nonlinear partial
              differential equations. Such equations
appear in many models of the real-world
              processes. The task of
mathematicians is  to solve these equations. Often
              this
is done by a numerical simulation on a computer. To be able to do
such
              simulations in a reliable way, one must know something about
the qualitative
              behavior of the solutions. For example, if we expect that
the solutions will
              oscillate wildly over small distances, we might need
a different method than
              in the case when the solutions change only
slowly. Roughly speaking, one of
              the main task of regularity
theory is to develop methods which would enable us
              to reliably
predict the behavior of the solutions, so that we can then
              choose
adequately the methods for solving the equations. 
The proposed
              research will hopefully improve our understanding
of these difficult and
              important questions.


