Title       : Probing Fluctuations and Nanoscale Dynamics in Glasses and Other Complex
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9877069

Award Number: 9877069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan E. Israeloff ISRAELOFF@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9877069
Israeloff

In this research novel scanning probe microscopy (SPM)
              techniques will be used to measure the fluctuations in the dielectric and
              visco-elastic properties of organic glasses, polymers, and other materials as a
              function of frequency, time, field and position. The direct study of nano-scale
              fluctuations in glasses could provide a detailed picture of the dynamical
              processes leading to non-exponential relaxation, diverging relaxation times,
              and scaling at the glass transition.  These investigations will address
              critical issues such as the length scale and nature of the molecular
              cooperativity, and the importance of heterogeneity and its time evolution. 
              Statistical measures which characterize glassy cooperativity can be directly
              compared with those provided by simulations.  Dielectric fluctuations will also
              be used to investigate predicted violations of the fluctuation-dissipation
              theorem (FDT) in macroscopic aging glasses.  Although never observed in
              experiments, these non-equilibrium FDT violations may provide a means to probe
              the equilibrium glass order parameter, and are strongly model dependent.  These
              researches address a fundamental unresolved issue in non-equilibrium
              statistical mechanics as well as test various glass transition models. 
              Graduate students and postdocs participate in these investigations.
%%% 
              
This research deals with fundamental problems of how liquids and polymers
              freeze into disordered solids, i.e., glasses.  Though much work in the past has
              been done on these problems, present technology employing scanning probe
              microscopy now allow such studies to be performed on a near-atomic/molecular
              level.  In this manner it was found that the physical properties of complex
              materials can vary dramatically when probed at near molecular length scales. 
              This research stands at the forefront of one of the areas of contemporary
              condensed matter physics and is expected to make significant contributions to
              our understanding on the behavior of complex materials and thus to future
              technology.  This research provides excellent opportunities for the training of
              graduate students and post doctoral research associates in an emerging area of
              condensed matter physics and materials science, and thereby contributes to the
              creation of an expert cadre of physicists and materials scientists for
              employment in the 21st Century.  
***


