Title       : Statistical Methods for Collaborative Multi-Robot Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9877033

Award Number: 9877033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sebastian Thrun thrun@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 
IIS-9877033
Thrun, Sebastian
Carnegie Mellon University 
$69,602
              - 12 mos.

STATISTICAL METHODS FOR COOPERATIVE MULTI-ROBOT MAPPING

This is
              the first year funding of a three year continuing award. This project will
              devise a new family of statistical algorithms that enable teams of mobile
              robots to jointly acquire maps of indoor environments.  The majority of
              successful mobile robot applications to
date rely on maps; yet, the problem of
              automatically acquiring such maps with one or more robots remains largely
              unsolved.  To build such maps, three sources of uncertainty must be overcome:
              uncertainty in sensing (e.g., with range finders), uncertainty in robot
              odometry, and uncertainty in the initial poses of the different robots relative
              to each other. In addition, robots must integrate information gathered
              distributedly, and they must coordinate their exploration strategies.The
              research is based on a unifying statistical framework, recently devised by the
              PI and others. This framework poses the problem of building maps as a maximum
              likelihood problem, of finding the most likely map given the data acquired by a
              team of robots. It uses efficient statistical techniques (specifically
              Dempster's EM algorithm) for likelihood maximization. The project goes beyond
              previous work in several aspects: First, it will address the problem of
              team-based map acquisition, where robots have to determine their relative
              location to each other in order to build a single map. This will be achieved by
              introducing additional degrees of freedom into the basic statistical framework.
              Second, maps will be represented by conjunctions of atomic object shapes (eg,
              rectangles, circles or segments thereof), instead of grids or similar
              non-iconic representations. To estimate the total number, sizes and poses of
              such
objects, the project will apply fast, sampling-based algorithms. Third,
              the project seeks to devise algorithms that enable teams of robots to
              collaboratively explore an environment. This will be achieved by methods for
              maximizing information gain, as measured by expected relative entropy. Finally,
              this project will pursue explorative research on learning maps in dynamic
              environments.  If successful, this project is expected to lead to a new, more
              robust and scalable family of algorithms for mobile robot mapping.

