Title       : Problems in Probability Motivated by Questions in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9877066

Award Number: 9877066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Durrett rtd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9877066

This investigator will study a number of questions that arise from
              ecology.  An important direction of the research will be to prove general
              results in support of the picture advocated by Durrett and Levin (1994): the
              behavior of stochastic spatial models can be predicted from that of the mean
              field ODE obtained by pretending all sites are always independent.  He will
              also continue work on hybrid zones, progressing now to the derivation of PDE
              limits for these systems as selection tends to 0, and the study of spatially
              inhomogeneous models to understand the structure of mosaic hybrid zones that
              have been seen in field work on the cricket species Gryllus firmus and G.
              pennsylvanicus.  Other projects include understanding limits to diversity by
              analyzing Tilman's competition model on a finite grid, studying the asymptotic
              behavior of an evolutionary arms race, and demonstrating the existence of
              chaotic oscillations in a simple discrete time model of gypsy moth
              populations.

The basic question that drives this research is: when does the
              spatial distribution of individuals change the behavior of a biological system?
               The comparison is made to a homogeneously mixing system in which each
              individual interacts equally with all the others.  In the past five years the
              investigator and his collaborators have developed some rules for predicting the
              answer to this question and have applied them to a variety of biological
              systems.  In the next three years they will apply this theory to some new
              examples. One of the most important questions they will study is:  What are the
              limits to diversity?  They will address this question mathematically by
              investigating the number of species that can coexist in a stochastic
              competition model.  Other questions will concern the fluctuations of the size
              of gypsy moth populations and the structure of hybrid zones that result from
              spatially varying selection.

