Title       : External Memory Algorithms: Dealing with MASSIVE Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9877133

Award Number: 9877133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Vitter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Problems involving massive amounts of data arise naturally in a variety of
              disciplines, such as spatial databases, geographic information systems,
              constraint logic programming, object-oriented databases, statistics, virtual
              reality systems, and computer graphics.  NASA's Earth Observing System project,
              the core part of the Earth Science Enterprise (formerly Mission to Planet
              Earth), produces petabytes (1015  bytes) of raster data per year!  A major
              challenge is to develop mechanisms for processing the data efficiently, or else
              much of it will be useless
The bottleneck in many applications that process
              massive amounts of data is the 
Input/Output (or I/O) communication between
              internal memory and external memory.  The bottleneck is accentuated as
              processors get faster and parallel processors are used.  Parallel disk arrays
              are often used to increase the I/O bandwidth.  The goal of this research is to
              deepen the understanding of the limits of I/O systems and to construct external
              memory algorithms that are provably efficient.  The three measures of
              performance are number of I/Os, disk storage space, and CPU time.
Theoretical
              work will consist of the development and analysis of provably efficient
              
external memory algorithms for a variety of important application areas. 
              Several batched and on-line geometric problems will be addressed, including
              real-life problems from environmental applications.  Techniques for innovative
              use of wavelets in an external memory setting will be explored.  Models and
              technique will be developed to answer practical issues such as how to design
              algorithms to be robust to changing memory allocations.  Focus is both on
              theoretical development and experimental validation.  The TPIE programming
              environment will be enhanced and used to implement the external memory
              algorithms that are developed.

