Title       : Tomography and Integral Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9877155

Award Number: 9877155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Todd Quinto equinto@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Quinto

This project continues research supported by National
              Science Foundation grant DMS 9622947.  Professor Quinto will pursue problems in
              tomography and in integral geometry.  He will develop and refine algorithms for
              industrial limited data tomography, including his current algorithm and Lambda
              CT, and test them on rocket data.  Professor Quinto will develop a boundary
              detection method for SONAR in shallow water and geophysical examination of
              structures near the surface.  The algorithm will be tested on simulations using
              different physical models.  Professor Quinto will work jointly with Professor
              Boergers on medical radiation dose planning, the goal of which is to use X-rays
              to kill tumors in the body and to damage as little surrounding tissue as
              possible.  The researchers will characterize the null space of the dose
              operator for both the semi-discrete and completely discrete problems.  They
              will investigate the dependence of the singular values of the dose operator on
              the attenuation.  Professor Quinto will discover properties of generalized
              Radon transforms and apply them to other areas of mathematical analysis.  He
              will prove uniqueness and support theorems for Radon transforms defined by
              spreads of polynomials, including spherical transforms in Euclidean space and
              the hyperbolic plane and spreads defined by other polynomials in Euclidean
              space.  He will use these results to answer questions in approximation theory
              and partial differential equations.  He will prove properties of the X-ray
              transform in Euclidean space.  He will prove support theorems for Radon
              transforms on spheres and other surfaces on manifolds and use these to solve
              Morera problems on complex manifolds.

This research encompasses both applied
              and pure mathematics: tomography and integral geometry.  The pure research will
              be used to develop, understand, and justify the applied algorithms, and the
              applied problems will motivate some of the pure research.  Computed tomography
              algorithms will be developed and refined to to detect defects in industrial
              objects.  They will be tested on real rocket data.  The algorithms will allow
              scientists to detect cracks in rocket bodies, air pockets in rocket fuel, and
              delaminations in rocket exit cones.  His current algorithm works well, in
              general, but it does not detect some types of rocket defects well enough.  So,
              he will develop other algorithms that will work in conjunction with his
              algorithm to get optimal reconstructions.  He will develop pure mathematics
              that will show how well the algorithms work and where their limitations might
              show up.  These pure mathematical underpinnings are required to ensure that his
              (or any other) reconstructions are correct and are not lucky guesses.  In
              cancer radiation therapy, doctors irradiate tumors with radiation from
              different directions.  Professor Quinto will develop and analyze mathematics
              that will help doctors choose how to irradiate tumors effectively.  SONAR data
              can be modeled as averages over spheres (the spherical wave fronts of the
              sound) and Professor Quinto will prove theorems about these averages.  He will
              use these theorems to develop simple algorithms to map the ocean floor and to
              find boundaries of objects in the ocean.  These algorithms could also be useful
              for geophysical examination.  The algorithms will be tested on simulations
              using different physical models.  This pure mathematics is intriguing in its
              own right.  Professor Quinto will prove theorems about spherical averages which
              will be used to understand the wave equation (the equation that describes how
              sound and light behave) and for SONAR.  He will also prove theorems about the
              X-ray transform, the mathematics behind the newest X-ray tomography scanners. 
              Finally, he will prove theorems he will apply to complex analysis, a field in
              pure mathematics.

