Title       : On Learning and Characterizing Classes of Boolean Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9877122

Award Number: 9877122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Hellerstein hstein@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9877122
Hellerstein

A central problem in computational learning is to
              determine which types of Boolean functions (concepts) can be learned by
              efficient algorithms.  The difficulty of learning can vary in different
              learning models.  The models represent different conditions under which
              learning might take place.  A major goal of this project is to distinguish, in
              a variety of learning models, between classes of Boolean functions that are
              efficiently learnable and classes that are not.

Among the learning models
              that will be studied are query models and attribute-efficient models.  In query
              models, the learning algorithm can obtain information about the function being
              learned by asking queries.  Query models represent situations in which the
              learner has access to a teacher or expert, or can perform experiments and
              observe outcome.  In attribute-efficient models, the learner is expected to
              learn efficiently even in the presence of a lot of irrelevant information.  The
              presence of irrelevant information is a common complication in applied machine
              learning problems such as automatic text categorization.

Another major
              aspect of this project concerns characterizations of classes of Boolean
              functions.  The project aims to discover connections between characterizations
              of Boolean function classes and the complexity of learning and recognizing
              functions in those classes.  This approach is inspired in part by work in graph
              theory.  The characterization of Boolean function classes has not been studied
              as extensively as the characterization of graph classes.  A goal of the project
              is to do for classes of Boolean functions what has been done for classes of
              graphs: to establish connections between characterizations of classes and the
              complexity of problems involving the classes.  A focus of this project will be
              on classes of Boolean functions that are closed under basic operations, such as
              permutation of variables, and substitution of constants for variables.  The
              motivation for restricting attention to such function classes is to obtain
              elegant results in learning and complexity, results that may not hold for all
              Boolean function classes.


