Title       : Small-Depth Circuit Complexity and Relativized Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9877150

Award Number: 9877150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexis Maciel alexis@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The central theme of this research is the computational complexity of Boolean
              circuits.  This fundamental model of computation is studied both as a model of
              parallel computation and for its connections to the most important questions of
              complexity theory, such as the P vs. NP question.

In the last fifteen years,
              a lot of effort has been devoted to the study of small-depth Boolean circuits. 
              While many important results have been obtained and many powerful techniques
              discovered, the computational power of some classes of small-depth Boolean
              circuits is still greatly misunderstood.  The main goal of the first part of
              this project is to investigate some of these circuit classes, especially those
              related to depth-three threshold circuits and depth-three circuits with modular
              gates.  The intention is to prove new lower bound results, extending the range
              of complexity classes that can be separated from NP.  The intention to prove
              both lower bounds and upper bounds that will help determine the exact
              computational power of some of these circuit classes.  

The second part of
              this project will focus on the close connections between circuit complexity and
              relativized computation.  Circuit lower bounds have typically been used to
              obtain oracle separations.  The intentions to show that exponential circuit
              lower bounds imply in fact a pair of oracle collapses, which in turn imply a
              separation.  This research will illuminate the intimate connection between
              upper and lower bounds in complexity theory and will also shake up the faith in
              oracles as providing circumstantial evidence about the real world.




