Title       : Double Hecke Algebras and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9877048

Award Number: 9877048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan V. Cherednik chered@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The aim of this project is to study the double affine Hecke algebra introduced
              by Dr. Cherednik which promises important application to many other branches of
              mathematics.  Specific objectives include the study of Macdonald polynomials of
              double affine Hecke algebras at roots of unity, as well as induced and
              spherical representations of the algebras.  Dr. Cherednik also intends to
              explore the analytic theory of q-spherical functions, and the difference
              Fourier transformation including q-deformations of the Gauss integrals, Zeta
              functions, and L- functions.  Finally applications of double affine Hecke
              algebra to Harish-Chandra theory and the harmonic analysis on Kac-Moody groups
              will be considered.

 	This is a project in the area of mathematics known as
              Algebra.  In the 20-th century, algebra has become the language of all of
              mathematics.  Mathematicians studying geometry, number theory, analysis,
              mathematical physics, statistics, or just about anything have noticed that
              there are underlying structures in their studies that transcend their origins. 
              In Algebra these underlying structures are studied in their pure form.  As the
              fundamental properties of these structures are uncovered, the implications
              reverberate back to all the original settings in which these structures occur. 
              In earlier research Dr. Cherednik introduced a new structure to algebra known
              as a double affine Hecke algebra which appears in representation theory,
              special functions, harmonic analysis, combinatorics, and conformal field
              theory. In this project he will continue his study of this new algebraic
              object.
