Title       : Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9877077

Award Number: 9877077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Taylor met@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves investigations in Partial Differential Equations,
with
              particular attention to two areas.  One involves the development
of microlocal
              methods in spectral and scattering theory.  Wave equation
techniques continue
              to be important in the analysis of functional calculi
for many important
              self-adjoint differential operators.  One type of
problem in this area is the
              fine behavior of convergence of generalized
eigenfunction expansions for the
              Laplace operator on a broad class of
complete Riemannian manifolds.  Both in
              this study and other studies
in spectral theory, such as spectral theory for
              quantum Hamiltonians 
for gauge fields, there arise problems in the Fourier
              analysis of
Fourier integral distributions associated with transversally
              intersecting
Lagrangians.  The project will also treat some inverse
              scattering
problems, in which microlocal techniques for eigenfunction
              expansions
appear as useful tools to filter out that part of the data
              whose
measurement leads to ill posedness.  The other general area involves the
              
study of PDE in various nonsmooth settings.  Some of the work here has 
been
              stimulated by work on equations of fluid motion in nonsmooth 
domains.  This
              work has also led to other problems, such as applications 
of layer potential
              methods to PDE with nonsmooth coefficients, on 
Lipschitz domains.  This work
              in turn stimulates work on classes of
pseudodifferential operators whose
              symbols are not regular.

The studies of wave motion and fluid motion are
              fundamental in science and
mathematics.  Reception of wave motion enables one
              to decode such motion
into information about the source.  This may involve
              hearing a bell ring
and inferring its size and location from the tones into
              which the sound 
waves resolve.  It may involve recording readings of waves
              generated by
a blast in the ground, and drawing conclusions about the
              ground
underneath.  The relation between the study of waves produced by a
              
source and the set of tones produced, the `spectrum,' is a central topic
in
              mathematical analysis.  This project will further develop mathematical
tools
              to study waves and spectra.  It will tackle questions on how 
diffraction
              effects of waves influence the reconstruction of functions
from their spectra,
              and questions on how to reconstruct an object from
the waves it scatters.  It
              will also tackle the equations of fluid motion,
using techniques of harmonic
              analysis that are also germane to the study
of waves.

