Title       : Dynamic Reliability Models for Systems of Interacting Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9877107

Award Number: 9877107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78709              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Padgett padgett@stat.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9877107

Many systems are composed of, or can be viewed as, complex subsystems
              of simple components whose behavior within the system can be quite complicated
              due to component interactions and dependencies.  These dependencies may occur,
              for example, because dynamic redistribution of stresses occurs among the
              remaining components when some components fail.  The dynamic approach is to
              incorporate the mechanism of failure into the model to account for such
              interactions and dependencies, as well as to use micro-level (component)
              relationships to determine the macro-level (system) failure.  There are several
              important, but difficult, issues regarding reliability, or failure, models for
              systems in such dynamic environments.  The main objectives of this research are
              to study the following five issues:  (1) appropriate modeling of component and
              system reliability based on the physics of failure and the assumed environment,
              (2) incorporating component reliability information into the determination of
              system reliability in a dynamic setting, (3) identifying critical
              configurations of components that cause failure, (4) determining approximate
              reliability models for complex systems that are tractable for statistical
              inference and data analytic purposes, and (5) incorporating multivariate
              failure mechanisms into modeling system reliability.  While (2)-(5) have been
              studied extensively for coherent systems of independent components, models
              incorporating dependencies among components would yield more realistic failure
              analysis of complex systems.  Such models would have direct application to many
              problems of current importance including, for example, failure of modern
              complex materials and other structures and of networks of large numbers of
              components.

The proposed investigations of the mechanisms for failure of
              complex systems are important, for example, in modeling and understanding the
              relationship between the micro-level (component) and macro-level (system) size
              scales of failure.  The statistical methodology and probability models to be
              developed will undoubtedly contribute to a better understanding of the random
              nature of failure mechanisms at both the component level and system level, and
              the associated statistical Inferences for failure of general systems in various
              applications.  Particular applications are in prediction of the reliability of
              structures made from composite materials (such as carbon composites) or
              "systems" such as large computer networks.  Also, the new, nonstandard
              statistical models developed in this study based on cumulative damage concepts
              are not well understood with respect to sampling and inference from observed
              failure data.  Hence, an important goal of the project is to investigate these
              aspects of the models.  Tactical and competitive advantages can be gained since
              the theoretical models developed here should lead to better system reliability
              prediction and its implication to system design and the system maintenance and
              inspection policies.

