Title       : Applying Learning Theory to Systems Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9877080

Award Number: 9877080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Scott sscott@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-9877080
Scott

     This project will focus on applying results developed
              in learning theory to real-life problems.  Such application-based theoretical
              work is important so that the learning models and problems studied capture as
              best possible the needs of real-life problems.  Working to apply theoretical
              techniques to real problems creates a better understanding of the real-world
              problems and thus helps direct future theoretical work, facilitating the
              transfer of results from theory to practice.
     Many system control
              algorithms (e.g. networking protocols) depend heavily on ad hoc methods in
              their operation, and their performance can be very sensitive to the robustness
              of these methods.  These ad hoc approaches are frequently based on assumptions
              made about the operating environment, e.g. assuming a particular distribution
              on the traffic patterns in a communication network without a sound statistical
              basis.  This project will develop a framework based on formal learning methods
              for assisting in automatic system control.  This framework will help to
              determine if better performance can be obtained by a system control
              algorithm.
     One goal of this project is to continue research on
              dynamically adjusting delays of acknowledgments in the TCP protocol.  Delaying
              acknowledgments has two main advantages.  First, it allows a single
              acknowledgment for more than one packet.  Second, if a data packet is being
              sent in the opposite direction, then one can piggyback the acknowledgment on
              the outgoing packet.  However, there is a tradeoff since delaying the
              acknowledgment too much can increase the latency.  Most TCP implementations,
              used today employ some sort of acknowledgment delay mechanism.
     The
              project applies different learning schemes to predict TCP packet arrivals.  The
              learning schemes include ones based on the Weighted Majority (WM) algorithm,
              ones based on the Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA) algorithm, and
              ones based on distributional assumptions with a sound statistical basis. The
              new ideas include new loss functions (functions that measure the learners'
              performance) that are more appropriate for the application.
     Another
              application explored in this project is that of branch prediction of general
              purpose programs.  A fast, accurate branch predictor is invaluable to a
              computer architecture that relies on instruction-level parallelism (ILP)
              techniques, e.g. pipelined and superscalar architectures.  Many commercial
              architectures employ branch prediction schemes, and it is well known that even
              a small increase in prediction accuracy can greatly increase the amount of ILP
              that can be exploited.
     An interesting facet of the branch prediction
              problem is that it requires some or all of the algorithms to be implemented in
              hardware.  Thus whatever approaches are adapted eventually lead to algorithms
              that have fast and compact hardware implementations.  The principal
              investigator's experience in hardware design and in learning theory will help
              in this regard.
     Applying learning theory results to these problems and
              other systems problems will then provide guidance in defining new theoretical
              learning models that better model real-life scenarios.  This project will also
              carefully develop and study such new learning models.



