Title       : Scalable Multidimensional Indexing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9877142

Award Number: 9877142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ambuj Singh ambuj@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapid advances in information technology have led to increased demand for the
              storage, management, access, and use of multimedia objects. The goal of this
              research project is to construct a scalable distributed repository for
              multimedia objects. The high number of dimensions, an important feature of
              multimedia objects, can significantly increase the search overhead due to
              increased computations and I/O. One component of the research is to reduce the
              number of search dimensions using dynamic and incremental transforms. This is
              supplemented with a performance model that can predict the effect of such
              dimensionality reduction for different user expectations of recall and
              precision. Another goal of the research is to decluster the index structure and
              the associated data on a distributed system. This improves performance as well
              as availability in case of failures. Building adaptive index structures that
              can respond to common access and query patterns is also a component of the
              research. The project is also examining user requirements with respect to
              consistency of data and supporting different levels of consistency for
              multimedia objects. The results of the project will be disseminated in the form
              of scientific papers and software that can be downloaded. The project will lead
              to efficient index structures and, in general, to better understanding of
              scalable querying of multimedia data. 
