Title       : On-line Learning and Control of Partially-Known and Unknown Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9877193

Award Number: 9877193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petros Ioannou ioannou@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ilias Kosmatopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9877193
Ioannou

While the control of linear time invariant (LTI) systems
              has reached a high level of maturity the control of nonlinear systems is still
              very much unexplored.  Recent advances in nonlinear design and analysis
              techniques together with the widespread use of fast low cost computers and
              sophisticated software tools offer a strong potential for the development of
              successful control designs for nonlinear systems.

In this proposal, a
              preliminary control design developed by the Principal Investigators for a class
              of nonlinear systems is used to motivate a series of research tasks that will
              lead to the development of a general methodology for controlling unknown
              nonlinear systems.  The proposed control design employs ideas from robust
              adaptive and nonlinear control as well as function approximation results from
              neural and fuzzy systems to meet control objectives for a nonlinear plant that
              cannot be met by the current control methods.  Robust adaptive control
              modifications. backstepping, tuning functions, nonlinear damping and control
              Lyapunov functions are some of the design techniques to be considered in the
              proposed work.  Analytical tools such as Lyapunov  theory, functional analysis
              and function approximations will be used together with computer simulations to
              establish and demonstrate the properties of the developed control
              methodologies.

The expected outcome of the proposed research is the
              development of a methodology for controlling a wide class of unknown or
              partially known nonlinear plants that cannot be controlled using the current
              control methods.



