Title       : Enhancing the Mathematics Curriculum: A Laboratory Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9452053

Award Number: 9452053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Callas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Kurz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Trustcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Delhi
	      
	      Delhi, NY  137531190    607/746-4111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will enhance the student-appeal and effectiveness of instruction
              for Calculus I, II and  III; Differential Equations; and Finite Mathematics. It
              will build upon the groundwork laid down  by other projects that emphasize the
              use of graphing calculators, but will exceed the calculators'  limitations by
              incorporating the greater power of computers.  The use of graphing calculators
              in mathematics instruction has been well received. However, in  certain areas
              -- 3-D graphics, contour plots, implicit plotting, analytic solutions, etc.--
              the  calculators lack power, convenience and flexibility. Graphing calculators
              are also not well-suited  for Finite Mathematics instruction. By using graphing
              calculators and computers, the project will  enhance the understanding of
              topics, and give students the technical tools to better analyze & solve 
              problems.  Forty experiments/projects for the Calculus and Differential
              Equations courses will be implemented  under the grant. The design will be to
              emphasize the qualitative properties (such as the shape of  a curve) of the
              topics under study, rather than the analytic analysis of expressions (algebraic
               calculations). The recent applications of mathematics (e.g., linear
              programming or graph theory)  in disciplines such as economics, biology, and
              political science require such methods of analysis.  An additional 10
              experiments/projects will be implemented for Finite Mathematics, based solely 
              on computers.  To accomplish this, the project is seeking support for a
              35-station computer lab, with appropriate  supporting equipment.
