Title       : PPD/EP: Science, Engineering, Education and Disabilities (SEED)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1997      
File        : a9452881

Award Number: 9452881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050940            (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gardner gardner@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. M. Hunter-Zaworski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9177,9180,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452881  Oregon State University  Information transfer is often a serious
              problem for students with  disabilities in most academic disciplines, but it is
              particularly  severe in science, engineering, math (SEM) and other technical 
              subjects.  Students with visual impairments and learning  disabilities are
              frequently overwhelmed by the difficulties of  learning, using, and/or
              presenting equations, graphs, schematic  and conceptual drawings, and other
              non-textual information  encountered in SEM.  The objectives of SEED are to
              develop  inexpensive easy-to-use computer-based methods and devices to  reduce
              or eliminate the problem with SEM information flow with  the eventual result
              that significantly more students with  disabilities can be recruited and
              retained in SEM education and  careers.    The initial focus is development of
              the Audio System for  Scientific Reading (ASTER) into a flexible tool for use
              by people  with visual and learning disabilities to read, write, manipulate, 
              and understand SEM literature.  ASTER developments are considered  to be
              critical for making SEM materials accessible to students  who are visually
              impaired or who have learning disabilities.  The  ASTER program currently runs
              on a Unix workstation using a  Dectalk voice synthesizer.  ASTER's internal
              representation of a  document is a hierarchical tree that allows the reader to
              easily  change the style in which the document is read aloud and also  allows
              very fine control over where the reading begins and ends.   These two controls
              make audio reading of technical material much  easier to comprehend for these
              students.  ASTER will be rewritten  in a common version of Lisp (such as CLisp)
              that run under DOS,  OS/2, Linux, and some versions of Unix.  Subsequently,
              ASTER will  be rewritten in C++ to make it possible to port ASTER to other 
              platforms.  SEED also will collaborate on the development and  evaluation of
              tactile tablets on which raised images (comprised  of Dotsplus and figures) can
              be used to display complex  sc ientific equations with each term expandable in
              audio by ASTER.    SEED will recruit talented, motivated university students
              with  disabilities to serve as SEED research assistants in projects.   They
              will be highly visible role models for other students with  disabilities; and
              their successes should increase the confidence  of teachers, counselors,
              parents, and potential employers in the  ability of students with disabilities
              to succeed in SEM.***
