Title       : A Laboratory to Improve the Programming Skills of Computer Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9452148

Award Number: 9452148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38197              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Berg berg@cs.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Narten  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Haas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452148  Narten  This project aims to improve the productivity of computer
              science  programmers and improve the quality of the software they produce.  We
              are creating a computer laboratory in which closed laboratory  sessions teach
              students how to use flexible, general-purpose tools.  Instead of focusing on
              specialized tools (e.g., CASE tools for  software engineering), we examine
              tools useful in a wide variety of  contexts, including the emacs text editor,
              make, awk, the command  shell, and multiple windows. Using and studying
              powerful tools make  students more productive software developers and allow
              them the  benefits of making software adaptable, customizable, and reusable. 
              Weekly laboratory sessions will be added to the three freshman and  sophomore
              introductory computer science courses required of all CS  majors and minors. In
              conjunction With the lab, we refocus the  emphasis in grading student
              programming assignments to provide  students with more detailed feedback on the
              design and structure of  their programs. Our goal is to teach students good
              programming  techniques at the time they are first learning how to program and 
              are picking up programming habits that they carry with them  throughout their
              careers. The novel ideas in this proposal include  having all freshman CS
              students learn and use general tools  starting with their first course,
              reinforcing the use of those  tools in the three consecutive courses required
              of all CS majors,  and having students revise and resubmit the programs they
              submit  for credit.
