Title       : Growth and Characterization of Optical Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9452409

Award Number: 9452409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39698              (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Oliver woliver@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452409  Oliver  Exciting and important advances in optical and electronic
              materials  should play a much more significant role in the undergraduate 
              science and engineering curricula. With this need in mind the  curriculum at
              the University of Arkansas has been designed to  provide a series of four
              courses in modern optics for science and  engineering students: Optics, Laser
              Physics, Applied Nonlinear  Optics, and Optical Properties of Materials.
              Students in Optics and  Laser Physics learn the fundamentals of both physical
              and wave  optics and they develop specific skills in the design,  construction,
              and analysis of state-of-the-art laser systems. These  skills are further
              developed in Applied Non-Linear Optics where  students investigate concepts and
              techniques finding widespread  applications in science and technology. All
              three of these courses  at Arkansas combine both classroom and strong
              "hands-on" laboratory  experiences to enhance student interest and maximize the
              learning  experience. The Optical Properties of Materials course develops a 
              foundation in the structural, electronic, and optical properties of  materials,
              all of which are integrally related and vitally  important for the continued
              development of novel optical and  electronic materials and devices.
              Unfortunately, a complementary  "hands-on" laboratory experience for Optical
              Properties of  materials is not presently available for the students. This
              project  proposes to reinforce the enthusiasm shown by science and  engineering
              students in this course with an opportunity to develop  their talents and
              interests into specific skills.  The proposed  Growth and Characterization of
              Optical Materials laboratory  explores several key aspects of materials
              research to develop  skills in (i) Crystal Growth, (ii) Physical
              Characterization; (iii)  Electrical Characterization; and (iv) Optical
              Characterization of  Materials. In each area, the equipment requested will give
              the  students experience with actual techniques used throughout the   optics
              and materials research community.
