Title       : Instrumentation for an Introductory Electronics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9452030

Award Number: 9452030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Usher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will create a first-year introductory electronics  course for
              science and pre-engineering students. The course will  concentrate on analog
              techniques, with a slant towards practical  electronics for the sciences. We
              will use computer-automated data  acquisition and control systems as
              instructional tools. Each lab  station will include a protoboard interfaced
              through an I/O board  and a GPIB DMM to a computer workstation running
              instructional  software that we have written in LabVIEW. The students will
              build  the circuits and use LabVIEW software to explore, test and control 
              them. Computer-based data acquisition and control are used as tools  to teach
              electronics, not as the focus of the course itself.  Through the use of
              computer-based instruction, the students will be  freed of much of the tedium
              associated with traditional electronics  courses and will be able to focus on
              the material. In addition, we  find that by integrating LabVIEW into this
              electronics course, we  are opening up new approaches to teaching the material.
               This  pre-calculus electronics course is offered it at a level that makes  it
              available to most incoming students.  This approach provides  students with a
              positive laboratory experience and one-on-one  contact with regular faculty
              members early in their career. This  will get them started towards early
              research experience and better  prepare them for industrial internships.
