Title       : Introducing Digital Maps and Image Analysis to Undergraduates in the Field and
               in the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9452078

Award Number: 9452078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell G. Clark RGCLARK@ALBION.BITNET  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy N. Lincoln  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Albion College is using a Geographic Information Systems  (GIS)/Computer Aided
              Mapping (CAM) laboratory, located in the  Department of Geological Sciences, to
              incorporate digital mapping  and image analysis into the College's curriculum.
              Albion has a  strong program in geology, including a nationally recognized
              summer  geology field program. The GIS/CAM laboratory includes the  equipment
              necessary for the creation, manipulation, analysis, and  display of digital
              images using modern GIS and CAM techniques. This  laboratory allows the College
              to make substantial, forward-looking  improvements in both our geology field
              program and the on-campus  geology and environmental science curriculum. The
              summer geology  field program is adding an introduction to digital field
              mapping;  at the end of the program students return to the Albion campus for  a
              week-long intensive course on the creation and use of digital  maps. Secondly,
              two new courses on GIS and digital maps are being  developed. An introductory
              level course introduces the fundamentals  of GIS and CAM to a broad spectrum of
              students including  non-science majors. The second course allows upper-level
              students  to apply their GIS/CAM skills to their own geological and 
              environmental research projects. Finally, the new laboratory allows  the
              revision of traditional geology laboratory mapping exercises  and projects,
              including an introduction to quantitative spatial  analysis, in as many as nine
              existing geology courses. This  includes the high-enrollment Introductory
              Geology course, in which  students can apply GIS/CAM techniques to existing
              mapping projects.  This project is an integral part of a broader effort to
              develop a  more engaging research-oriented curriculum using up-to-date 
              equipment and techniques.
