Title       : An Integrated Modular Design Laboratory for Electrical Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9452032

Award Number: 9452032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96402              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Carroll jcarroll@sun.soe.clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Said Ahmed-Zaid  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas H. Ortmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hossein Salehfar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nabeel A. Demerdash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452032  Ahmed-Zaid                                                          The
              objective of this project is the development of a modular  design laboratory
              for senior-level undergraduate electrical  engineering students. This
              laboratory integrates physically-based  devices and components within a
              PC-based data acquisition and  control environment. The new design sections
              offer an integrated  systems approach for the rapid development and
              implementation of  both hardware and software in a complete engineering design.
               The  educational goals of this laboratory are to teach the fundamentals  of
              electric machinery, power electronics and solid-state devices,  electric
              drives, motor control, and robotics, with reliability  techniques incorporated
              in the evaluation of alternative design  solutions. The experiments are
              systems-oriented and build on  concepts such as stability, feedback, and
              analog/digital controller  design for various plants. Microprocessor control
              and modern  instrumentation are emphasized throughout for the performance 
              evaluation of the designs in real-world environments subject to  modeling
              errors, disturbances, measurement noise, and sensor and  control system
              failures.  Four initial design sections  are built  around eight PC-based data
              acquisition and control (DAC)  workstations. Each DAC workstation consists of a
              486/PC with  specialized hardware/software and dedicated test instruments 
              (digitizing scope, signal analyzer, etc.). Each system is equipped  with an
              embedded high-performance digital signal processor (DSP)  board interfaced with
              a physical plant (electric machine, inverted  pendulum, robotic arm, etc.) via
              sensor I/O signals (encoder,  Hall-effect device, etc.) A DAC programming
              environment is used for  the identification of the system plant and the rapid
              design and  implementation of prototype controllers, both classical and 
              advanced, in either a simulated or real-time fashion.
