Title       : Environmental Stress in Ecosystems: Linking Ecology and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9452655

Award Number: 9452655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Lamberti lamberti.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly A. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Environmental scientists must be able to synthesize diverse  information about
              the biological, chemical, and physical attributes  of perturbed ecosystems.  We
              propose to train students broadly in  the environmental sciences to produce
              professionals with the  breadth of knowledge needed to address serious and
              complex  environmental problems.  A single-discipline approach is inadequate 
              to identify, solve, and avoid environmental degradation.  Yet,  graduate
              programs have been slow to move beyond the traditional  boundaries of colleges
              and departments to develop rigorous and  comprehensive degree programs that
              integrate disciplines.  Our  proposed training program in environmental science
              will foster  integration of students, faculty, curricula, facilities, and 
              knowledge from two major disciplines:  Ecology and Environmental  Engineering. 
              Our training program will encourage the development  of integrated research
              efforts needed to address real-world  situations of environmental perturbation
              and mitigations.  We will  accomplish this with a combination of:  (1)
              traditional coursework  in three primary research areas (Environmental
              Chemistry,  Organismal Biology, and Aquatic Ecology), (2)  innovative field 
              training modules covering six critical subdisciplines in  environmental
              science, (3) in-depth instructional training for the  students, and (4) active
              recruitment of minority students for the  program.  We view a training grant
              from NSF as a major step in  coordinating the active graduate programs in
              environmental science  and engineering at the University of Notre Dame.
