Title       : Computer-based Equipment Platforms in Introductory Labs for Technology Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9452536

Award Number: 9452536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19087              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Ferguson   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Bejian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence C. Lovett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin Inst of Boston
	      41 Berkeley Street
	      Boston, MA  021166342    617/423-4630

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452536  Ferguson  The Franklin Institute of Boston will improve its Physics 
              Laboratory by the purchase of equipment that, together with already  existing
              computers, will enable enhanced data acquisition and  analysis, the further
              integration of major physics topics, and the  reinforcement of similarities in
              physical phenomena.  The  instrumentation consists primarily of sensors,
              peripherals, and  transducers. This equipment, together with the addition of 
              dynamics, optics, microwave and e/m systems will facilitate the  collection,
              storage and manipulation of data. A single experimental  platform selected from
              the above-described equipment, such as a  sonometer studying wave behavior,
              when teamed up with the ability  to change experimental results through the use
              of power amplifiers,  digital function generators, driver/detector coils and
              sensors,  will result in a more integrated approach to physics instruction. 
              The physical phenomena of wave behavior described above will then  be studied
              in optics, microwaves and atomic structure, reinforcing  the similarities,
              through the utilization of the appropriate  systems.  The proposed laboratory
              improvement is highly significant  to Franklin, as a two-year technical college
              serving a  predominantly economically-disadvantaged urban population. Without 
              full exposure to the state-of-the-art data analysis methods  currently utilized
              by private sector industry, the Institute's  students, the majority of whom
              will be entering the work force upon  graduation, will not have adequate
              professional training in this  vital area. In addition, these students, and
              those who elect to  continue their education at four-year institutions, will
              gain a  more thorough knowledge of the general theory through a laboratory 
              which offers the best possible integration and reinforcement of  major physical
              principles and phenomena.
