Title       : Development of Undergraduate Laboratories in Inorganic Chemistry: from Molecules
               to Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9452023

Award Number: 9452023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne E. Jones, Jr. wjones@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Stanley Whittingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through the use of advanced technologies, a diverse faculty, and  computer
              innovation, the institution will produce an inorganic  laboratory that bridges
              the gap between molecular and materials  sciences using techniques and
              methodologies which will prepare  students with the tools necessary to succeed
              in industry and  academia today. The central plan for this new laboratory is to
              have  students model, prepare, and completely characterize a series of 
              independent inorganic systems that range from simple molecules,  such as
              ferrocene, to extended molecular structures and materials,  such as zeolites.
              In each case the students will: 1) explore the  reaction conditions and
              characteristics of target substances using  advanced computer software, 2)
              apply their computer results in the  preparation of these systems by modern
              synthetic methodologies, and  3) completely characterize these systems using
              advanced  spectroscopic and analytical technologies. At the completion of  each
              system, the students will assess the success of the initial  modeling efforts
              on the final observed product and reaction  conditions, and test any changes
              they may develop through  additional computer analysis. Each system/experiment
              will be a self  standing module that is readily transferrable to other 
              universities. This new laboratory will act as a model which can and  will be
              implemented at universities and colleges across the country  both in the
              inorganic curriculum and, with suitable examples, other  sub-disciplines as
              well.
