Title       : Computing in Mathematics Courses After Calculus: A Discovery-Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9452194

Award Number: 9452194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78271              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Damiano ddamiano@holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Cecil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alisa A. DeStefano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Schweizer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret N. Freije  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452194  Damiano                     A laboratory of networked Sun Workstations
              provide computer support  in ten different mathematics courses servicing majors
              and  non-majors for over 150 sophomore and upper division students.  Based upon
              past experience in writing PC courseware for calculus  and using PC's in the
              calculus, the faculty in the Department of  Mathematics are systematically
              extending the use of the computer to  the sophomore and upper division
              offerings in vector calculus,  differential geometry, topology, complex
              analysis, ordinary  differential equations, applied mathematics and numerical
              analysis.  The project builds on previous work of department faculty in 
              developing and testing courseware, including a set of laboratory  modules for
              vector calculus, exercises and projects in differential  geometry, applied
              mathematics, and ordinary differential equations,  and an interactive
              electronic text for differential geometry. This  courseware utilizes a
              discovery-based approach, encouraging  students to work together to formulate
              and test conjectures based  on numeric, symbolic and graphic investigations
              primarily with the  software package Mathematica. The approach invigorates and 
              strengthens the learning process for majors and non-majors alike.  The purchase
              of 20 Sun Sparc Stations equipped with Mathematica  allow full implemention of
              new courseware in a laboratory  environment which achieves full utilization of
              the computer in  major upper division courses. The courseware will be
              disseminated  through NECUSE, AMS, MAA and MER-Network outlets.  Laboratory 
              modules and curriculum material will be submitted for publication  in texts and
              lab manuals.
