Title       : Lasers in the Undergraduate Chemistry and Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1994     
File        : a9452036

Award Number: 9452036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27523              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Drossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Val R. Veirs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Lindeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452036  Drossman  The Colorado College Chemistry and Physics faculty are
              building a modern laboratory program to  support our strong undergraduate
              curriculum. Unfortunately, we do not currently study laboratory  applications
              of lasers in chemistry and physics. Our goal is to introduce all of our
              physical science  students to lasers. In this proposal, we request funds for
              laser and optical equipment to alleviate curricular  deficiencies in the
              chemistry and physics laboratories. A corridor display will be constructed in
              the main  entrance to the science building to capture visiting students'
              interest and to build familiarity with lasers.  Laser-based labs will be added
              to supplement current offerings in general chemistry, analytical chemistry, 
              physical chemistry, chemical instrumentation, modern experimental physics,
              modern optics and in classes  in our new interdisciplinary majors in
              biochemistry and environmental chemistry. Fundamentals of optical  design will
              be added as a laboratory topic in instrumental analysis. Student
              instrumentation projects  incorporating lasers will provide new opportunities
              for them to develop and evaluate their own  instruments. Projects in flash
              photolysis, thermal lens calorimetry, fast chemical lifetime measurement,  and
              Raman spectroscopy will be added to enhance the lab curriculum in physical and
              inorganic chemistry.  Experiments in phase conjugation and two photon
              absorption will be added for physics majors. Projects  in thermal lens and
              fluorescence detection, flow cytometry, ligand binding and fluorescence
              polarization  will be added to the new laboratories in biophysical and
              bioanalytical chemistry. Experiments in remote  sensing and photolysis of
              organic pollutants will be developed for use in the recently upgraded 
              environmental science program. Finally, new experiments will be developed for
              an experimental "Topics  in Lasers" class. The proposed laser equipment will
              also be used for senior student research projects.
