Title       : West Hawaii Explorations Academy: A Center for Integrative Secondary Curriculum
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9452790

Award Number: 9452790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Woerner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Bean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Mathews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hawaii Dept of Education
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96816    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              50        Engineering                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This project proposes to establish a secondary educational facility which
              differs fundamentally from traditional classroom education.  The West Hawaii
              Explorations Academy is an operational project and work experience laboratory
              for secondary students, while also serving as a Center for integrative
              curriculum development and teacher training.  The project is headquartered at
              the Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii, a state funded incubation facility for
              scientific research and commercial operations in aquaculture and energy
              development.  Approximately one hundred thirty three 10th through 12th grade
              heterogeneously selected students, including high-risk students,  work and
              study full time throughout the school year.  Students team with peers, staff,
              University of Hawaii faculty and students, graduate students, mentors,
              community members, and employers.  Rather than attend classes, students receive
              credit for all of their core courses by managing and staffing a wide variety of
              projects.  These include aquaculture and cold water agriculture research and
              production, alternatively-fueled vehicle research, environmental projects,
              aquarium site development, desalination, alternative energy development,
              sustainable research, and marine environments.  While engaged in project work,
              they take modules in Records/Business/Finance, Media/Publications, Research
              Support, Facilities, Leadership and Reading/Writing.  The vision is to partner
              with a research laboratory, a university and the community to develop a new
              model for education with the following goals: a) enhance the prospect that
              students, including high risk youth, go to college or be employed, b) encourage
              inservice teachers to adopt an integrative teaching style, c) develop
              pre-service teachers who can implement an integrative program and modify the
              curriculum for high risk students, d) increase the science, math and
              engineering expertise available to students, e) serve as a national model
              program in expanding education beyond the walls of the classroom and attract
              community and university resources, and f)  prepare and distribute a collection
              of exemplary materials with national scope which promote and facilitate
              integrative education at the secondary level.  An external evaluator carefully
              documents project activities and student outcomes so the results can be
              disseminated to the profession.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
