Title       : Environmental Physical and Mathematical Science and Engineering, and Geoscience
               Graduate Research Traineeships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9452800

Award Number: 9452800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudarshan K. Loyalka loyalkaS@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest C. Kung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tushar K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brett W. Gunnink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Scientific advancement in Environmental Physical and Mathematical  Sciences
              and Engineering, and Geosciences require comprehensive  multidisciplinary
              education and research at the cutting edge of  science and technology.  The
              requested program at the University of  Missouri-Columbia addresses the related
              critical need for human  resources by providing PhD level education to five NSF
              Trainees in  the multidisciplinary investigation of Particulate Systems, both 
              natural and engineered.    NSF Trainees will be recruited through vigorous
              advertising  throughout the nation.  MU has a history of successful recruiting 
              and nurturing of talented undergraduate students (~70; a major  portion of whom
              are from groups underrepresented in science and  engineering) through the
              NSF-REU in Particulate Systems Engineering  program.  The requested
              Traineeships will allow significant  opportunities to the brightest of these
              students, as well as others  to be recruited for the awards.    The program
              will provide Trainees with a challenging yet supportive  environment.  Students
              will receive both the MS and PhD degrees  from the participating academic
              disciplines in engineering and the  sciences, and the program faculty will
              carefully plan and monitor  the students' teaching and research development. 
              Curricula for the  GRA Trainees will include classes in thermodynamics, fluid 
              dynamics, particulate systems, atmospheric dynamics, atomic and  molecular
              physics and chemistry, computational chemistry and  climatology.  Experimental
              research will focus on characterizations  and measurements of particle-vapor
              (gas) and particle-particle  interactions, dry and wet disposition of particles
              and gases, trace  gas emissions and transformations, and radiative properties
              of  particles.  Theoretical and computationally intensive projects will  focus
              on sulfur chemistry, particle dynamics and general  circulation models.  The
              education and training of students  emphasize integrated approaches to complex
              environmental problems.    Professional development opportunities for the
              Trainees will  include internships at the national laboratories and industrial 
              research centers in the U.S., and possibly at prestigious 
              universities/institutions in the U.S., Germany, Japan, and Russia  that
              conducts relevant particulate systems investigations.    The University of
              Missouri system educational mission charges MU  with special responsibilities
              for graduate education.  The College  of Engineering specifically has made
              major investments in  infrastructure (new building, renovations, equipment,
              computing).   The project faculty are dedicated to the success of the program, 
              and funding will lead to truly unique, interdisciplinary  opportunities for the
              Trainees.
