Title       : A Proposal for the Implementation of a Mathematics Activity Resource Center
               (MARC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9452028

Award Number: 9452028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35146              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franz Helfenstein fhelfenstein@metolius.cocc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Sequeira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Oregon Comm Col
	      2600 NW College Way
	      Bend, OR  977015933    503/382-6112

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9452028  Helfenstein  Recent reports from prestigious study groups strongly
              suggest  modifying the mathematics curriculum to produce students who meet  the
              demands of today's society. Teamwork, technology, creative and  critical
              thinking, and communication skills are crucial to success  in today's
              professional world. To ensure better prepared students,  the Mathematics
              Department at Central Oregon Community College  (COCC) implemented major
              curriculum reforms which foster skills so  crucial to success.  This
              comprehensive reform effort involves  developing and incorporating various
              interactive/experiential  formats across the curriculum.  Central to this
              reform program is  the creation of the Mathematics Activity Resource Center
              (MARC).   Project funds are being used to equip the MARC with computers and 
              other instructional aids.  The MARC greatly facilitates activities  that
              encourage teamwork, discovery, learning-by exploration,  open-ended group
              projects, and technical writing. The MARC enhances  the learning environment
              for all math students at COCC by providing  a setting physically separate from
              the traditional classroom.  In  addition, the MARC serves as a district-wide
              resource for  strengthening mathematics education at all levels.  The key 
              components COCC is addressing in its mathematics reform project  include:
              development of a cooperative learning environment;  integration of hands-on
              activities to promote skills and concepts;  implementation of
              interactive/experiential activities; introduction  of modern technologies and
              innovative educational methodologies;  involvement of faculty department-wide;
              incorporation of realistic  and open-ended problems; and, promotion of
              technical writing  skills.
