Title       : Collaborative Research: Damage Analysis and Numerical Simulation of Convectively
               Driven Wind Events Observed during the Bow Echo and Mesoscale Vortex Experiment
               (BAMEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0233344

Award Number: 0233344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Trapp jtrapp@ncar.ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Morris L. Weisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The bow echo is known as a prolific producer of severe, though primarily
              non-tornadic, wind damage at the ground.  The generally accepted explanation
              for the damaging wind involves a strong surface cold pool and associated
              rear-inflow jet (RIJ) that descends to the ground behind the apex of the bow. 
              Recent idealized numerical simulations and limited observations are suggesting
              a different model, in which damaging surface winds are also induced tens of
              kilometers north of the apex by low-level, meso-gamma scale (order 10 km
              diameter) vertical vortices.  Simulations suggest that, under certain
              conditions, mesovortex winds can be stronger, have longer durations, and
              produce a larger area of significant damage than can the RIJ winds at the apex.
               Adequate observations to validate this new explanation have yet to be
              collected.  Further, the generality of this damaging-wind producing mechanism
              has yet to be established in instances when the mesoscale environment of the
              bow echo is significantly inhomogeneous.  Underscoring the importance of this
              are recent observational studies that indicate a relation between reports of
              damaging straight-line (and/or tornadic) winds and the interaction of a bow
              echo and mutually perpendicular "external" outflow boundary.

The primary
              objectives of this research are to: (i) conduct detailed aerial and ground
              surveys of wind damage following bow echo events, relating the severity and
              scale of damage to radar-observed convective system location and structural
              characteristics; and (ii) perform analyses and mesoscale model simulations of
              bow echo events in order to investigate dependencies of damaging winds,
              meso-vortexgenesis, and convective system structure on the inhomogeneous
              mesoscale environment. 

The bow echo and mesoscale convective vortices (MCV)
              experiment (BAMEX) will provide the framework for the proposed work.  BAMEX
              seeks to understand and improve prediction of: the meso- and cellular-scale
              processes, within bow-shaped mesoscale convective systems, that lead to
              damaging winds at the ground; and MCVs and the deep cumulus convection they
              often trigger.  BAMEX will be conducted over a large experimental domain
              centered on St. Louis, Missouri, and will involve unprecedented data collection
              via specialized airborne and ground-based observing platforms.  Post-event
              damage surveys, a critical component of the BAMEX dataset, will be conducted
              under this award and used to meet numerous BAMEX objectives beyond those to be
              addressed under this award.

The results of this research will significantly
              clarify the understanding of damaging wind production in bow echoes and will
              illuminate where the most damaging winds are most likely to occur, with what
              radar-observable attributes, and under what mesoscale environmental conditions.
               Ultimately, results may be applied by operational forecasters to issue more
              timely and accurate forecasts and warnings of damaging nontornadic surface
              winds.
