Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Genetics and Chemical Ecology of
               Reticulitermes Termites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0233238

Award Number: 0233238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Vargo ed_vargo@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233238
Vargo

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperation in
              population ecology involves the research groups of Edward Vargo at North
              Carolina State University and Anne-Genevieve Bagneres at the University of
              Tours' Institute for Insect Biology.  They will investigate the genetics and
              chemical ecology of social insects, in particular, Reticulitermes  termites. 
              This species plays an important role in decomposition of cellulose in natural
              ecosystems.  They are serious structural pests throughout the temperate regions
              of the Northern Hemisphere, including France and the United States.  The
              investigators address two important aspects:  colony social organization and
              taxonomy.  They will use molecular genetic markers and analytical chemical
              techniques to investigate colonies and population of R. santonensis, a
              subterranean termite found in France.  Comparisons to R. flavipes and general
              utility of chemical characters will also be studied.  The US investigator
              brings to this collaboration the technique of molecular marker genotyping using
              microsatellite loci.  This is complemented by the French investigator's
              research on chemical analysis of cuticular hydrocarbons and soldier defensive
              secretions in social insects.  The collaboration will advance understanding of
              how colonies and populations of these social insects are organized and the
              extent to which differences in biochemical signatures among colonies reflect
              genetic variation.
 
This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to
              the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF
              will cover travel funds and living expenses of the US investigator,
              postdoctoral researcher and graduate student.  The CNRS will support visits to
              US of the French participants. 

