Title       : RUI: Control of Branching in Neurospora Crassa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0233242

Award Number: 0233242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Watters Michael.Watters@valpo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valparaiso University
	      651 S. College Avenue
	      Valparaiso, IN  463836493    219/464-5000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0233242
Watters

As in most filamentous fungi, growth of Neurospora crassa
              begins by highly polarized cell extension that leads to the formation of a
              hyphal tube of uniform diameter.  The continuously extending tip sends off
              periodic branches, which are themselves, capable of extension and branching. 
              There are few other biological systems that develop in this manner.  New
              branches normally emerge a short distance behind the apex of the extending tip
              and grow at an angle to the main hypha and are referred to as 'lateral'
              branches.  Under normal conditions the majority of branch points form
              laterally, but alternate branch morphology is seen at a minority of branch
              points.  In this minority morphology, the two tips emerge at an angle to the
              previous direction of growth forming a forked structure.  These are referred to
              as 'dichotomous' or 'apical' branch points.  In this project, the genetics of
              control of branch morphology will be examined.  The project will focus on the
              lateral/dichotomous dimorphism observed in Neurospora crassa.  

The project
              is expected to advance along two independent fronts.  First, the collection of
              morphological mutations will be expanded by screening for suppressors of a
              select group of known morphological mutations. In this phase of the project,
              the focus will be on mutations that cause a shift in favor of dichotomous
              branching.  This is expected to uncover suppressors which act on specific
              branching mutants, and hopefully will also recover those which are capable of
              at least partially suppressing the branching effect on a wider selection of
              morphological mutations, acting, in effect, as low-branching mutants.  Such
              mutations are largely unknown in Neurospora.  Second, the morphological effects
              of cold shock will be further examined.  In Neurospora, temperature shifts (25
              to 4) have been shown to cause a dramatic, but temporary branching effect.  One
              phase of the response is characterized by a switch in morphology to all
              dichotomous branching.  By screening for mutants with altered responses to cold
              shock, genes responsible for the developmental switch between branch
              morphologies should be identified.

Filamentous fungi play a large role in
              human affairs.  They are major recyclers of biomass and a significant source of
              losses in agriculture and lumber production as pathogens and agents of
              spoilage.  They affect both producers (loss of product, cost of antifungal
              actions) and consumers (increased costs, food spoilage, decomposition of wood
              products) and thus have a significant economic impact.  An increase in our
              understanding of tip growth and branching in fungi would prove useful for more
              direct control of the growth of the organism.  The project should prove useful
              to batch culturing technologies, control of fungi in material subjected to
              temperature shifts, and should expand our understanding of the growth of
              filamentous fungi in the field.

