Title       : LTREB: Continuing Long-Term Demography of Florida Scrub Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0233899

Award Number: 0233899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Menges emenges@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit: This award will continue a long-term demographic study on
              plant populations in the Florida sandhills. Three new types of modeling
              approaches will be added: individual-based modeling, mark-recapture modeling to
              improve estimates of demographic rates, and larger-scale, spatially explicit
              modeling. The long-term demographic datasets allow characterization of
              environmental stochasticity, microhabitats, effects of fire, and metapopulation
              dynamics. Environmental stochasticity is incorporated into demographic
              projections. In addition, microhabitat effects on demographic variation have
              been characterized. These microhabitats are controlled in large part by fire,
              which creates or enlarges gaps, the preferred microhabitat for many of the
              study species. Expanded data collection on species' occurrences in defined
              habitat patches and expanded analyses of the interaction of spatial habitat
              structure and demography will occur. Spatially explicit models of demographic
              change will be built that are parameterized with observational data and
              experimental results. A new focus will be the long-term demography of Florida
              scrub plants in experimental restorations. One single-species introduction is
              underway in a sandhill ecosystem being restored with fire. Also, a long-term,
              multi-species demographic experiment within a large restoration will be
              started. Restoration goals of providing conditions for equivalent or improved
              demographic performance of introduced populations relative to wild populations
              will be evaluated. Experimental introductions in the restoration can in turn
              provide insights into colonization dynamics, dispersal rates, and microsite
              requirements of Florida scrub species. 
Broader Impacts: This research on the
              long-term demography of Florida scrub plants has accumulated data and models
              that have a broader impact than the advancement of research. Data and models
              are shared with the scientific community and thus facilitated more effective
              conservation biology. In addition, this study has provided many graduate and
              undergraduate student research opportunities. 

