Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Food Availability, Predation Risk and
               Antipredator Behavior in Blue Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0233835

Award Number: 0233835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Cords mc51@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Animals must obtain food and avoid predators to survive.  However, empirical
              evidence suggests that food acquisition and predator avoidance are conflicting
              demands. Behaviors that reduce predation risk may also reduce food intake. 
              Therefore, animals must develop strategies that allow them to balance the need
              to eat with the need to avoid being eaten.  One factor that may largely
              determine how individuals respond to predation risk is food availability.  When
              food is scarce, individuals may accept greater predation risk and minimize
              investment in antipredator behaviors if by so doing they are able to increase
              their food intake.  

The role of food availability on antipredator behaviors
              in primates has not been well studied.  This project addresses this gap in
              primate research by investigating the influence of food abundance and
              distribution on antipredator behaviors in three habituated groups of blue
              monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) in Kakamega Forest, Kenya.  By examining how food
              availability and predation risk interact and influence behavior in blue
              monkeys, this project will contribute to a better understanding of primate
              behavioral ecology in several ways.  First, determining the extent to which
              predation risk influences foraging patterns in blue monkeys will lead to a
              better and more realistic understanding of foraging behavior.  Second, data
              from this project will elucidate how predation risk and food availability
              interact to determine the amount of competition for food within a group. 
              Third, studying how individual group members balance the competing demands of
              food acquisition and predator avoidance will provide insights into how the
              costs and benefits of sociality are distributed among group members, and this
              in turn will provide insights into the relative importance of predation vs.
              food competition in group-living primates.

  With the help of local Kenyan
              assistants, observational data on antipredator behaviors in adults and
              juveniles will be collected over a 12- month period.  These data will be
              compared with ecological data on food abundance and distribution to determine
              whether blue monkeys reduce antipredator behaviors and accept a higher risk of
              predation in periods of low food availability.  Playback experiments, in which
              vocalizations from crowned hawk eagles, a predator of blue monkeys, are played
              to a blue monkey group, will be conducted each month to assess the effects of
              simulated predator presence on foraging and antipredator behavior among group
              members.  This project will provide additional data to an on-going, long-term
              study of blue monkey behavior at Kakamega Forest.  It will have the broader
              impacts of benefiting the Kakamega Environmental Education Project, a local,
              grassroots organization, by employing local conservationists and naturalists
              and providing educational materials to environmental education teachers and
              students while assisting in the professional development of the co-PI.

