Title       : SGER Award: Assessment of Proterozoic, Post-Orogenic Structures Within Basement
               Massifs in the Southeastern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0233684

Award Number: 0233684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Streepey streepey@quartz.gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Post-orogenic extension occurs in most of the major mountain belts on Earth,
              regardless of
age or tectonic setting.  Efforts have been made to both
              quantify the driving mechanisms and also to correlate them from young to old
              mountain belts, but the fundamental physics behind the transition from
              contractional orogenesis to extension remain unclear. Studies that seek to
              explain not only the kinematics of mountain evolution but also the dynamics can
              give insights into crustal architecture and possibly deeper mantle involvement
              in lithospheric dynamics. This project proposes to address these issues by
              initially studying the temporal differences in post-orogenic extension across
              the strike length of a major orogenic belt, the ca.1.1 billion year-old
              Grenville Province.  These results will be used in a larger context to assist
              in creating an accurate three-dimensional model of the post-orogenic evolution
              of an orogen. This project is exploratory in nature, as the effects of
              Paleozoic mountain-building events on some of the rocks are not fully known,
              and a record of activity related to Proterozoic orogenic events may be
              difficult or impossible to find. However, if successful, important insights
              will be gained about the nature of post-orogenic extension down the length of
              the ancient Laurentian margin. The Grenville Province is exposed as a laterally
              continuous belt from Labrador, Canada to Ontario, Canada and New York state. 
              It is exposed in a series of small inliers and basement massifs down the
              eastern United States, with one of the southernmost outcrops within the Pine
              Mountain window of Alabama and Georgia, as well as westerly massifs in
              Tennessee, North Carolina, and Virginia.  The structures and age relationships
              are well documented in the Canadian Grenville but are not well known in the
              southern exposures. Detailed information about Grenville structures in this
              region can provide important insights and correlations to the northern,
              well-studied Grenville exposures.  This project requests funds to conduct an
              initial study of deformed basement rocks within the Pine Mountain window to
              determine their suitability for comparison with other Grenville-aged
              structures.  It is possible that the Paleozoic Appalachian orogenic events have
              overprinted these rocks to such an extent that Grenville structures can no
              longer be documented.  However, with the advent of the technique of electron
              microprobe dating of monazites, it is possible to quickly and accurately
              determine the age of minerals within shear zones and therefore to determine the
              effects of metamorphic overprinting. In this study, the PI will collect and
              analyze sheared basement rocks from the Pine Mountain window as well as analyze
              the PI 's existing collection of sheared rocks from the Canadian/New York
              Grenville Province.  This will be done using electron microprobe analysis of
              monazites in thin sections at the University of Massachusetts.  This technique,
              while not as precise as traditional methods of geochronology, is rapid,
              efficient, and allows the investigator to retain all structural information of
              a sample, which is essential when studying shear zones that may have had
              multiple episodes of deformation.  This will allow the PI to determine the
              nature of the Paleozoic metamorphic overprint of these rocks.  In addition,
              analysis of the rocks in Ontario and New York provides a check on the technique
              of monazite dating by the electron microprobe, a relatively new procedure. 
              Since there is an extensive database of ages, collected by the PI using
              standard U/Pb and 40 Ar-39 Ar isotopic techniques, all monazite ages can be
              framed within a very detailed temperature-time path. 
