Title       : Direct Measurements of Dissipation Rate and Determination of the
               Velocity/pressure-gradient Correlation in Complex High Reynolds Number
               Turbulent Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0233653

Award Number: 0233653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Simpson simpson@aoe.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  CTS-0233653
PROPOSAL TYPE:  INVESTIGATOR INITIATED
PRINCIPAL
              INVESTIGATORS:	ROGER L. SIMPSON
INSTITUTION:  VIRGINIA POLYTECHNIC INST.
              

DIRECT MEASUREMENTS OF DISSIPATION RATE AND CORRELATIONS IN COMPLEX
              TURBULENT FLOWS

There is a clear need to greatly improve turbulent flow
              models for practical three-dimensional high Reynolds number turbulent flows in
              order to facilitate development of robust and accurate computational tools. 
              Improvements will have a great impact on the design calculations of all fluid
              machinery, including aircraft, submarines, jet engines, etc. as well as the
              prediction of atmospheric and ocean flows. Some terms in the governing
              Reynolds-averaged equations used in many models have never been directly
              measured and the underlying theoretical ideas are highly uncertain.

This
              program will provide a major experimental breakthrough. A newly designed type
              of laser-Doppler velocimeter is being used and further developed that can
              determine instantaneously the three components of position, velocity, and
              acceleration of multiple particles that follow the flow within a 200 micron
              measurement volume. Not only will the instantaneous position of the particles
              be determined to within 1 micron (0.00004 inches) uncertainty, but the
              instantaneous rate-of-deformation and angular velocity of the flow will be
              obtained, leading to the determination of the instantaneous values of important
              terms in the fundamental equations.  The information is important for improved
              turbulence modeling. 

The experimental technique will be used to obtain data
              for three fundamental building block flows: 2-D flat plate zero mean pressure
              gradient boundary layers (momentum thickness Reynolds number in the range 7,000
              to 23,000), two-dimensional turbulent boundary layers with isolated roughness,
              and three-dimensional rough-wall boundary layers.  The experimental results
              from this proposed research will be the first available data sets with complete
              measurements of all turbulent quantities in the Reynolds-averaged modeling
              equations at relatively high Reynolds numbers. 

This research will have a
              number of broad impacts. Significant interaction and collaboration with
              turbulence modelers is planned, which will broadly disseminate the results for
              enhanced scientific and technical understanding. Other broad impacts are the
              education of US undergraduate and graduate students in the use of this
              cutting-edge research technique, significant contributions to research
              infrastructure by developing a new instrument, and benefits to society through
              advancements in turbulence modeling for practical applications.


