Title       : SBIR Phase I: Knowledge-Based Adaptive Software Development Methodologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0233137

Award Number: 0233137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Henninger scotth@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : APT
	      1720 So. 77th St.
	      Lincoln, NE  68506    402/489-1658

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project builds on a
              research program investigating the design of process-based software development
              tools and methodologies. The project will develop a next generation of this
              software that supports the creation, refinement, and adaptation of software
              development methodologies in a principled manner while preserving the need for
              rapid innovation.  The BORE (Building an Organizational Repository of
              Experiences) software development approach uniquely provides two levels of
              process adaptation based on project experiences. The system allows individual
              development efforts to create an instance of a defined process and tailor it to
              meet project needs. This is accomplished through a rule-based system that
              formally captures project decisions in a manner that can easily be used to
              assess project experiences for potential process improvements. These
              experiences are used in a feedback-based framework that refines the defined
              process to meet the emerging needs of the organization.
     The objectives of
              this Phase I research project are to refine the concepts and implement them in
              a stable version of the BORE system that can be used in evaluative studies.
              These studies will be used to assess the feasibility of the overall approach
              for potential commercialization.  The innovative approach investigated in this
              project has the right mix of flexibility and discipline not found in current
              methodologies or tools, which have had minimal impact on the industry thus far.
               Success of this project also has the potential for impact beyond software
              development organizations. It has already been used in educational settings and
              is general enough to be applied to a number of industries that face dynamic
              production and design processes in today's fast-based, customer driven,
              business milieu

