Title       : JIETSSP: Coordination of Robotic Teams for Space Solar Power Assembly Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0233698

Award Number: 0233698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjiv Singh ssingh@ri.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid G. Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Wettergreen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Whittaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Assembly of Space Solar Power facilities will be significantly more complex and
              demanding than any prior on-orbit assembly. While it is evident that human
              workers will not be able to construct such facilities directly, alternatives
              involving many robot teams and few human supervisors are not yet mature. To
              succeed in this enterprise, revolutionary new capabilities are needed in areas
              such as autonomous robotic assembly and human-robot interaction. This project
              will seek fundamental new insights and demonstrations of how Space Solar Power
              (SSP) facilities can be built using autonomous robots supervised by humans. It
              will have two main objectives, important to the future of Space Solar Power
              assembly:

Enable heterogeneous multiple robots to coordinate in the
              performance of complex tasks, such as assembly~

Enable flexible human-robot
              interaction during assembly operations to deal contingencies that cannot be
              anticipated.

For some of the key tasks, such as moving substructures,
              autonomous control is already feasible. For other aspects, such as fine
              manipulation to connect components, human perception and control is
              needed.
The PI seek to develop a general framework, which they term sliding
              autonomy, where any subtask, on any of the robots, can be performed either
              autonomously or by a tele-operator, depending on the situation. The framework
              will enable mixed-initiative decision making: Human users can decide to take
              control, if they want, and the autonomous systems can decide to hand over
              control, when they need help.

This project will utilize an existing robotic
              testbed, developed for a previous NASA program, consisting of three
              heterogeneous robots (a crane, a mobile manipulator. and a roving eye) that are
              used for autonomous assembly. It will demonstrate several basic assembly tasks,
              such as docking beams and stringing cables. It will quantify the advantages of
              sliding autonomy for this task, in terms of time spent and success ratio. A
              clear improvement in efficiency will demonstrate the feasibility of such
              assembly for Space Solar Power facilities.

