Title       : Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0233773

Award Number: 0233773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand I. Halperin halperin@hall.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0233773
Halperin
Theoretical research carried out under this grant will
              improve our understanding of a variety of phenomena in condensed matter and
              statistical physics.  Some of the work will try to explain puzzling results
              from existing experiments.  Other work will aim to improve calculational
              techniques, to understand the wider consequences of existing theoretical
              models, or to suggest new experimental tests of theoretical ideas.

The
              project will have educational impact through the training of graduate students,
              undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows.  The Principal Investigator is also
              involved in efforts to develop presentations to the general public, which could
              benefit from this research.

A large portion of the research will concern
              properties of systems where conduction electrons are confined in one or more
              directions.  As an important example of such a system, the electrons in a
              field-effect transistor are trapped at a semiconducting interface, and may be
              described as a two-dimensional electron system.  A number of surprising
              phenomena, known collectively as quantum Hall effects, have been discovered in
              two-dimensional electron systems in strong magnetic fields at low temperatures.
               Recently, experiments have been carried out on systems with two parallel
              two-dimensional electron systems, coupled by the Coulomb interactions between
              electrons in different layers.  Research under this grant will develop improved
              theories of the various states that can occur in such systems, including weakly
              and strongly coupled phases, and phases where the electron density may vary
              periodically in space on the scale of 100nm.  Drag experiments, where current
              in one layer produces a voltage in the second layer, show puzzling results in
              quantum Hall systems, which this research proposes to explain.  The research
              will also try to improve the understanding of experiments that measure the
              conductance arising from electrons that tunnel through the barrier between the
              two layers.  Other work will try to understand shot noise measured in
              single-layer quantum Hall systems when current passes through a series of
              narrow constrictions.

Another research area will be the study of
              one-dimensional electron systems, which can occur in carbon nanotubes, or can
              be fabricated out of two-dimensional electron systems in semiconductors. 
              Previous analyses of the effects of electron-electron interactions on tunneling
              between parallel one-dimensional wire segments will be extended to more general
              ranges of experimental parameters.  Other work will try to understand drag
              experiments with parallel wires, and will explore phenomena in semiconductor
              nanowires.

Another research topic will explore generalizations of the Kondo
              effect, where repeated flips of the spin of a localized electron produce
              peculiar effects in electrical transport at low temperatures.  Generalizations
              include situations where changes in the position of a localized electron,
              rather than its spin, give rise to anomalous transport effects: and situations
              where the coupled motion of several interacting electrons is crucial.

Other
              theoretical work will explore aspects of sound propagation and of NMR
              measurements in fluid-containing rock formations, which could have significance
              for oil well management.
%%% 
Theoretical research carried out under this
              grant will improve our understanding of a variety of phenomena in condensed
              matter and statistical physics.  Some of the work will try to explain puzzling
              results from existing experiments.  Other work will aim to improve
              calculational techniques, to understand the wider consequences of existing
              theoretical models, or to suggest new experimental tests of theoretical
              ideas.

The project will have educational impact through the training of
              graduate students, undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows.  The Principal
              Investigator is also involved in efforts to develop presentations to the
              general public, which could benefit from this research.
***

