Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Fluid and Particulate Transport in Self-affine
               Fractures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0233255

Award Number: 0233255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Koplik koplik@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233255
Koplik

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration involves
              Joel Koplik of City College, City University of New York and Jean-Pierre Hulin
              of the University Marie and Pierre Curie in Paris, France.  The investigators
              propose to study several interrelated problems centered on the relationship
              between the fractal characteristics of the geometry of rough fractures and the
              transport properties of fluids within them. The key geometrical feature of this
              work is the self-affine nature of fracture surfaces and the resulting
              correlations in the velocity field when fluid flows through such a fracture. 
              The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration theoretical and numerical
              expertise.  This will be complemented by the experimental studies on
              reconstructed fractures conducted by the French group.   The joint program will
              entail laboratory experiments on transparent rough surfaces copied from natural
              rock samples with theoretical and computational studies in corresponding model
              fractally-rough geometries.  In addition, field experiments in a granite quarry
              will be conducted in collaboration with the French Institute for Physics of the
              Earth.   The project will advance understanding of the motions of fluids and
              particles in geological formations, with application to water supply,
              hydrocarbon production, and waste disposal.  The work is motivated by
              environmental concerns about groundwater contamination and safe disposal of
              nuclear waste in fractured rocks. 

This award represents the U.S. side of a
              joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific
              Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the U.S.
              investigator, a postdoctoral researcher and/or graduate student.  The CNRS will
              support the visits of the French researchers to the United States.  

