Title       : JIETSSP: Cost Effective, Efficient Monitoring and Control of Space Solar Power
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0233339

Award Number: 0233339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205900             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Johnson jj@scs.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Power distribution voltages and insulation are areas of critical importance to
              the study of SSP systems. Due 
to the importance of the mass and cost of the
              SSP system, most designs for the SSP operate at high voltages 
in order to
              reduce transmission losses and mass. Some design concepts even use no
              insulation. Use of these 
high voltages will present challenges of electrical
              breakdown and performance of insulators, insulation, and 
switchgear. As a
              result, there is a strong research motivation for technology geared towards
              enhancement of 
PMAD systems exposed to electrical breakdown and corona type
              faults.  In harsh environments (aerospace), economic and effective fault
              management (maintenance and monitoring of electric power systems) is needed to
              ensure high performance. In the effective fault management of the aerospace 
              environment,  the maintenance  cost  of  aging  distribution  cables  is  a
              major  consideration.  The installation  and  maintenance  of  the  equipment 
              on  board  the  SSP  is  also  of  high  significance.  These operations  can 
              be  significantly  improved  by  more  accurate  predictions  of  insulating 
              aging,  as  well  as detection and location of faults within the components of
              the power system. 
 
This project will focus on the design of an integrated
              system using state-of-the-art technology for 
continuous and periodic
              monitoring of a space power system with emphasis on the detection and diagnosis
              
of corona and soft faults. This scheme involves the cost effective, efficient
              monitoring and control for an 
enhanced space solar power network. A network
              of sensors will monitor the network, report information 
for  the  detection 
              of  faults,  and  provide  health-status  information  of  electrical 
              insulation  and  other 
components in the system. 
 
The Center for Energy
              Systems and Control (CESaC), Howard University is one of the research centers
              in 
the US that has demonstrated capabilities in the following combination of
              fields: Power system analysis in 
the  terrestrial,  non-terrestrial,  naval 
              systems,  and  spacecraft  energy  power  systems;  Application  of
              
optimization  techniques  to  improve  the  solution  of  different 
              problems,  and  applications  of  intelligent 
systems to the solution of
              complex problems. This combination is necessary for completion of the complex
              
interdisciplinary tasks that will be faced in this project. The project will
              create an opportunity for students 
from differing branches of electrical
              engineering - material sciences, communications, power systems and 
controls -
              to  become  aware  of modern  problems  in  the  power  industry  and 
              contribute  to  the  technical 
progress in this field.  
