Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Variability in Thermohaline Circulation and
               North Atlantic Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0233483

Award Number: 0233483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry F. McManus jmcmanus@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Francois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233483
McManus

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in climate
              change involves researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the
              Laboratory for Climate Sciences and Environment of the French National Center
              for Scientific Research (CNRS).  Jerry F. McManus in the US and Laurent
              Labeyrie in France will lead this collaborative program to model and analyze
              the variability in thermohaline circulation and impact on North Atlantic
              climate.  The ocean's thermohaline circulation has undergone reorganization on
              various time scales, with important implications for understanding the Earth's
              climate in the past and present.  Nutrient proxies provide important evidence
              of watermass reconfigurations.  Dynamical tracers may provide an ideal
              complement to this information by allowing quantitative evaluation of changes
              in the rates of deepwater formation and export.  Combination of watermass
              properties and overturning rate could yield direct estimates of the transport
              by the ocean's thermohaline circulation.  To this end, the US and French
              investigators will refine a method that utilizes two long-lived uranium series,
              231 Pa and 230 Th.  They will construct maps of the burial ratio (231Pa/230Th)
              in bulk sediment cores of the Atlantic Ocean.  In addition, they will evaluate
              the link between changes in circulation and climate variability through
              high-resolution time series.  The US group brings to this collaboration
              expertise in the area of Uranium-series radiochemistry.  This is complemented
              by French expertise in spatial coverage and resolution and access to the IMAGES
              cores repository in France.

This award represents the US side of joint
              proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research
              (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US
              investigators.  CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers and a
              graduate student to the United States.   The project will advance understanding
              of the causes and potential impact of ocean circulation on climate change and
              abrupt climate change in the North Atlantic.

