Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Tribological Thin Films on Rough Surfaces:
               Design, Analysis, Characterization, Fatigue and Wear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0233313

Award Number: 0233313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andres Soom soom@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary F. Dargush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233313
Soom

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in mechanical
              engineering involves researchers and students at the State University of New
              York at Buffalo and the University for Science and Technology in Lille, France.
               Andres Soom and Gary F. Dargush in the US and Jacky Lesage and Gerard
              Mesmacque in France will lead this collaborative program to model the
              tribological performance and failure of thin coatings and films.  In
              particular, they will conduct a series of experiments, resulting in patterns of
              wear or film failure.  In parallel, computational mechanical modeling of 3D
              contact stresses and strains will be developed.  The US investigators are
              expert in computational, contact mechanics and tribological testing.  This is
              complemented by French capabilities in characterization, preparation and
              failure of thin films, and nano-indentation measurements. 

Thin films and
              coatings are frequently used to enhance performance and durability of
              mechanical components and production tooling where some sliding occurs at
              contact with the surface.  Recently advanced designs of surfaces have
              challenged current ability to design films, and predict behavior, based on
              mechanical properties.  This joint effort will advance understanding of
              life-cycle performance and predictive modeling.  

This award represents the
              US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
              Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses
              for the US investigators and graduate student.  CNRS will support the visits of
              the French researchers and graduate students to the United States.   

