Title       : Topographic and compositional studies of andesite lava flows at Sabancaya
               volcano, Southern Peru.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0233939

Award Number: 0233939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 20,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Bulmer mbulmer@jcet.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy K. P. Gregg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Americas Program award will support Dr. Mark Bulmer of the University of
              Maryland Baltimore County, Dr. Bruce Campbell of the Smithsonian Institution,
              and Dr. Tracy Gregg of SUNY at Buffalo in a research collaboration with Eng.
              Guido Salas of the Universidad Nacional de San Agustin in Arequipa, Peru. The
              overall objective of this study is to improve current knowledge of the
              emplacement of thick lava flows by studying those at Sabancaya volcano in
              Southern Peru. These flows have unique topographic and geochemical signatures.
              Three tasks are proposed: (1) Determine quantitative inferences on the rheology
              and flow regime of the lava flows based on the dimensions, topography,
              morphology, petrography and geochemistry of the flows; (2) Compare the flow
              properties derived in Task 1 to a variety of natural lava flows and laboratory
              simulations; and (3) Use the results gained from Tasks 1 and 2 to determine the
              extent to which the surface structure and roughness of different lava flow
              surfaces can be used as a diagnostic tool in remote sensing for accurate
              geologic interpretation of emplacement styles and lava compositions.

The
              eruption of large evolved lava flows on Earth has never been witnessed, making
              careful data analyses combined with numerical (and possibly physical) modeling
              the only way to understand them. Furthermore, little is known about the
              magmatic processes that govern the generation, ascent and eruption of these
              viscous flows. For this collaboration, the U.S. researchers will contribute
              archived data sets of satellite and airborne visible and near-infrared data of
              Sabancaya volcano and the surrounding region, while the Peruvian side will
              contribute access to geologic samples from 1989 when the first of the most
              recent eruptions began, and their expertise concerning the surrounding region. 
              The Sabancaya flows will provide an important reference point for the
              geological interpretation of remotely sensed data of volcanic terrains.



              
  

