Title       : University of Maryland Graduate Rewards Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0233785

Award Number: 0233785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $882425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Rudolph djr@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Plan of action:  We will work with a collection of affiliated colleges and
              universities to create a well-supported pathway to bring students from
              underrepresented groups to careers in the mathematical sciences.  These
              affiliates include ones from which we have recruited students in the past and
              who share our philosophy of strong and complete academic and professional
              training.   Currently Morehouse College, Bowie State Univ., Florida A&M, North
              Carolina A&T, Spelman College, Trinity College of DC, and Xavier Univ. are
              Affiliates.  We are actively recruiting new Affiliates.  An annual Affiliates
              Workshop will strengthen ties among our institutions and guide and maintain the
              effectiveness of this program.  Sophomores and juniors will be recruited to
              participate in a Summer Institute at the University of Maryland.  This
              Institute will provide both upper level undergraduate academic classes and
              research experiences to reinforce the students' training and maturity for
              graduate study.  A Graduate Fellowship Program will offer competitive
              fellowships to graduates from the Affiliates.  As Fellows in this program,
              students will be provided complete career training as mentors, educators and
              scientists.  The Summer Institute will extend to the graduate level, offering
              academic training in preparation for qualifying and candidacy exams and
              integration with the department's Research Interaction Team (RIT) program. 
              Graduate Assistantships will be offered to students to support the program. 
              These Graduate Assistants will provide classroom support, tutoring, mentoring
              and advising for the Summer Institute.  A supported Peer Mentoring Program will
              provide peer mentors to students in the mathematical sciences and will provide
              supported students with training for mentorship.  

Funding is for: fifteen
              undergraduate participants in the Summer Institute, three to four 4-year
              graduate fellowships per year, TA support both preceding and during the Summer
              Institute, peer mentoring support, and both recruiting and workshop travel
              support.      

