Title       : The Structure of Mesoscale Convective Systems as Revealed from Detailed Surface
               Mesoanalyses during the Bow Echo and Mesoscale Vortex Experiment (BAMEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  2002   
File        : a0233172

Award Number: 0233172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance F. Bosart bosart@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Bow Echo and Mesoscale Vortex Experiment (BAMEX) to be held from 20 May to 6
              July 2003 will take advantage of multiple state-of-the-art observational
              platforms together with a variety of conventional observations to produce
              comprehensive integrated datasets to help document the birth, maturation,
              decay, and overall life cycles of an important class of mesoscale weather
              phenomena.  Bow echoes and mesoscale convective vortices (MCVs) occur in
              conjunction with mesoscale convective systems (MCSs).  Severe weather,
              including hail, high winds, and tornadoes, frequently occurs in association
              with MCSs and embedded MVCs and bow echoes.  Remnant MCVs left behind in the
              wake of parent MCSs can also act to spin up new deep convection and reignite
              new MCSs.  Forecasting where and when a MCS will form, where it will track, and
              how long it will last remains a vexing problem.  An opportunity exists with
              BAMEX to capture multiple MCS life cycles with special datasets out of which
              can come increased scientific understanding of the physical mechanisms that
              govern MCS behavior, a necessary first step to making improvements in
              forecasting MCSs. 

This research is motivated by the need to prepare
              comprehensive research quality mesoanalyses in order to learn more about the
              often "hidden" surface structure of bow echoes and MCVs and how surface
              circulations are linked to circulations above the surface.  The Principal
              Investigator will: (1) document first, and subsequent, generation MCS life
              cycles spatially and temporally through detailed surface mesoanalyses, (2)
              determine how surface boundaries (outflow, frontal, dryline) modulate MCS life
              cycles, are in turn modulated by the convection, and then influenced by
              successive MCSs, (3) evaluate how surface frontogenesis processes force
              mesoscale circulations that influence MCS life cycles, and (4) relate surface
              features such as wake troughs and lows, bubble highs, and multiple cyclonic
              vorticity maxima to low- and mid-level vortices, mid- and upper-level potential
              vorticity anomalies, rear-inflow jets, cloud-to-ground lightning patterns, and
              radar-, aircraft- and satellite-derived MCS signatures.  The detailed surface
              mesoanalyses will be prepared using a combination of manual and automated
              procedures that take advantage of time-to-space conversion techniques to better
              map mesoscale features.  The linkage between surface and free-atmosphere
              circulations will be explored in cooperation with other BAMEX
              investigators.

Successful completion of this research may lead to better
              forecasts of severe wind events and convective storms.
