Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Systems and Biophysical Processing of Afferent
               Input by Vestibular Nucleus Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0233337

Award Number: 0233337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry F. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233337
Hoffman

This three-year award supports US-France collaboration in
              neuroscience and sensory systems between Larry F. Hoffman at the School of
              Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and Lee Moore at
              the Laboratory of the Neurobiology of Network Sensors at the University of
              Paris VI.  The investigators propose to develop a new approach to investigate
              central processing mechanisms into the central nervous system of afferent
              neurons from individual vestibular end organs.  They will conduct experiments
              and modeling studies designed to reveal the biophysical bases of processing and
              neural computation in second order vestibular neurons.  The investigations
              focus on the convergence of dynamically diverse afferents projecting from the
              horizontal semicircular canal in the ear.  The experimental component will be
              conducted by the US group, taking advantage of instrumental and experimental
              expertise in natural vestibular stimuli and electrophysiologic recordings.  The
              French investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in neuron
              biophysics.  He will integrate his methods into the preparation of in situ
              electrophysiology performed by the UCLA lab.  The vestibular nucleus neurons
              will be characterized and subsequently imaged by confocal microscopy.  The
              images will then be utilized in the modeling component conducted by the French
              group. 

This award represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and
              the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover
              travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator.  The CNRS will
              support the visits of the French investigator.  The proposal will advance
              understanding of afferent sensory neuron input in the central nervous system
              and biomedical understanding of balance and movement disorders.

