Title       : WCR: Effect of Changes in Climate, Snow Pack, Glaciers, and Permafrost on River
               Runoff in Tien Shan, Central Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0233583

Award Number: 0233583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir B. Aizen aizen@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elena M. Loktionova-Aizen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7241,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0233583
Aizen
  The evaluation of the long-term dynamics of water cycle
              components in the World's largest closed drainage system has not been examined
              in detail. Location of the Tien Shan and rich data provide a unique opportunity
              to assess the pathways of water among hydrological surface and subsurface
              reservoirs and to quantify the precipitation partitioning among land surface
              stores with different residence times. The main objective of our research is
              estimating, simulating, and predicting the variability in water cycle
              components and water composition in the Central Asian alpine basins. This
              project proposes to: (1) Provide background information and evaluate the
              long-term changes in type and quantity of precipitation, evaporation, total
              river runoff and snow/glacier/permafrost runoff, major ions, pH, conductivity,
              and dissolved oxygen. This data will be posted at the University of Idaho web
              site (www.mines.uidaho.edu/~aizen/aizen.html). (2) Discover the controls on the
              water chemistry (changes in glacier, snow, and permafrost river runoff,
              atmospheric deposition, rock weathering, etc.). Define the input/output
              chemical budget emphasizing on the watershed geology. (3) Implement
              modular-design, deterministic, distributed-parameter modeling systems:  i.e.,
              "Precipitation Runoff Modeling System" and/or snow-ice simulation with
              "Snowmelt Runoff Model" in application with the operational runoff modeling,
              which simulates active layer freezing and thawing. Geochemical modeling
              includes specification of the various elements and determination of saturation
              indices for various metals based on MINTEQA2 and WATEQ. Mass-balance
              calculations will be facilitated by computer codes such as BALANCE, NETPATH and
              PHREEQE. Validation of simulation results will be based on data sets other than
              those used in model calibration. (4) Develop and validate the transition from
              small hydrological units to complex geographical systems through the scaling
              relationships and to determine the distribution of point measurements. Three
              representative sub-basins will be used to determine water balances using data
              during each time step (daily, monthly, seasonally, and annually). (5) Apply
              climate scenarios to assess the climate-driven impact on future water resources
              and model the effect of global warming on water chemistry. 
    The basis of
              this integrative research is the collaboration with the Central Asian, the USA,
              the Japan, and the Chinese institutions.



