Title       : Stable isotopes as a tool for investigating changes in Holocene hunter-gatherer
               strategies along the northern California coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0233888

Award Number: 0233888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120667             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Bettinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With NSF support, Dr. Ann Russell, Dr. Robert Bettinger, and Mr. Michael Kennedy
              will use stable oxygen and carbon isotopes (d18O and d13C) at the edges of
              California sea mussel (Mytilus californianus) shells collected from 14C-dated
              archaeological components to determine the season in which prehistoric northern
              California hunter-gatherers harvested this marginal marine resource over the
              last 8600 years. In addition, they will evaluate the relationship between
              seasonality of the mussel harvest and changes in marine conditions
              reconstructed from annual records of d18O and d13C. 
In recent years, there
              has been increased focus on the emergence of hunter-gatherer maritime
              adaptations and the role of climate change as a selective force in shaping
              cultural responses. Major cultural changes in southern and central California,
              such as the use of marginal resources as well as increasing economic and
              sociopolitical complexity, may have developed from resource stress related to
              changes in sea-surface temperature (SST) and marine productivity. Little is
              known about these aspects of hunter-gatherer evolution along the coast of
              northern California. Reconstruction of seasonal foraging patterns, as well as
              upwelling intensity and marine nutrient levels along the coast of northern
              California will provide critical information for understanding the emergence of
              marine resource intensification in this region.
Previous research has shown
              that the record of stable isotopes (d18O and d13C) in shell calcite of mollusk
              shells provides important information on marine environmental conditions (SST,
              nutrient levels, and inferred marine productivity).  Preliminary results
              confirm this and suggest that the approach of using both d18O and d13C of the
              terminal margin (growing edge) of Mytilus californianus (California sea mussel)
              shells is a valuable tool for determining the season of harvest.
How
              intensively did hunter-gatherers utilize marginal marine resources (shellfish)
              throughout the year in northern California, and what role did marine climate
              play in the development of intensified marine foraging strategies? 
To address
              these questions, the research team will generate three seasonal records of d18O
              and d13C in mussel shell calcite from five 14C-dated archaeological components
              near Bodega Bay, California. These profiles will provide information on average
              marine environmental conditions, as well as the typical range of seasonal
              variation of SST and d13C at the time of occupation. In addition to these
              long-term records, the researchers will obtain isotopic data from the terminal
              margins of at least 20 additional shells per component to determine the season
              of harvest. An important aspect of the research will be to continue a modern
              calibration/verification of the use of coupled d18O and d13C from shell
              terminal margins to establish the season of harvest. 
Using the results of
              these studies in conjunction with other archaeological data, the research team
              will reconstruct changes in environmental conditions and in the adaptive
              strategies of maritime hunter-gatherers of northern California since 8600 BP.
              This research will permit a regional evaluation of annual foraging intensity
              over the last ~8600 years, and will provide a far more sophisticated
              examination of marine resource intensification along the northern California
              coast than previous research has offered.

