Title       : Collaborative Project: The Role of Counterfactual Mind-Sets in Debiasing Group
               Decisions with Adam Galinsky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0233294

Award Number: 0233294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Kray kray@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many consequential decisions are made by groups, from jury decisions over the
              guilt and innocence of defendants (Pennington & Hastie, 1992) to medical
              decisions made by pooling information from different expert physicians (Larson,
              Christensen, Franz, & Abbott; 1998).  An unfortunate reality of group decision
              making is that collective decisions are often beset by flaws, leading innocent
              people to be incarcerated and those in poor health to become sicker rather than
              healthier. One category of factors that leads groups to make faulty decisions
              is the manner in which information is sought, shared, and processed in a social
              context (Janis, 1982).  Given the magnitude of the consequences of group
              decisions, it is important to consider how groups can seek, share, and process
              information in a more systematic and less biased manner. 
The purpose of the
              current research is to gain a better theoretical and practical understanding of
              the role of counterfactual thinking, or thoughts about what might have been or
              what almost happened, in influencing group decision making. Counterfactual
              mind-sets are expected to increase the propensity of groups to engage in mental
              simulations and consideration of alternatives.  We predict that activating a
              counterfactual mind-set will improve the decision making accuracy of groups.
              The proposed program of research explores the nature, boundary conditions, and
              range of applications of activating a counterfactual mind-set in group decision
              making and problem solving contexts.  The project will involve a series of
              controlled, experimental studies that establish the causal relationship between
              counterfactual mind-sets and group decision making processes and outcomes. 
              



