Title       : SGER: Evolutionary Algorithms for Pathogen Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0233901

Award Number: 0233901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori Stevens lori.stevens@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna M. Rizzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1306,9139,9150,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Evolutionary computation uses principles from biological evolution to find
              optimal solutions to problems in engineering and computer science. Evolutionary
              algorithms are ideal for studying natural selection and optimization of the
              myriad of physiological processes that occur in organisms.  In contrast, many
              other current modeling methods are limited in their ability to include dynamic,
              multi-objective optimization processes and results may be biased by initial
              parameter settings.  Parameters in evolutionary algorithms can self-adapt,
              mimicking the evolution of processes such as mating system, migration,
              recombination and mutation.  This research will use evolutionary algorithms to
              study multi-objective evolution of pathogen defense and local adaptation. An
              experiment using Tribolium flour beetles will validate the model and
              demonstrate the synergy between the computational efforts and empirical work. 
              

The project has broader impacts including stimulating an emerging research
              area through the novel application of recent developments in computer science
              and engineering to evolutionary physiology.  Undergraduate, graduate and
              post-doctoral students will be trained in computational biology and the
              evolutionary physiology of host-pathogen interactions.  The models will
              demonstrate the utility of evolutionary algorithms for modeling multiple
              defenses, self-adaptation, and spatial and temporal variation in pathogen
              prevalence. The topic of pathogen defense is a timely problem in both basic and
              applied biology, medicine and agriculture.  These studies are relevant to
              genetically modified foods, and changes in pathogen abundance caused by global
              warming, as well as emerging infectious disease and drug resistance.

