Title       : SGER: Superconducting MgB2/Metal Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0233805

Award Number: 0233805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49981              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Dunand dunand@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this study is to demonstrate and investigate the reactive
              synthesis of superconducting composites consisting of two co-continuous phases,
              superconducting MgB2 and metallic Mg. The two routes to be studied (reactive
              liquid metal infiltration and reactive mechanical alloying) produce the MgB2
              phase by reaction of B powders or fibers with liquid or solid Mg. The kinetics
              of the reaction and the formation of intermediate phases (e.g., MgB4) will be
              studied by metallography, x-ray diffraction using both traditional and
              synchrotron sources and surface techniques such as microprobe and SIMS.
              Superconducting and mechanical properties of the composites will also be
              assessed. The materials processed using the two routes will be characterized
              using metallography to determine porosity, connectivity and architecture of the
              MgB2 phase and other possible reaction products. These will further be
              investigated by XRD and SXRD, as well as surface science techniques such as
              microprobe and SIMS, the latter being highly sensitive to boron. The density of
              the mechanically alloyed powders as well as the infiltrated or densified
              composites will be determined by helium pycnometry. The hardness and
              compressive mechanical properties (modulus, strength and ductility) will also
              be measured. The electrical conductivity will be studied; both at ambient
              temperature and in the range of 2-50 K. Superconductivity properties will be
              measured with a computer-controlled magnetometer allowing SQUID measurements of
              temperature-dependence of magnetization up to fields of 55KG.

This is a
              small grant exploratory project on the metallurgical/materials science study of
              the Mg-MgB2 system and may have significant importance in the eventual
              fabrication of tough, superconducting wires for magnets in energy storage
              devices, medical imaging systems, levitating devices and particle accelerators.
              Other applications include wires for power transmission and small SQUID
              systems. The proposed work is fundamental research and if successful may
              provide the impetus for further R&D and eventual commercialization of these
              superconducting composites. 

