Title       : AlGaN/GaN Heterostructure Field-Effect Transistor Free-Space Combining
               Oscillator: An Approach for Solar Power Conversion to High RF Power for
               Wireless Transmission to Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0233500

Award Number: 0233500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris Pavlidis pavlidis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Volakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amir Mortazawi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233500
Pavlidis

Predictions of the power needed in 50 years or so imply
              commercial power levels usages 3 to 5 times greater than today's. Meanwhile,
              power generation cost per kWh need be about 10 times less. Further, considering
              the necessity for clean, non-polluting alternative sources of energy, and a
              trend to abandon nuclear power generation makes solar power sources,
              increasingly more attractive. However, earth-based solar cell power generation
              at the predicted level by 2050 implies an unrealistically large earth surface
              area (about 1/5 of the entire United States). Thus, alternative means must be
              employed to harness solar power, and space-based solar arrays offer this
              possibility. This proposal addresses wireless power transmission (WPT) by means
              of spatial power-combining oscillator arrays that employ high power widebandgap
              semiconductor devices.

The PIs will address the theoretical and practical
              aspects of designing very large, low profile, printed, active and
              self-oscillating injection locked antenna arrays consisting of thousands of
              A1GaN/GaN Heterostructure Field Effect Transistors (HFETs) to generate a
              powerful coherent microwave beam. GaN HFETs and their high-frequency,
              non-linear and noise characteristics will be optimized for DC to RF conversion
              in WPTs. The proposed studies address widebandgap solid-state device issues
              central to transmission by microwaves and their implementation in spatial power
              combining arrays.

The PIs goal are to design a highly stable, efficient and
              multimode-free oscillator array that is tolerant to multiple device failures.
              Low cost and self-assembly are other attributes. Their design approach is to
              start with a fundamental study and analysis of multiple device injection locked
              oscillators in close proximity with radiating elements and devise techniques to
              design, optimize and construct large, stable and efficient injection locked
              spatially combined oscillator arrays. The innovative approaches proposed under
              this program will lead in understanding of GaN-based device, oscillator and
              spatial power combination in conjunction with power generated by solar cells.
              This will open new possibilities in RF power transmission for satisfying
              projected needs of 2kW per person in 2050, translating to 20 tera Watts.

