Title       : Landscape Transformation and Sociopolitical Organization in Marajoara Phase,
               Brazilian Amazon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0233788

Award Number: 0233788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11925              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Richardson, III JBR3+@PITT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Marajo Island is famous for its unusual geography and remarkable archaeological
              sites.  On a landscape characterized by seasonal flooding and severe droughts,
              Marajoara people built earthen mounds and canals, and produced one of the most
              elaborate ritual ceramics of the New World.  Marajoara culture influenced
              further developments of social complexity on the Amazon Basin, during the
              millennium that anteceded the Europeans arrival.
Located at the mouth of the
              Amazon River, Marajo Island was in the center of the dispute between the
              European nations for the control of the Amazon River during the early stages of
              the conquest.  Although its indigenous occupation dates back to 3,500 years
              ago, it was only around A.D. 400 that complex societies emerged on the Island,
              predating the development of regional, politically centralized societies on the
              Brazilian Amazon.  From A. D. 400 to A. D. 1,400, Marajoara Phase mounds
              multiplied on the Island flooded grasslands, representing the height of
              cultural development in Brazil.  Interpretations by archaeologists who have
              excavated at some of these ceremonial sites, has led to a debate on the nature
              of the rise of chiefdom level society in the Amazon. Some researchers have
              characterized the moundbuilders as hierarchically organized, with chiefs
              holding political control over a large region.  Under this senario, this
              development took place outside the Basin,. Others believe that social
              complexity developed locally but that there is little difference between the
              mound groups in terms of architecture and material culture.  Accordingly, the
              mounds would have hosted independent villages within a more egalitarian type of
              society.
The proposed research will test these two opposing hypotheses at the
              Camutins site, a group of 37 mounds located along the Camutins River, on the
              center of Marajo Island.  That site represents the first regional aggregation
              of population under some kind of sociopolitical rule.  In order to investigate
              whether the Camutins society was hierarchically organized under a single chief
              or simply represents population aggregation on a more egaliatarian basis, a
              major systematic settlement pattern survey will be accomplished on the area,
              followed by excavations in selected mounds.  The research will construct a
              chronological sequence of the rise of the Marojoara chiefdomship at the
              Camutins site, based upon the radiocarbon dating and the analysis of the
              pottery recovered from the excavations. This detailed study will provide the
              critical foundation for future regional studies on Marajo Island, and permit
              more sophisticated hypotheses to be formulated on the socio-political
              organization, not only on Marajo Island, but throughout the Amazon Basin. 
              Although it has become widely recognized that complex societies were present in
              many areas in prehistoric Amazonia, the region has lacked significant
              archaeological investigation as compared to other areas in the Americas.  This
              project aims to place Marajoara societies and Amazonia more broadly on current
              debates on ancient complex societies. The project will also assist in training
              a very promising graduate student.


