Title       : The Impact of Scientific Knowledge on Water Management: A Comparative
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0233961

Award Number: 0233961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Carmen M. Lemos lemos@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the use of technical information in water management
              in Brazil:
To illuminate the opportunities and constraints for the use of
              technical information in policymaking, especially water management, and 
To
              investigate how the use of such knowledge affects decision making in the
              context of the recently implemented water management reform in Brazil. 

This
              example of science/society interaction illustrates how institutional settings
              where technical knowledge is applied play a role in the effectiveness of this
              information as a policy tool, and how institutions respond and adapt to new
              policy tools.  

In 1997 Brazil enacted new national water law that
              introduced an integrated, decentralized, participatory, and environmentally
              sustainable water management system. This resulted in several instances of
              public participation in water resources management at the watershed level, such
              as users' commissions, watershed committees, and water policy councils that are
              open to the public. Within such organizations, technical information can play
              many policy-related roles, including providing support information for
              different kinds of decision-making, planning, and enforcement. However, such
              information can critically affect decision-making in different, sometimes
              unwarranted, ways. 

A key argument this study seeks to advance is that the
              use of technical information is context-dependent.  The distribution of costs
              and benefits of information use in policymaking depends on the social,
              political, and cultural context in which information producers and users work.
              Better information may lead to better decisions, and better-informed
              decision-making might encourage stakeholders' perception of effectiveness,
              which in turn, might encourage stakeholder participation. Or, the use of
              technical information can alienate participation by insulating decision-making
              from the public.  Because technical information requires technical expertise
              for its use, it can shield policymakers from political meddling and efforts
              from outsiders to influence policy implementation and outcome. In this case,
              technocrats' use technical information can make decisionmaking unaccountable
              and less democratic. 

This study involves detailed case studies in three
              watersheds using a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods.
              In-depth, semi-structured interviews and focus groups will be carried out with
              policymakers, information producers, and stakeholders. Participatory
              observation of public meetings and policymaking at the state level are used. 
              

The findings can inform policymakers and stakeholders of the possibilities
              and constraints for application of science-based information in policymaking,
              as well as to provide data producers with information on data needs from users.
              By examining political and cultural aspects of the application technical
              knowledge in distinct policy environments, this study contributes to analytical
              frameworks within the policy sciences, such as social constructivism, policy
              analysis, and the sociology of science. Results will include scholarly and
              policy-oriented presentations and publications in English and Portuguese.
              

0135497 


  


. 

