Title       : JIETSSP: 1,000 W/kg Concentrator Study and Roadmap for SSP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0233208

Award Number: 0233208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. O'Neill mjoneill@entechsolar.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ENTECH, Inc.
	      ENTECH, Inc.
	      Keller, TX  762487000    817/379-0100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ENTECH is pleased to submit this proposal to perform a study of advanced
              photovoltaic concentrator arrays capable of meeting the performance goals of
              the Space Solar Power (SSP) program, including the 1,000 W/kg specific power
              (array power divided by array mass) requirement. This study will lead to a
              roadmap for future developments of such advanced concentrator systems, which
              will be applicable not only to SSP but to many other space power applications,
              from NASA satellites in low earth orbit (LEO) to DOD satellites in mid-earth
              orbit (MEO) to commercial communication satellites in geostationary earth orbit
              (GEO) to NASA spacecraft on interplanetary missions.

This proposal addresses
              Rev Area 3 in the Program Announcement, specifically this item: "revolutionary
              options for solar power generation beyond the scope of existing research funded
              by the Department of Energy."  Ultra lightweight concentrator arrays for space
              power are clearly beyond the scope of DOE-funded research. The revolutionary
              nature of the proposed concentrators is clear from the specific power target
              value of 1,000 W/kg, which is at least 13 times higher than for any solar array
              presently flying in space.

The objectives of the proposed 12-month-long
              program are:

o	To generate candidate designs of advanced photovoltaic
              concentrators which are capable of meeting the performance requirements for
              SSP, including the specific power target of 1.000 W/kg.
o	To perform optical,
              thermal, and mass analyses of the candidate designs to identify the necessary
              thicknesses for the optics, radiators, and cell assemblies, to verify adequate
              performance of these items, and to estimate the areal mass densities (kg/sq.m.)
              for the candidate designs.
o	To generate a roadmap of the necessary
              concentrator development program to move from the conceptual designs of this
              program to prototype components to functional ground-test panels to
              flight-qualified arrays.

Proven engineering methods will he used to
              accomplish these objectives, including:

o	Ray trace programs, which include
              the effects of solar disk size, spectral content of the solar irradiance,
              optical properties of the concentrator material, and quantum efficiency curves
              of the multi-junction solar cells. These programs have been used successfully
              to analyze and design many previous concentrator systems, including the
              mini-dome lens array on PASP+ and the SCARLET array on Deep Space
              1.
o	Combined conduction/radiation thermal analysis models, which calculate
              the temperature distribution across the radiator, which dissipates waste heat
              from the solar cell to deep space. The accuracy of these conduction/radiation
              models has been verified by the measured temperatures on the SCARLET army,
              which matched pre-flight predictions.
o	Mass estimation spreadsheets, which
              include the areas, thicknesses, and densities of the components making up the
              concentrator array, including lenses, radiators, and photovoltaic cell
              assemblies.	

