Title       : WCR: Quantifying the Impact of Land Use and Climate Change on
               Groundwater/Surfacewater Interactions in Regional Great Lakes Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0233648

Award Number: 0233648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hyndman hyndman@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan C. Pijanowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mantha S. Phanikumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,7241,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0233648
Hyndman

Changes in land use and climate are both likely to adversely
              affect water cycle dynamics, however the potential impact of these changes are
              rarely quantified in regional watersheds. The PI's propose to explore complex
              climate-land-water interactions at scales that matter using an integrated
              modeling approach.  Their proposed research will provide insight into the
              impacts of climate and land use changes separately, and then synergistically,
              on the spatial and temporal variation of water fluxes throughout regional Great
              Lakes watersheds. The models will also provide a framework to study the complex
              processes that control the interactions between surface water and groundwater
              at a watershed scale. High-resolution stream flow measurements and land use
              estimates will constrain process-based flow models.  Pilot models of two
              experimental watersheds that drain into the Great Lakes will be refined to
              predict spatial and temporal dynamics of the water cycle fluxes.  The proposed
              work has high intellectual merit because few studies have: (1) adequately
              addressed the interaction of climate and land use on water dynamics, (2) fully
              integrated three-dimensional groundwater and surface water flow models, (3)
              applied high-resolution stream flow data in a process model framework to
              estimate recharge rates for different land covers, and (4) developed
              mechanistic models of land-climate-hydrology interaction at the experimental
              watershed scale. The proposed work will have significant broader impacts. 
              First, the results will help explain complex relationships between climate,
              land use and the water cycle at scales where decisions are commonly made. 
              Second, scenarios of land use and climate change will be explored to provide
              information to local, state, regional and federal agencies.  Third, the
              proposed education activities will provide students with a broad understanding
              of important climate-land-water interactions through a multidisciplinary
              environment.  Finally, community stakeholders will be provided with information
              on how their actions impact water cycle dynamics.


