Title       : Global Thunderstorm Activity and its Effects on the Radiation Belts and the
               Lower Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0233955

Award Number: 0233955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umran S. Inan inan@nova.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project proposes an experimental study of thunderstorm coupling to the
              radiation belts, characterization of lightning flashes which lead to upward
              electrodynamic coupling, ionospheric variability and parameters, and global
              lightning and climatology. Newly discovered precipitation of radiation belt
              particles by magnetospherically reflecting whistler waves launched by lightning
              discharges will be measured via the associated localized and transient
              disturbances of the lower ionosphere. The latter disturbances are sensed
              remotely by means of their effect on the phase and amplitude of very low
              frequency (VLF) signals propagating in the nearby earth-ionosphere waveguide.
              Broadband ELF/VLF radio atmospherics measurements at the Antarctic base Palmer
              are proposed for the measurement of characteristics waveforms of sferics
              associated with upward electrodynamic coupling phenomena such as sprites.
              Recent results indicate that such measurements can be unique and used as a
              proxy measure for occurrences of intense upward coupling phenomena on a global
              scale. The unique location of Palmer station facilitates the measurements of
              sferics originating in lightning discharges over large regions of the globe,
              including the Americas, Africa, and the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. When used
              together with space-borne measurements, the highly accurate determinations of
              occurrence time and arrival bearings of sferics as measured at Palmer
              constitute a powerful new tool for assessment of global lightning activity. VLF
              observations at Palmer will provide crucial support to a separately funded (by
              the NSF/OPP) program, operating a VLF beacon transmitter at South Pole.
              Reception of the beacon signal at Palmer Station will allow the continuous
              measurement of relativistic electron precipitation from the outer radiation
              belts, an important component of worldwide efforts to assess "space weather".
              The proposed program is a part of the international collaboration with Stanford
              observations at Palmer (PA), complemented by and coordinated with observations
              at the British station Rothera, the Brazilian base Commandante Ferraz on King
              George Island (through the collaboration with the Centro de Radio-Astronomia e
              Aplicacoes Espaciais of Brazil), and at Negev Desert in Israel supported by the
              University of Tel Aviv. The proposed program complements similar observations
              carried by Stanford University in the northern hemisphere under the support
              from the NSF Atmospheric Sciences Division. Coordinated measurements in both
              the northern and southern hemispheres are needed to study the geomagnetic
              conjugacy of the phenomena under investigation.

