Title       : GOALI: Tandem Computational and Experimental Combinatorics for Controlled
               Crystallization of Polymorphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0233696

Award Number: 0233696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Ward wardx004@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lian Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract	


Proposal Title: 	GOALI: Tandem Computational and Experimental
              Combinatorics for Controlled Crystallization of Polymorphs
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-0233696
Principal Investigator:	Michael
              Ward
Institution:			University of Minnesota


The objective of the project
              is to develop techniques for polymorph selection and control using appropriate
              epitaxial substrates.  Computational and experimental combinatorial techniques
              for polymorph discovery will be developed.  The different crystal forms that
              molecules adopt can affect their stability and function.  In the pharmaceutical
              industry considerable effort is expended to discover and characterize
              polymorphs, largely because of their impact on bioavailability and stability. 
              These university and industrial investigators will develop a strategy for
              controlling polymorphism that combines geometric lattice modeling of
              two-dimensional epitaxy and experimental combinatorics, with the aim of
              identifying substrates that are effective for selective crystallization of
              polymorphs. A key element of this work involves the use of lattice modeling to
              build substrate libraries of experimentally manageable size, based on
              crystalline organic and inorganic materials, expected to produce specific
              polymorphs.   Using X-ray diffraction and spectroscopic methods, these
              libraries will be screened for polymorph selectivity and their overall ability
              to improve crystallization yields. These studies will be accompanied by
              real-time in situ atomic force microscopy, performed directly in
              crystallization media on selected substrates, which will provide direct
              visualization of nucleation and crystal growth and confirm the role of epitaxy.
              The project will lead to rational and systematic control of polymorphism,
              elucidation of the fundamental principles governing this phenomenon, discovery
              of new polymorphs, new protocols for crystallization, and improved
              crystallization processes. The ultimate implementation of this work will
              provide an important tool to aid in the design and scale-up of selected crystal
              forms for pharmaceutical compounds.  Training students in this area is vital to
              keeping the competitive advantage of US industry.  The PIs will also provide
              computation tools to the community in the form of software.


