Title       : Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms Governing Cnidarian/Algal Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0233363

Award Number: 0233363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia M. Weis weisv@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the cellular and molecular interactions between
              cnidarians, such as reef-building corals, and their single-celled symbiotic
              algae that reside within their tissues.  Weis' group will identify and
              characterize genes in host corals and closely related anemones that are turned
              on specifically due to their symbiosis with algae.  The time-course for the
              expression of these so-called symbiosis genes during the initial establishment
              of the cnidarian host and symbiotic algae partnership will be explored in
              microscopic larval corals that acquire their algae from their environment, by
              ingesting them with food.  New state-of-the-art genetic techniques will be used
              to block the correct functioning of the symbiosis gene products.  This approach
              will help determine the role that symbiosis genes play in the regulation and
              maintenance of coral/algal symbioses.
Symbiotic associations between two or
              more unrelated organisms are found throughout every ecosystem.  These
              relationships encompass a spectrum of lifestyles, from mutualistic to
              parasitic, and from extracellular to intracellular.  Among the most significant
              marine mutualisms are those between corals and their algal symbionts, which
              together form both the trophic and structural foundation of the entire coral
              reef ecosystem.  A great deal is known about corals on a macroscale level, such
              as their global distribution and ecology.  However, microscale processes of
              inter-partner communication and regulation that occur during the initiation,
              establishment, and maintenance of these symbioses remain largely unexplored.  A
              lack of basic knowledge of these processes has hampered efforts to understand
              the global phenomenon of coral bleaching, which is the result of the breakdown
              of the symbiosis.  Widespread bleaching, which leads to coral death and reef
              degradation, is considered a serious environmental threat.  This study will
              take a multileveled approach to the examination of the events surrounding the
              initiation, establishment and maintenance of symbioses between corals and their
              symbiotic algae.









