Title       : Structural and Electronic Properties of Insulating Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a0233925

Award Number: 0233925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Vanderbilt dhv@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1753,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports fundamental theoretical research on the structural and
              electronic properties of insulating materials, with special emphasis on
              development of novel techniques for the computation and analysis of these
              properties.  The objectives are to continue the development of accurate,
              efficient, robust and informative algorithms for computing the electronic
              structure of complex materials, and to apply these methods to study several
              important material systems, especially dielectric oxides.

The context of the
              computational work will primarily be the plane-wave pseudupotential approach to
              density-functional theory, with the use of ultrasoft pseudopotentials where
              appropriate.  The novel methodologies that will be applied and developed are
              ones that give a local real-space picture of electronic and dielectric
              properties via theoretical concepts connected with Wannier functions, electric
              polarization, and response to electric fields.

Applications will be focused
              mainly on insulating oxides, either having strong potential for applications,
              or else having unusual dielectric properties.  A primary thrust will be to
              study so-called "high-K" dielectrics, i.e., insulating oxides having dielectric
              constants about 20 or higher that could be candidates for the next generation
              of microelectronics.  A secondary emphasis will be on a newly discovered class
              of materials having enormous static dioelectric constants.  While recent work
              by ourselves and others tends to point to an extrinsic mechanism for this
              enormous dielectric response, there are also anomalies associated with the
              lattice dielectric response that deserve further investigation.  We also plan
              to carry forward our previous interests in wide-gap III-V semiconductors by
              studying screw dislocation in GaN.
%%%
This award supports theoretical
              computational research on materials.  The reserach will further develop novel
              computational techniques to better understand the electronic and structural
              properties of materials.  
These state-of-the-art techniques will then be
              applied to materials having unusual electrical properties.  Successful
              completion of this fundamental research will yield new computational methods
              and a better understanding of materials properties of interest to the
              microelectronics industry.
***

