Title       : SBIR Phase I: Nanofluidic Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction
               Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0233051

Award Number: 0233051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Broadley sbroadley@broadleyjames.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broadley-James Corporation
	      19 Thomas
	      Irvine, CA  92618    949/829-5524

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
              the technical
feasibility of a nanofluidic flowing liquid junction (NFLJ)
              reference electrode. These electrodes, because
of their low flow and stable
              potential, can operate for years without human attention. The objective is
              to
develop a reference electrode with an invariant potential, a flow rate of
              <100 nanoliters per hour, and a
reservoir of 5 ml sufficient for 5 years of
              continuous operation. I. This nanofluidic device will operate at two orders of
              magnitude lower flow rate than the microfluidic liquid junction reference
              electrodes currently under development. The reduced size, and extraordinary
              long lifetimes due to exceedingly small electrolyte consumption, will make
              possible handheld pH and potentiometric sensors with a combined shelf life and
              operating life of up to five years without recalibration or refilling. These
              miniature reference electrodes are being developed for use with existing
              portable, handheld, commercial instruments. They will find application in
              laboratory research, environmental monitoring, and detection of chemical and
              biological agents.

Commercially, a pH sensor with an NFLJ reference
              electrode offers significantly greater measurement precision over a longer time
              than any other pH sensor on the market. The precision pH sensor market is
              involved in measurements for regulatory compliance and for matters of process
              validation. This market segment pays a premium to obtain the most precise pH
              sensors available for applications that must withstand the scrutiny of Federal,
              State, and local regulatory agencies. The annual market for precision pH
              sensors is
200,000 units and $45 million in sales. This market segment will
              readily respond to any new sensor
technology that results in more precise
              measurements over longer periods. The NFLJ pH sensor has the
potential to
              become the new standard for such precision pH measurement applications. In
              addition, the
new sensor will require less calibration and maintenance, which
              will significantly lower the cost of
ownership and operation.


