Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Archaeology of Culture Contact in Northern
               Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0233057

Award Number: 0233057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8502               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce rajoyce@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Ms. Kira Blaisdell-Sloan will collect data for her doctoral dissertation under
              the supervision of Dr. Rosemary Joyce.  Ms. Blaisdell-Sloan will continue her
              archaeological excavations at the site of Rancho Ires, located in the Ulua
              River Valley, in Honduras.  Rancho Ires was occupied continuously from the
              Postclassic (c. AD1400) to Late Colonial period (c. AD1800).  This long
              occupational span is unusual for colonial period indigenous sites in Honduras.
              Such long term occupation allows archaeologists to explore the changing nature
              of contact to colonial period life through the archaeological examination of
              differences in architecture, diet, trade goods, and locally produced goods both
              between different households at a given time and within a given households over
              multiple generations.  This project will use an "agent-centered" approach to
              examine the varied and changing strategies of cultural retention and identity
              creation employed by individuals and groups of individuals living at Rancho
              Ires as their traditional social and economic networks were disrupted and new
              ones formed.

An "agent-centered approach" will place a critical focus upon
              the strategic choices that people (as individuals and groups) made as they
              interacted with colonial powers beyond their control. Rancho Ires provides an
              ideal situation to use such an approach. Ethnohistorical research indicates
              that the Ulua Valley, one of the most fertile river valleys in Central America,
              was of considerable inter-regional economic importance before the arrival of
              the Spanish.  When the Spanish arrived and attempted to dominate the area, they
              were met with hostility, and conflict ensued.  The seat of this resistance was
              a town called Quitamay.  Based on ethnohistorical and archaeological research,
              the archaeological site of Rancho Ires appears to be the town identified in the
              documentary as Quitamay.  Despite their initial rejection of the Spanish and
              the disruptions caused by Spanish domination, documentary and preliminary
              archaeological evidence indicates that the settlement continued to have
              dealings with the Spanish.  To address the dynamic nature of the intercultural
              contact experienced by the residents of the community of Quitamay from an
              agent-centered perspective, this project will focus on the domestic group. 
              Though there have been explicitly agent-centered approaches to culture contact
              and colonialism, as yet these have not been rooted in household archaeology. 
              However, the household is the finest scale at which we, as archaeologists, can
              identify discrete cooperative groups.  These then will be linked to larger
              perspectives, allowing for an understanding of the relationship between
              individuals, groups communities and cultures.

The significance of this
              research is threefold.  First, it will provide the data to test the efficacy of
              an agent-centered approach to contact and colonization in a household context.
              Second, it will contribute specific archaeological knowledge of under
              documented colonial settings in Latin America. Beyond being a matter of simple
              historical curiosity, our understanding of these early contacts between
              Aboriginal and European people is important because they shaped many subsequent
              developments in the countries in which they occurred.  In Spanish America in
              particular, current race relations, systems of inequality, social
              stratification and many issues of identity relate back to the original colonial
              setting. Finally, as a doctoral project, this project will also aid in the
              training of a young scientist with great potential.

