Title       : Low-level Turbulent Zones and Associated Rotors in the Lee of Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0233165

Award Number: 0233165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf F. Hertenstein herten@co-ra.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Poulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Kuettner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research utilizes data from numerical simulations and field observations to
              evaluate and extend existing dynamical understanding of low-level turbulent
              zones (LLTZ) and rotors associated with mountain waves.  In recent decades,
              LLTZ have been left largely unstudied, despite their potential feedbacks on
              mountain wave characteristics and structure, their influence on destructive
              down-slope windstorms, dispersion, and the danger they present to aircraft
              operations throughout the world.  Advances in mesoscale models and computing
              power have made high-resolution simulations of this atmospheric phenomenon
              feasible, thereby creating the opportunity for potentially large advances in
              understanding of these important counterparts to mountain waves.  
 
The
              authors hypothesize the following: 1) The most intense and turbulent LLTZ occur
              in association with high-amplitude mountain waves; less intense LLTZ form in
              association with trapped lee waves.  2) The severity of LLTZ depends on the
              horizontal vorticity budget, which in turn depends on details of the upstream
              environment; hence the LLTZ intensity can be quantified and forecast.  3) The
              diurnally evolving boundary layer can significantly modify the spatial
              structure of LLTZ, which then modifies the overlying mountain wavelength and
              amplitude. 
 
The research will employ numerical simulations of increasing
              complexity.  Simulations will use fine resolution, with grid spacing of
              O[100m], since most previous numerical mountain wave studies have used grid
              spacing too coarse to adequately capture details within LLTZ.  The work begins
              with two-dimensional simulations initialized using a single upstream sounding
              with no moisture and using no surface heat fluxes.  Realistic surface heating
              will be added over a diurnal cycle to more completely study the boundary layer
              effects on LLTZ.  Recognizing the likely importance of three-dimensional
              effects, a series of idealized three-dimensional experiments similar to those
              in two dimensions will be run.  Finally, the validity of the stated hypotheses
              will be explored by investigating the role of changing synoptic conditions
              superimposed on the diurnal cycle via a select number of fully
              three-dimensional case studies.  Wherever possible observations from past and
              upcoming field campaigns will be utilized to validate conclusions obtained from
              simulations.  

It is expected that this study will yield a far more complete
              understanding of LLTZ and their relation to the overall mountain-wave system,
              and result in benefits within the atmospheric science, aviation, and air
              pollution disciplines.
