Title       : Collaborative Research (NSF-CNPq): Application Level Adaptation and Control for
               Retrieval and Delivery of Continuous Media over the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0233979

Award Number: 0233979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leana Golubchik leana@cs.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1085,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Future networked multimedia information systems will carry a wide variety
              of applications including digital libraries, video, audio and image services,
              distance learning and collaboration, networked virtual environments, and
              entertainment.  The main characteristics of multimedia applications that lead
              to difficulties in end-to-end systems design are that they have very large
              bandwidth and storage requirements, with vastly different performance and
              reliability requirements, often coupled with real-time constraints.  Along with
              these characteristics, the highly interreliability requirements, often coupled
              with real-time constraints.  Along with these characteristics, the highly
              interactive nature of a variety of multimedia applications, resulting in fairly
              unpredictable workloads, makes the design and evaluation of networked
              multimedia information systems an exceptionally challenging problem.           
                                                                      In this proposal, we
              outline research on three aspects of this problem:                             
                                                (1) the design and evaluation of server
              resource allocation algorithms for CM  servers in order to retrieve information
              efficiently and according to the QoS demanded by the application;              
                                           (2) the development of performance evaluation
              techniques for evaluating new server designs.                          (3) the
              participants of this project bring expertise from a wide variety of areas:
              databases, distance learning, multi-media, networking, and performance
              evaluation to bear on problems in these areas.                       Another
              important feature of this proposal is that the participants have available four
              prototypes of state of the art multimedia systems:  the Virtual World Data
              Server (VWDS) developed at UCLA: the prototype of a Video-on-Demand server
              developed in Brazil as part cooperative research project among Brazilian
              institutions; and the Multimedia Asynchronous Networked Individualized
              Courseware (MANIC) and the Internet Multimedia Proxy (IMP) both developed at
              UMass.                                                                         
                             These applications will be used to motivate the development of
              new algorithms for retrieving information and for maintaining the desired
              quality of service after sending the data over a wide area network.  They will
              also form the basis of the many experimental and analytical studies that will
              be performed to evaluate these new algorithms.  To aid in this evaluation, our
              group also developed three performance evaluation and modeling tools:  a
              state-of-the-art tool for constructing performance and reliability models
              (Tangram-II) developed in Brazil jointly with UCLA; a symbolic model checking
              tool (VERUS): and a tool which facilitates design, development, and subsequent
              performance evaluation of designs of multimedia storage hierarchies
              (ViPEr-HiSS) under development at UMD.                                         
                                                                                       Thus,
              the environment of our labs as well the long distance among them will provide a
              unique testbed for this type of an evaluation due to the drastically different
              connectivities available to our applications, from gigabit low utilized links
              to intercontinental congested links.                                           
                                                  
The proposed research represents a
              fundamentally important step in the design and performance evaluation of next
              generation information servers and the networked applications that will operate
              on top of them.  As a result of our research we expect to have a better
              understanding of how storage server resource management policies, channel
              allocation policies, and network adaptation policies interact to satisfy the
              required QoS of CM  applications, despite the fairly unpredictable network
              delays.

