Title       : SOFTWARE: Collaborative Research: Scalable Software Systems for Large Internet
               Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0233858

Award Number: 0233858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laxmi N. Bhuyan bhuyan@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Several applications over the Internet, such as script and cryptographic
              processing, database management, and multimedia processing, involve processing
              of secure, computation-intensive, multimedia, and high-bandwidth information.
              These applications require large-scale scientific computing, reliability, and
              high-bandwidth at the server nodes. This joint project between two campuses of
              the University of California (Davis and Riverside) develops a scalable
              distributed software system architecture, where the major functionalities
              required in the Internet servers are partitioned, and resources are allocated
              on the basis of their needs. The amount of computation and architectural
              requirements of these applications are determined through actual execution on
              servers. New techniques are developed to handle system-level issues like
              admission control, functionality distribution, content management, traffic
              management, and dynamic reconfiguration of resources, inter-process
              communication, and lightweight I/O. They are implemented on a prototype system,
              which is built using a combination of the available off-the-shelf components
              and special-purpose devices. The outcome of the project will impact the
              development and management of future large-scale Internet servers. The project
              is conducted in collaboration with researchers at Intel Corporation, and would
              have a potential for future technology transfer.


