Title       : Inorganic Deuterium Effects Upon Aggregates Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0233811

Award Number: 0233811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergiu M. Gorun Sergiu_Gorun@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental, but yet unrecognized property of hydrogen isotopes, namely the
              deuterium-induced generation of new and/or morphologically different inorganic
              materials will be investigated.  This effect manifests itself in the aqueous
              assembly of supramolecular structures. An aggregate exhibiting a structurally
              rigid, magnetic core, and interacting, hydrated diamagnetic ions at its
              periphery will be developed as a model. The initial demonstration of a link
              between isotope composition and supramolecular topology will be used to explore
              the nature of chemical and physical factors responsible for the deuterium
              effect.  Technical issues to be investigated will focus on varying
              independently the hydrogen isotope, and several parameters viewed as
              potentially significant for tuning the assembly of large aggregates. Variable
              parameters include: (i) the ionic strength of the solution; (ii) ionic radii of
              ions linking aggregates into supramolecular structures; (iii) concentration of
              sodium chloride in water, a salt that is incorporated to a higher extent when
              deuterium is the solvent.  The aggregates formed in water behave magnetically
              like molecules, while their deuterium counterparts exhibit solid-state,
              Neel-like points.  This difference could be due to a bona fide formation of a
              solid, in case the magnetic ions oxidation states in the two aggregates are
              identical, or the deuterium complex may be a molecular magnet, in case the
              oxidation states are different.  This question will be answered, inter alia, by
              x-ray absorption spectroscopy determinations of valence states.  The answer
              will also shed light, if warranted, on the sensitivity of  oxidation states to
              an isotope change. The hydrogen isotopomer - chemical parameters relationships
              will be used to rationally design new solids with predictable structural and,
              perhaps, magnetic features.

Mixing two chemicals in water can give a
              predictive result, for example, compound A.  Surprisingly, when A is a large
              molecule, using heavy water results in a related, but not identical product, B.
               The structural differences, especially in the way A and B assemble to form
              large "supramolecules", also result in magnetic differences of the type
              expected to distinguish a molecule from a solid. Elucidating the chemical
              factors responsible for these differences, and ways to rationally design new
              solids based upon an understanding of   deuterium effects may well give rise to
              new synthetic paths to novel materials exhibiting new physical and chemical
              properties of high interest to the commercial sector. 

