Title       : Microwave Evaluation and Modeling of Rapid Chloride Ingress in Mortar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0233243

Award Number: 0233243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57181              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reza Zoughi zoughir@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly E. Kurtis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Steel corrosion and the resulting deterioration of reinforced concrete
              structures is one of the primary causes of increasing damage to infrastructure.
              Corrosion of the reinforcing steel is implicated as a cause of damage to the
              majority of the 226,000 reinforced concrete bridges described by the Federal
              Highway Administration (FHWA) as deficient.  In 1991, the United States
              Department of Transportation estimated rehabilitation costs for these damaged
              bridges at $90.9 billion.  Concrete normally provides reinforcing steel with
              adequate corrosion protection.  When steel is encased in concrete, a protective
              iron oxide film forms at the steel-concrete interface due to the high pH of the
              concrete.  However, the presence of a sufficient concentration of chloride ions
              can compromise the passive layer.  In the presence of moisture, the steel will
              corrode.  

Development of a reliable test method for in-situ measurement of
              the chloride ion penetration depth and concentration in concrete structures
              would be invaluable to the concrete and construction industry.  From an
              economic standpoint, accurate measurements of the concentration of chlorides
              and penetration depth in concrete structures, would allow agencies to more
              effectively allocate funding for repair of those structures with the most
              critical needs.  Thus, the overall objective of the proposed investigation is
              to gain a more complete understanding of the fundamental implications of
              microwave measurements of cement-based materials exposed to chloride solutions.
              

A methodical research plan is proposed in order to correlate microwave
              measurements to the salt content and chloride penetration depth in mortar. 
              Mortar samples will be cyclically ponded with salt solution.  After the samples
              are oven dried, a very accurate and sensitive microwave characterization
              technique will be used to evaluate their dielectric properties using four
              independent complex reflection and transmission coefficients.  This information
              is then used in conjunction with a discrete layered electromagnetic model and a
              dielectric mixing formula to render information about the salt volume content
              as a function of depth into the samples.  This process is repeated for a number
              of soaking cycles, giving information about salt penetration gradient and total
              content as a function of depth into the sample, sample make-up and soaking
              cycle.  

The anticipated outcome of this proposed investigation constitutes
              a significant and comprehensive leap forward in the path to evaluating chloride
              ingress in reinforced concrete structures.


