Title       : Symbolic Computation and Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0233610

Award Number: 0233610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 29,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doron Zeilberger zeilberg@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Doron Zeilberger proposes to continue to develop methodologies for harnessing
              the great potential of Symbolic Computation to do research in Combinatorics and
              related areas.  In particular he hopes to introduce new computational and
              conceptual frameworks that would extend the so-called Wilf-Zeilberger proof
              theory to much wider classes of identities and theorems.  He also proposes to
              continue his efforts in `Artificial Combinatorics', and develop algorithms for
              the discovery and {\it rigorous} proof of theorems in combinatorics whose
              complexity make them unfeasible for human proofs.  This research should be
              symbiotic, as it is expected that both the concrete results and  the underlying
              methodologies, would help computer algebra developers to improve and enhance
              their systems.

This research is in the general area of Combinatorics.  One
              of the goals of  Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how 
              discrete collections  of objects can be arranged.  The behavior of discrete
              systems is extremely  important to modern communications.  For example, the
              design of large networks, such as those occurring in  telephone systems, and
              the design of algorithms in  computer science deal with discrete sets of
              objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research.  This research is also
              in the general area of  Symbolic Computation, that attempts to teach computers
              to perform research that previously required extensive human resources. 
              Progress in this area promises to have important ramifications to science  and
              technology.

