Title       : Indigenous Navigation, Technology, and the Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0233967

Award Number: 0233967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarita C. Holbrook holbrook@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,7184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is an NSF Social and Economic Sciences grant in the history of science for
              "start-up" funds in support of research following the PI's two years as a NSF
              Minority Post-Doctoral Fellow.  It supports on a cost sharing basis with the
              PI's institution research infrastructure costs (travel and research assistance)
              to perform research in Africa on celestial navigation. The project utilizes
              findings from the NSF postdoctoral project on the celestial navigation
              practices at sites in Tunisia, Fiji, and the United States. A theory of the
              decision-making process behind the adoption or rejection of new technologies
              emerged from that research; the theory will be tested during this preliminary
              study.  Celestial navigation is a practical method of finding one's position by
              use of the stars, Sun, Moon, or other celestial bodies. The compass and the
              Global Positioning System (GPS) have spread globally and provide an accurate
              means of position determination. However, many cultures have rejected these
              technologies in favor of their traditional navigation methods including
              celestial navigation. This preliminary investigation seeks to document
              navigation practices at two sites in East Africa: Massawa, Eritrea, and Lamu
              Island, Kenya. At each site details of the local navigation methods and
              navigation equipment that is available will be recorded. If there is a
              celestial part to their navigation, then the following aspects of the
              navigators and their communities will be examined: how do people learn to
              navigate and are their techniques being taught to the next generation of
              navigators; what is the role of new navigation equipment and new techniques;
              how is the decision made as to whether to adopt or reject new navigation
              technologies; and what is the role of women in navigation? The methodology
              involves ethnographic field techniques including formal and informal interviews
              and participant observation. A record of local navigation methods and culture
              will be created via digital images, videotapes, field notes and sound
              recordings. In an effort to train students in the skills necessary to complete
              a multi-site research project, students will be asked to participate in several
              aspects of this project: archival research, fieldwork, preservation of
              materials, and documentation. In a continuing effort to increase the number of
              women and minorities in the sciences by offering courses focusing on
              non-Western cultures and scientific traditions, the results of this project
              will be incorporated into undergraduate courses on the anthropology of Africa
              and on the history of science, technology, and medicine of Africa. This project
              will increase our knowledge of African indigenous knowledge systems as well as
              make a positive contribution to the history of science, technology, and
              medicine in non-Western cultures. It will compare current navigation techniques
              with those recorded by Ibn Majid (in 1489 A.D.), adding another chapter to the
              history of navigation of Africa and the Indian Ocean. It will record for what
              appears to be the first time the navigation techniques of the Afar people of
              Eritrea.
