Title       : Molecular Design and 3-D Assembly for Coupled Electro-Optical Functionalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0233728

Award Number: 0233728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galen D. Stucky stucky@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley F. Chmelka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project targets nanoscale control of molecular assembly to create
              integrated, functional systems such that "every atom counts", i.e. the active
              volume and function is maximized relative to the atomic density.  The approach
              makes use of organized interfaces with high surface areas and amplification of
              response. The research is synthesis and processing focused to determine the
              molecular synthesis and 3 dimensional organization needed to structurally
              integrate hierarchical assembly with interacting electro-optic functionalities.
               Because of the ease of simultaneous synthesis and processing and the huge
              chemical diversity that is accessible through composition, inorganic
              modification, organic incorporation, and multidomain assembly, the potential
              significant technological applications are great.  In order to realize these
              possibilities, it is essential to be able to predictively design and control
              the multivariable kinetic and thermodynamic parameters that lead to the desired
              multiscale structure and functional properties.  The educational emphasis for
              undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers working on this project
              will include 1) the promotion of professional careers for female students and
              postdoctoral associates, 2) providing cutting edge collaborative
              interdisciplinary interactions and resources within the University of
              California scientific community, 3) personal exposure to leading research and
              educational programs in world-wide institutions, and 4) provision of summer
              "hands-on" training opportunities for K-12 and community college students.
              

The goal of this project is to enable, by controlled molecular assembly,
              the creation of multi-functional devices made up of thin films, coatings or
              fibers that have thickness' which are the diameter of a human hair or smaller.
              The thin films, coatings and fibers will contain self-assembled, 3-d patterned
              and interfaced functional components that are dimensioned on the molecular and
              nanoscale.  Synthesis and processing are carried out simultaneously to greatly
              reduce the expense and time normally associated with multi-step assembly.
              Commercial interest includes low-dielectric coatings, optical limiters,
              photovoltaics, photocatalysts, chemical and bio sensors, displays, microcavity
              lasers and laser arrays, battery electrolytes, and optical data storage. The
              educational emphasis for undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers
              working on this project includes the promotion of professional careers for
              female students and postdoctoral associates, providing cutting edge
              collaborative interdisciplinary interactions and resources within the
              University of California scientific community, personal exposure to leading
              research and educational programs in world-wide institutions, and provision of
              summer "hands-on" training opportunities for K-12 and community college
              students. 






