Title       : Collaborative Research: Teleautonomy in Networked Robotic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0233314

Award Number: 0233314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Spong m-spong@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will address the interplay among various robotic control and
              networking problems focusing on the issue of teleautonomy.  The research
              addresses both the problems of remote assembly with minimal human intervention
              and direct teleoperation.  Both (semi-)autonomous and teleoperated systems as
              described herein will be important to  realize the goal of assembling and
              operating Space Solar Power (SSP) systems. For systems in earth orbit and for
              human coordination of multiple networked robotic systems, direct teleoperation
              is a viable and attractive option, while greater autonomy is crucial for more
              remote assembly systems, such as lunar based systems where longer time delays
              make direct teleoperation difficult.  A significant level of autonomy, i.e.
              local intelligence, will also be required due to the possibly unreliable
              communication networks over which these systems will be controlled.

The
              present research seeks to integrate robotic control algorithms with
              communication networking research, along with issues associated with projecting
              and magnifying human capabilities to facilitate assembly in space structures. 
              The technical issues include bilateral teleoperation, the reliability of the
              communications links, and the coordination of complex assembly tasks. 
              Bilateral teleoperation will be studied using passivity-based nonlinear control
              along with logic-based switching control.  The reliability of the communication
              links will be studied to mitigate the effects of unknown and time-varying
              delays and to incorporate recent ideas from networked control systems (NCS). 
              Finally the issue of coordination will be studied using concepts from
              statistical learning theory that borrow and generalize ideas from Internet
              protocols.

More broadly, this research will have important applications
              beyond teleautonomous robotic systems.  We expect to contribute to the growing
              area of networked control systems, to incorporate our research in areas such as
              control in hazardous and remote environments, surveillance, search and rescue
              robots, autonomous vehicles and autonomous locomotion systems, haptic devices,
              remote construction, and remote surgery.

