Title       : SGER: Restoring Assumptions of Safety and Control Following the 2001 Terrorist
               Attacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0233978

Award Number: 0233978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne C. Thompson sthompson@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The terrorist attacks of September 2001 were not just an assault on the physical
              infrastructure of the U.S. -- they also represented a blow to the sense of
              safety and security of millions of Americans. The attacks were personally
              salient to all Americans because of the extensive media coverage, the choice of
              Americans as targets, and the likelihood of further attacks. Thus it seems
              likely that the majority of Americans who were not victims themselves suffered
              significant effects from the attacks including anxiety and reduced personal
              control, a challenge to their sense of meaningfulness in life, and a sense of
              vulnerability regarding airline passenger travel, the water supply, and
              anthrax. Although some of these effects have abated as most individuals found
              ways to restore their adaptive assumptions of control, invulnerability, and
              meaning, it seems likely that many individuals remain in a heightened state of
              anxiety and have not found useful ways to regain a sense of security and
              meaning. The long-term consequences for those who remain anxious are a lowered
              quality of life, including increased stress and restrictions in lifestyle. The
              goal of this small grant for exploratory research is to explore how most people
              in the general public have restored adaptive assumptions of control,
              invulnerability, and meaning following the terrorist attacks. Through
              open-ended interviews and questionnaires, the cognitive and behavioral
              strategies to restore control following the attacks will be identified. Based
              on "Assumptive Worlds Theory," it is predicted that the use of strategies to
              restore a sense of control will be associated with higher current levels of
              adaptive assumptions and lower anxiety. Furthermore, it is expected that
              success in restoring assumptions will be associated with prior resolution of a
              victimization, a sense of general perceived control, and the use of social
              support in times of crisis. It is critically important that public decision
              makers and Americans themselves understand the process of restoring adaptive
              assumptions following a nationwide disaster. This research will help
              individuals understand their reactions to the events and will identify adaptive
              responses that reduce anxiety and disruption to everyday life. This practical
              information about common responses and adaptive reactions to the attacks will
              be disseminated to the public through the popular media and made available to
              public health officials through the professional literature. At the same time,
              this study extends theories about personal traumatic life events to individuals
              who are not victims themselves, but fellow members of a targeted group, and can
              establish the utility of Assumptive Worlds Theory for understanding these
              widespread reactions to a national disaster.

