Title       : Workshop: New Departures in Structural Geology and Tectonics, September 2002,
               Denver
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0233679

Award Number: 0233679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25925              (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Pollard dpollard@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recognition of new opportunities for research in structural geology and
              tectonics, brought into focus by recent technological developments, new
              quantitative data sets, and both conceptual and theoretical advances, motivate
              a workshop to consider the future directions of science in this field. These
              new opportunities also bring into focus long standing questions in this area of
              research about the relative merits of descriptive versus quantitative methods,
              case studies of particular regions versus experimental studies of particular
              mechanisms, kinematic versus mechanical modeling, and historical versus
              process-oriented objectives. Funding is requested to organize and carry out the
              workshop, and to prepare and distribute a white paper summarizing new
              departures for research in structural geology and tectonics. Participants in
              the workshop, who will prepare the white paper, represent the community of
              scholars in this field in the broadest disciplinary sense. They will solicit
              input and comments from peers and colleagues to seek balanced and
              representative statements about future scientific directions in this field. It
              is anticipated that the white paper will help to set the course of research in
              structural geology and tectonics in the next decade, that it will provide
              criteria to help evaluate the intellectual merits of proposed research in this
              area, that it will help identify areas of investigation and methodologies ripe
              for the most rapid advances and scientific breakthroughs, and that it will
              provide guidance to instructors for the selection of topics and the discussion
              of methodologies in the classroom. The white paper will be distributed in hard
              copy form to the NSF EAR Division professional personnel, and to appropriate
              professional personnel in charge of research grants at the USGS and the DoE.
              The white paper will be made available to members of the Structural Geology and
              Tectonics Division of the GSA, and to members of appropriate divisions of the
              AGU through a website.
