Title       : Conference: Annual Meetings of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists, to be
               held in Pacific Grove, California, December, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0233365

Award Number: 0233365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Meeks jcmeeks@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the  annual meetings of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists
              (WCBP) is to 
foster communication  among  established investigators,
              postdoctoral fellows and  graduate 
students working in the broad area of
              microbial physiology.  Started in the 1940.s by C. B. van 
Niel for his
              associates on the West Coast, participants now come from Canada, the Midwest
              and 
the East Coast of the USA. This is one of the few conferences in North
              America that have 
retained  a focus on microbial physiology, with a primary,
              but not exclusive, emphasis on the 
physiology of prokaryotic microorganisms.
              The conference  especially  provides a forum for 
graduate  students  and 
              postdoctoral  fellows  to  present  and  discuss  the  results  of  their 
              research 
projects  utilizing  experimental  systems  ranging  from  model 
              organisms  to  those  of  specific 
relevance to pathogenic and environmental
              microbiology. The conference has been held 
continuously since 1963 over a
              weekend in the middle of December at the Asilomar Conference 
Center in
              Pacific Grove, California. 
 
The annual meeting is announced in August and
              September by direct mailings and by posting on 
the WCBP web site
              (http://wcbacterialphysiologists.ucdavis.edu). The meeting is organized with
              
four formal sessions (Friday evening, Saturday morning and evening, and
              Sunday morning) and 
four unstructured informal sessions (Friday afternoon and
              late evening, and Saturday afternoon 
and late evening).  Each of the four
              formal sessions is initiated with a 45 min overview lecture. 
The overview
              lectures  are endowed by the Genentech Corporation and  identified as the John
              
Ingraham  Lectures in  Microbial Physiology. The John  Ingraham  Lecturers
              may  be principle 
investigators, postdoctoral fellows or graduate students.
              They are selected by the conference co-
directors on the basis of scientific
              merit and current high profile research topic of relevance to 
microbial
              physiologists. The overview lectures are followed by offered papers of 15 or 20
              min 
duration. Typically, 7-9 and 5-7 offered papers are scheduled  for the 
              morning and evening 
sessions,  respectively,  depending  on  the  number  of 
              abstracts  submitted.  No  graduate  student 
submitting  an  abstract  has 
              been  denied  a  chance  to  present  her/his  data  and  conclusions.  A
              
registration fee covers lodging, food, meeting room expenses and support for
              the informal 
sessions. A differential between the registration fees for 
              graduate students and all other 
participants has traditionally been
              preserved. NSF funding will be applied to maintain at least a  
20% lower
              registration fee for graduate students and go toward support of poster
              sessions, if the 
participants desire such sessions. 
