Title       : Research Starter Grant: Enrichment Culture Studies of Anaerobic Methane
               Oxidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0233946

Award Number: 0233946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Valentine valentine@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1156,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               
Intellectual Merit 
The  anaerobic  oxidation  of  methane  is  a 
              microbially-mediated  process  by  which  the 
reduction of sulfate is coupled
              to the oxidation of methane.  This process is prevalent on a 
global scale and
              is estimated to consume between 12 and 50% the net modern 
atmospheric methane
              flux (70 to 300 Tg per  year).  The microbes responsible for this 
process are
              important as methane is a potent greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, and their
              
metabolism  prevents  large  quantities  of  methane  in  the  Earth  from 
              reaching  the 
atmosphere.  Despite the importance of this process, the
              responsible organisms have 
never been cultured in the laboratory.  Recent
              studies conducted in our lab indicate that 
sustained growth of these
              organisms is possible  in the laboratory  given the appropriate 
conditions,
              especially elevated pressures of methane (50 to 150  atmospheres).   We
              
therefore propose to  continue growth of these  enrichment  cultures, to 
              characterize the 
microbial community composition and physiology of the
              enrichments, and to isolate the 
methane oxidizers.  Specifically, we propose
              to:  
 
1)  Characterize changes in microbial community structure as well as
              in methane and 
sulfate metabolism during growth of successive enrichment
              cultures, 
 
2) Characterize growth of the CH4-oxidizing archaea in the
              enrichment cultures 
including species-specific analyses of growth rates,
              carbon conversion efficiencies, 
growth morphologies, and the impact of
              methane partial pressure,   
 
3)  Quantify isotope fractionation factors
              (for  13C  and  2H) associated with methane 
oxidation and lipid biosynthesis,
              and 
 
4)  Isolate the responsible organisms using modified roll tubes at
              elevated (100 
atmosphere) methane levels. 
 
Broader Impacts 
In addition
              to the studies proposed above, this work will also lead to development of new
              
methods for culturing strictly anaerobic bacteria and archaea at low
              temperatures with 
high gas pressures.  These methods promise to enhance
              infrastructure for microbiological 
research. 
 
The proposed studies  also
              promise to  enhance our understanding of anaerobic methane 
oxidation and to
              lay a foundation for future studies.  The ability to grow the responsible
              
organisms in the laboratory will allow for a variety of biochemical, genetic,
              physiological 
and molecular studies of this environmentally important
              process.  Key questions that may 
be addressed in future studies include: 1)
              how is the stable methane molecule activated in 
the  absence  of  oxygen?, 
              2)  can  this  chemistry  be  applied  to  methane  cracking  in  an
              
industrial setting?, 3) what is the evolutionary history of anaerobic methane
              oxidation and 
how does it relate to the evolution of Earth.s climate system?,
              and 4) is the physiology of 
the isolate consistent with environmental
              observations of anaerobic methane oxidation?  
Understanding the physiology of
              these organisms and isolating them in the laboratory are 
the first steps in
              answering these and other important questions.   
