Title       : Transition Metal Oxides with Correlated Electronic Properties: Synthesis and
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0233697

Award Number: 0233697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Greenblatt martha@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research project is a close interaction between the design and
              synthesis of new compounds, detailed characterization of the physical
              properties and understanding the structure-property relationships.  This
              research project will provide the basis for discovering interesting new
              materials leading to novel phenomena and useful applications. The synthesis and
              characterization of transition metal (B) perovskites (ABO3; A = rare earth,
              alkali earth, alkali metal ions), double perovskites (AA'BB'O6) and related
              quasi-low-dimensional (LD) Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phases [(AO)(ABO3)n; n = 1,
              2, 3], and pyrochlore-based (A2B2O7) oxides with strongly correlated electronic
              interactions provide an opportunity to discover new materials with interesting
              properties. The research project is a systematic study of unique synthetic
              routes for the stabilization of new transition metal perovskites, LD RP phases
              and pyrochlore-type compounds.  Crystal growth of new and promising phases
              whenever possible will be attempted and the characterization of properties by a
              battery of physical measurements will be carried out. A major focus of the
              research is the training of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students
              in state-of-the-art reseach methods in solid state chemistry and materials
              science. 

The synthesis and characterization of novel transition metal
              oxides with important electrical and magnetic properties is emphasized for
              applications in the electronic and communication industries, for example as
              possible computer memory chip components, sensors, and superconducting elements
              in imaging devices. Moreover, the results of these investigations will enhance
              fundamental understanding of the factors that determine material properties,
              which will enable the design and control of new unique materials by chemistry.
              The training of Postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in
              state-of-the-art reseach methods in solid state chemistry and materials science
              will be emphasized. The next generation of well-trained solid state chemists
              and materials scientists is essentail for maintaining the leadership of US
              technology in the 21st century.



