Title       : WCR: Vegetation Control of Ecohydrologic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0233643

Award Number: 0233643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachael G. Craig                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan G. Phillips nathan@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Friedl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guido D. Salvucci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,7241,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0233643
Phillips

As a major currency in the economy of terrestrial
              ecosystems, water is acquired, saved, and spent much like money in human
              economies.  Like human use of financial resources, vegetation does not
              generally take up and release water at the same instantaneous rate, but rather
              buffers supply of and demand for water by banking this critical resource in
              internal storage organs.  Understanding how and when vegetation captures,
              stores, and transports water from roots to and out of foliage is critical to
              quantifying diverse eco-hydrologic functions such as watershed buffering of
              rainfall-runoff relationships and flood responses, and ecosystem uptake of
              atmospheric carbon dioxide. This study examines the physiological controls
              exerted by vegetation on forest-atmosphere water transport, at Harvard Forest,
              Massachusetts.  The specific objective of this proposal is to quantify, using a
              novel diagnostic method, how forest vegetation responds hydraulically to
              variation in environmental stimuli.  The methodology used here imposes
              short-lived disturbances of humidity, light and rainfall on canopies and root
              systems, and then traces the propagation of these perturbations through trees
              and soil.  This .ripple. effect contains the integrated signature of key
              hydraulic properties and processes within vegetation, that govern the overall
              control that vegetation exerts on ecosystem hydrology.  This novel methodology
              is highly manipulative and produces large signal to noise ratios for analysis,
              but does not cause irreversible ecological disturbances, such as damage or
              destruction of plant roots, stems, and branches.  Most importantly, this
              methodology will yield fundamental insights into the dynamic relationships and
              feedbacks among vegetation properties and physiology, atmospheric forcing, and
              evaporative fluxes from forests.  Finally, this project provides broad
              educational impacts by integrating research with focused educational activities
              in three existing programs:

