Title       : Freshwater Bivalve Morphometrics as a Means of Investigating Hydrological
               Conditions During the Hypsithermal Climatic Interval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0233837

Award Number: 0233837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28464              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan Peacock peacock@anthro.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Evan Peacock will undertake a
              pilot study aimed at developing a new method for reconstructing past river
              conditions.  The method involves measuring changes in the size and shape of
              freshwater mussel shells over time.  Freshwater mussels display a considerable
              amount of variation in shell characteristics.  Upstream forms are typically
              small and have pronounced shell sculpture in the form of ridges, knobs,
              pustules, and other traits.  The same species become larger and less sculptured
              with downstream distance.  This is a direct response to environmental
              conditions, as larger size and a smoother shell allow better anchoring in
              stronger currents.  Presumably, significant changes in climate should have
              altered stream conditions in the past.  Those changed conditions should be
              reflected in changes in mussel shells from archaeological sites.  The
              Hypsithermal climatic interval was a warm, dry period that lasted from
              approximately 7,000 to 5,000 years ago.  Its effects on prehistoric cultures in
              the southeastern United States are currently poorly understood.  Some
              researchers believe that streams were lower due to decreased precipitation,
              meaning that riverine resources such as mussel beds became more available for
              exploitation.  Other researchers believe that dryness led to decreased
              vegetation on uplands, leading to increased erosion that smothered mussel beds
              and covered gravel beds from which rock for stone tools had been taken.  

To
              investigate the effect of the Hypsithermal on Southeastern rivers, Dr. Peacock
              will examine mussel shells from the Vaughn Mound, a prehistoric site on the
              Tombigbee River in eastern Mississippi.  A Middle Archaic stratum has yielded
              shell from the Hypsithermal period, while a Late Woodland stratum provided
              shell from about 1,200 years ago.  Valves from the two distinct cultural layers
              will be compared in terms of size and sculpture.  If the river was
              significantly lower during the Hypsithermal, the shells should be smaller and
              more sculptured than during the Late Woodland period when essentially modern
              climatic conditions prevailed.  As an additional test of past hydrological
              conditions, shell chemical analysis will be conducted using an inductively
              coupled plasma mass spectrometer.  With increased stream flow, elements such as
              calcium and strontium become diluted in waterways:  such changes are
              discernible in shells, as mussels uptake elements in proportion to what is in
              the waterways.  If this pilot study is successful, it will establish a method
              that can be used worldwide to investigate past climatic effects on the
              landscape.  Many collections exist that could be analyzed in the manner
              described.  More accurate assessments of past climatic effects will have direct
              implications for better understanding past settlement patterns, subsistence
              strategies, raw material procurement, and a host of other issues.  New methods
              such this will help in mapping out the long-term effects of climate change on
              culture.

