Title       : American Desires for Ecological Independence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0233922

Award Number: 0233922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110535             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Pauly pauly@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Americans have sought to use science and sovereignty to influence what new kinds
              of organisms would live within their national borders. This interest has
              involved the importation of promising exotic species, the creation of varieties
              adapted to American environments, and the exclusion of alien pests. Drawing on
              Alfred Crosby's metaphor of ecological imperialism, I call these concerns
              "American desires for ecological
independence."  My project investigates the
              history of these biotic dimensions of national self-determination. Utilizing
              the extensive published and manuscript records produced by horticulturists--a
              biotechnological network that has been the subject of little scholarly
              research--I examine a series of critical events from the Revolution to the
              present. These include the debates over the degeneration of cultured Old World
              plants in North America, fears about the destruction of wheat by the Hessian
              fly, efforts to create and define
American fruits, discussions regarding the
              forestation of the prairies, efforts to exterminate completely such alien pests
              as the gypsy moth and the medfly, and contemporary discussions plans to control
              biological invaders and to restore native ecosystems. My focus is on the
              temperate humid regions of the continental United States, but I also consider,
              as a contrasting case, the outlying tropical margin of southern
Florida. This
              project, integrating history of science, technology, international relations,
              environment, and nationalism, will offer a new perspective on the ways
              Americans have altered the continent's species in the last two centuries. It
              will result in a book that will deepen public understanding of the place of
              biotechnology, broadly conceived, in the shaping of the American nation. It
              will also have a more focused impact on assessments of environmental norms: a
              scholarly study emphasizing the diversity of scientific perspectives and the
              uncertainties in decision-making will advance reasoned and effective policies
              regarding migrating organisms.

