Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Comparative Sources of Self-Potential on Active
               Volcanoes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0233517

Award Number: 0233517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm J. Johnston mal@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233517
Johnston

This three-year award for US-France cooperative research
              involves Malcolm J. Johnston and students at the US Geological Survey in Menlo
              Park, California and Jacques Zlotnicki of the Observatory of Earth Physics in
              Clermont-Ferrand, France.  The objective is to bring together theoretical,
              laboratory and field measurements of self-potential (SP) generation on active
              volcanoes, and in particular, to study sources of electric and magnetic signals
              around volcanoes. The investigators will study existing data for temperature,
              fluids and gas generation processes.  Joint comparisons will focus on
              separation of processes that contribute to SP and the implications for
              monitoring volcano activities.  The investigators will look for anomalies in
              laboratory and field data collected in well-known volcanic regions - Piton de
              la Fournaise (Reunion Island), Soufriere (Caribbean), Kilauea (Hawaii), Long
              Valley Caldera (US) and Miyake-jima (Japan). The US investigator brings to the
              project expertise on fluid vaporization and charge transport.  This is
              complemented by French expertise in electrokinetic effects.  The project has
              potential to understand signals from volcanoes and could lead to better
              prediction methods. 

This award represents the US side of a joint proposal
              to NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will
              cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and graduate
              student. The CNRS will support the visits of French researchers to the United
              States. 

