Title       : WCR: Designing a Pilot Study for Floods in the Walnut River Basin, KS, Using a
               Scaling Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0233676

Award Number: 0233676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay K. Gupta gupta@terra.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Furey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth A. Veitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,7241,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0233676
Gupta

This proposal addresses the long-standing, fundamental problem
              of unifying the spatial statistics of floods with its physics. We propose to
              address this problem within a newly developing statistical scaling framework.
              Statistical scaling is an emergent property of a complex physical system, which
              is not built into the physical equations a-priori. Scaling provides a new
              mathematical framework to link emipirical observations with numerical or
              analytical solutions of physical processes.  Our objective is to design a pilot
              study of floods in the Walnut River basin, KS, using the scaling framework.
              Special emphasis will be given to the role of scaling in space-time variable
              rainfall and spatially variable channel network structures in determining the
              scaling parameters of peak flows. This proposed pilot study is also a first
              step to conduct a large-scale cooperative field experiment in the Walnut River
              basin in Kansas. We propose to test the scaling framework for peak streamflows
              using existing observations from the Walnut Gulch basin, AZ, and the Goodwin
              Creek basin, MS. Tests will also be carried out using GIS-based numerical
              simulations for these two basins. In addition, we will simulate peak flows in
              the Walnut River basin, KS, which is a site for cooperative atmospheric surface
              exchange studies (CASES). From the simulation results, we will design a pilot
              study for strategically gauging the basin to test peak flow scaling. The
              scaling framework unifies spatial flood statistics with its physics, and
              thereby addresses a longstanding fundamental open problem in hydrologic
              sciences and engineering. The body of new knowledge under scaling  provides the
              scientific foundations for solving the long-standing applied problem of
              prediction of floods and low flows from ungauged and poorly gauged basins. The
              scaling framework can be used to detect the effects of man-made changes on
              landscape and changes in climate on floods on a global basis.  This is a
              cooperative interdisciplinary proposal involving scientists and engineers from
              the University of Colorado, Boulder, the U.S. Geological Survey and the
              University of Iowa. 



