Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics and the Evolution of Rattlesnakes [Crotalus and
               Sistrurus]
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0233850

Award Number: 0233850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine A. Forster                    
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly R. Zamudio krz2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kelly R. Zamudio and Dr. Harry W.
              Greene at Cornell University to study rattlesnake evolution. The 28 species
              comprise a group of ecologically diverse New World pitvipers with unique tail
              shaker muscles and noise-making segments on their modified tail tips. Despite
              widespread interest by scientists and the public, previous inferences about
              their origin and diversification were made prior to recent innovations in
              molecular systematics. No evidence exists for a widespread belief that rattles
              evolved in response to bison herds, for example, and new statistical approaches
              for studying biogeography and character evolution have not previously been
              applied to this topic. Zamudio and Greene will sequence the DNA in several
              nuclear and mitochondrial genes of rattlesnakes and their relatives, with the
              immediate goals of reconstructing their relationships and biogeographic
              history, then testing five alternative scenarios of rattle origin.
         
              Rattlesnakes play increasingly prominent roles in anthropology, ecology,
              evolutionary biology, conservation, and biomedical research, topics on which
              Zamudio and Greene's findings will provide important comparative perspectives.
              Rattlesnakes are important predators and knowledge of evolutionary
              relationships will elucidate the roles of speciation and other historical
              factors in structuring natural communities. As examples of implications for
              understanding and eventually treating human diseases, because they exhibit
              parental care that is not complicated by the feeding of young, female
              rattlesnakes offer a simple model system for studying hormonal control of that
              behavior. Likewise, the shaker muscle anatomically and physiologically
              resembles heart tissue, and in recent years the tails of restrained, live
              rattlesnakes have proved extremely useful for studying muscle biochemistry in
              intact organisms with NMR and other in vivo techniques. Understanding
              rattlesnake evolutionary relationships will enable researchers to strategically
              choose species that have or lack particular characteristics, and thereby
              untangle the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of normal and
              abnormal functions.

