Title       : Longitudinal Design to Measure Effects of MSP Professional Development in
               Improving Quality of Instruction in Mathematics and Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0233505

Award Number: 0233505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1479605            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf K. Blank rolfb@ccsso.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mike Garet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Smithson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatrice Birman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Council Chief St Sch Off
	      One Massachusetts Ave., NW
	      Washington, DC  20001143    202/408-5505

NSF Program : 1793      MSP-Other Awards
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CCSSO has established a collaborative research team involving Wisconsin Center
              for Education Research (WCER) and American Institutes for Research (AIR) to
              investigate how professional development programs and activities in multiple
              sites (approximately 5 districts participating in MSP) can be evaluated using a
              common set of research-based measures, and how a survey methodology can be used
              to evaluate the effects of professional development in improving instruction in
              mathematics and science.   The project will survey 640 middle school teachers
              about what and how they teach. Specifically, the study will address the
              following research questions. 1) To what extent is the quality of the
              professional development supported by MSP activities consistent with a
              research-based definition of quality?
2) What effects do teachers'
              professional development experiences have on instructional practices and
              content taught in math and science classes?  Are high-quality professional
              development activities more likely than lower-quality activities to increase
              the alignment of content with state standards and assessments?  3) How can MSP
              projects use study findings to improve professional development and the content
              and instruction of mathematics and science classes?

