Title       : The Role of Land Atmosphere Interactions on Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts
               and Convective Initiation over the Southern Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0233780

Award Number: 0233780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dev Niyogi dev_niyogi@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sethu Raman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Improving the understanding of warm-season precipitation processes in the U.S.
              Southern Great Plains (SGP) is a research priority of the U.S. Weather Research
              Program.  Using observations from the International H2O Project (IHOP), the
              Principal Investigators will study the multi-scale land-surface/atmosphere
              interactions and their impacts on the initiation and intensification of deep
              convection in the SGP and improve the diagnosis and prediction of warm season
              rain. 

The investigators will use stomatal resistance / biophysical
              measurements to characterize the temporal and spatial variations of stomatal
              resistance, transpiration and hence water vapor exchange over typical
              landscapes in the SGP.  A broad outline of the research activities includes:
              (1) modifications to land surface model (LSM) physics relating to soil moisture
              / soil temperature assimilation, photosynthesis-based land surface model
              enhancements, and consideration of diffuse radiation and explicit terrain
              effects, in order to understand the effects of soil moisture and vegetation
              representation on convection and convective precipitation; (2) testing of the
              LSM using episodic convective storm analyses, as well as month long simulations
              using a high resolution coupled mesoscale numerical model ; and (3) diagnosing
              the nature of the coupled / interactive pathways between the soil, vegetation
              and atmospheric convection leading to the convective potential and the
              convective precipitation using ensemble and statistical-dynamical factor
              separation analyses.   

The study will address the need to investigate the
              complex interactions between land surface, planetary boundary layer, and
              cloud-radiation processes, and their effects on the development of deep
              convection and improve model quantitative precipitation forecast skills. 
              

As a broader impact, the study involves participation in a collaborative
              program and integrating undergraduate and graduate student research theses
              within the research activities.  Successful completion of the research may have
              a positive impact on the forecasting of convective initiation.
