Title       : Travel for U.S. Participants in the 21st and 22nd International Cartographic
               Conferences in Durban, South Africa (August 2003) and A Coruna, Spain (July
               2005)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0233386

Award Number: 0233386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Lobben amy.lobben@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy M. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In cartography as in many other scientific fields, advances in research and
              education increasingly rely on the development of international collaborations
              that bring together skilled scholars and educators from many different nations.
               International contacts and collaborations develop through many different
              means, but one of the most successful has been periodic meetings of the
              International Cartographic Association (ICA).  The ICA has been the primary
              international forum for cartographic research since 1959, and it currently
              involves approximately 80 nations.  The ICA's next biennial meetings will occur
              in Durban, South Africa, in August 2003 and A Coruna, Spain, in July 2005.  To
              facilitate the continued involvement of U.S. scientists in ICA activities and
              to facilitate the involvement of more Americans in international networks at
              early stages of their careers, this award will provide group-travel support to
              enable at least ten early-career cartographers from the U.S. as well as a
              limited number of more experienced professionals to attend each ICA meeting. 
              Funds will be distributed to U.S. cartographers whose applications are
              evaluated using a number of criteria associated with active participation in
              the meeting.  Travel grants will be given to more junior scientists in order to
              encourage their participation in international discussions and
              communications.

This award will foster greater participation by U.S.
              cartographers in the global forum of the International Cartographic
              Association.  As has been demonstrated in follow-up reports from Americans who
              have been supported with previous travel grants to other major international
              meetings, opportunities abound for meeting professional colleagues from many
              other nations, for hearing ideas and information from a broad range of
              different perspectives, and for participating in discussions that frequently
              result in successful research collaborations.  These meetings will be
              especially important because of their locations.  The 2003 ICA conference will
              be the first held in Africa, and the theme for this meeting is "Cartography for
              Development."  The 2005 meeting's theme is "Mapping Approaches into a Changing
              World."

