Title       : Reactive Mass Transfer at Dynamic Interfaces: Impact of Micro-Scale Fluid
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0233708

Award Number: 0233708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes G. Khinast khinast@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

The PI's research during the last years showed that selectivity and
              yield of fast gas-liquid reactions strongly depend on the dynamics of single
              rising bubbles in a continuous phase, and not on the large-scale mixing
              patterns in a chemical reactor. High selectivity and yield are important for a
              chemical process, since it reduces byproduct formation, which is undesired.  In
              order to study the effects of bubble dynamics and bubble swarm dynamics on
              chemical reactions, a computational simulation model will be developed.  The
              model takes into account nonstationary bubble deformation, break-up,
              coalescence, heat effects and surfactant adsorption. The multi-fluid model is
              based on surface tracking techniques, augmented by an efficient CFD solver that
              was developed by the PI's group. Concentration and temperature fields are
              computed by solving mass and energy balances simultaneously with the
              hydrodynamic code. Variable surface tension is accounted for by a surfactant
              adsorption model and an accurate description of surface tension forces.  In
              order to investigate the impact of bubble swarms dynamics on fast reaction
              systems, the PI will study specific reaction systems of industrial importance,
              i.e., (i) a simple two-step Bourne reaction (liquid -liquid), (ii) the
              stereo-selective iodohydroxylation step for the Merck HIV protease inhibitor
              Crixivan (liquid-liquid), and (iii) the liquid-phase oxidation of cyclohexane,
              which is a complex free radical reaction with multiple time scales
              (gas-liquid). All reactions are known to be fast and mixing-sensitive. 

The
              work is of fundamental and practical interest, for instance in the areas of
              phase-transfer catalysis, gas-liquid reactions, reactive absorptions and
              extractions. Several national and international research groups study the
              hydrodynamics of bubbles and bubble swarms. However, there is no systematic
              work that addresses reacting bubble swarms, which will be the ultimate goal of
              this research. In summary, the PI will develop realistic two- and
              three-dimensional simulation models of reacting bubble swarms, which can be
              used to create the first micro-scale closures for fast reactions in multi-phase
              systems to be incorporated in the existing coarse-grid CFD packages. In
              addition, the simulations will provide an insight into complex processes that
              are not accessible through experimental techniques, e.g., for metallurgical
              reactions or opaque media. 

Impact:

The research will also have
              educational impact, including the training of one graduate students in a
              multi-disciplinary environment and the development of course modules for
              various undergraduate and graduate courses.

