Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: An Integrated Optics Beam Combiner for the CHARA
               Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0233138

Award Number: 0233138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18810              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold A. McAlister hal@chara.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Ridgway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theo A. ten Brummelaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233138
McAlister

This three-year award supports U.S.-France collaboration
              in optical long baseline interferometry for astronomy at Georgia State
              University and the Observatory of Grenoble.  Harold A. McAlister  leads the US
              group, which includes Stephen T. Ridgway of the National Optical Astronomy
              Observatories, Theo A. Ten Brummelaar of Georgia State and several graduate
              students.  Jean-Philippe Berger, an astronomer at the Grenoble Observatory's
              Astrophysics Laboratory, leads the French group.  The purpose of this US-France
              joint project is to develop and validate a new generation instrument capable of
              combining light from six telescopes at the Center for High Resolution Astronomy
              (CHARA) located in Mount Wilson, California.  The new instrument will be based
              on technology developed by the Grenoble Observatory.  This technology can
              replace dozens of precision fabricated and aligned optical components with a
              single optical "chip."   The US group will develop the subsystems necessary to
              operate six telescopes simultaneously (including pair-wise fringe
              stabilization), will lead the design of the beam-combiner laboratory, and will
              develop optical and electronic interfaces.  This is complemented by the
              Grenoble group's work on a combination system using integrated optics
              technologies.  The goal is to obtain the first on-sky demonstration of an
              integrated optics beam combination at the CHARA array within the first year,
              and to obtain the first images with the full array at the conclusion of the
              grant period.

This award represents the US side of joint proposals to the
              NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will
              cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigators and students. 
              The CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers. 

