Title       : An Animal-in-the-Loop, Approximate Dynamic Programming Based Robotic Design
               Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0233529

Award Number: 0233529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennie Si si@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Rousche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The future development of space solar power systems presents immense challenges
              for designers of sophisticated and adaptable robotic systems capable of complex
              mission assignments in the difficult environment of space. In an effort to help
              address a subset of these problems, this project will conduct an
              interdisciplinary investigation integrating the diverse ranges of computer
              science, neurophysiology, psychology and bioengineering. It will develop a
              novel  animal-in-the-loop  robotic architecture for the efficient investigation
              and optimization of learning algorithms applicable to general cooperative
              robotic systems. The plan is to eclipse the current trend for bio-inspired
              robotics through the use of an actual bio-based robot. This will be
              accomplished by training rats to pilot mobile robots.  Rats will be used in
              place of the traditional sensing mechanisms of robotic systems. In so doing,
              the researchers aim to exploit the proven superiority of embedded processing
              paradigms provided by real neural networks. To better understand exactly how
              and why mammals are such good processors of sensory input and how we might
              apply their strategies to robotic systems, the researchers will equip each rat
              with multi-electrode arrays in the sensory regions of their brain. They will
              collect neural spike data representing the sensory environment as the rat-robot
              systems complete a cooperative task. Task data and neural recordings will be
              used in the development and simulation of advanced learning algorithms based on
              approximate dynamic programming (ADP). A better understanding of sensory
              processing coupled with advances in ADP models will be used to design more
              intelligent platforms, namely animal-computer co-adaptation, in cooperative
              robotic systems. For the development of space solar power objectives, such
              robotic systems must provide the essential traits of robustness and
              scalability. The new generalized approach using bio-sensor based, ADP optimized
               solutins provides a unique high-potential to develop such powerful systems.

