Title       : SGER: Detection of Bioterrorism-Linked Microbial Pathogens Using Surface
               Acoustic Wave Liquid Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0233463

Award Number: 0233463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauricio Pereira da Cunha mdacunha@eece.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Millard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233463
Pereira da Cunha

Bioterrorism threats and attacks in civilian
              environments require sensors that can rapidly and accurately detect minute
              quantities of pathological bioagents. Selective and inexpensive sensors are
              urgently needed to detect pathogens in liquid environments, including food and
              water supplies. Conventional laboratory analyses are time-consuming,
              labor-intensive and inconsistent with the expedient response required in the
              wake or possibility of a bioterrorist act.

The activities proposed in this
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) are multidisciplinary and involve
              two faculty members from the University of Maine. Dr. Mauricio Pereira da
              Cunha, from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, will provide
              expertise in the area of sensor platform development in general, and acoustic
              wave sensors in particular. Pereira DaCunha is a 2002 NSF CAREER award
              recipient, who has worked for more than 16 years in the acoustics microwave
              area. Dr. Paul Millard, from the Department of Chemical and Biological
              Engineering, is a microbiologist with more than 15 years of experience in
              microbial detection and analysis. Both Pereira da Cunha and Millard are
              affiliated with the University of Maine's Laboratory for Surface Science and
              Technology, a multidisciplinary laboratory with appropriate facilities for the
              realization of the proposed tasks.

The research activities described in this
              proposal are consistent with the purpose of the NSF SGER program. The research
              plan brings together expertise and research results from two separate but
              related areas, and moves both areas forward into a new, exploratory application
              that is highly relevant to bioterrorism threats, particularly in liquid and
              mist environments.

Pereira da Cunha recently fabricated a successful Shear
              Horizontal Surface Acoustic  Wave (SH) SAW mode device utilizing the new
              Langasite family of crystals (LGX). He tested this device in a liquid
              environment and has obtained preliminary results for proof-of-concept device
              performance. Millard has developed immobilized molecular padlock technology for
              nucleic acid recognition and amplification, allowing for the rapid detection of
              pathogenic viruses and bacteria in aquaculture. The proposed exploratory
              research combines molecular padlock probes for specific nucleic acid
              amplification with the SH-SAW sensor platform to produce an inexpensive hybrid
              biosensor to detect microbial pathogens in liquid quickly, accurately and
              reliably. Successful detection of these agents will justify the generation of
              molecular probes for detecting selected waterborne human pathogens that are
              likely agents of bioterrorism, i.e. enteropathogenic Escherichia coli,
              Salmonella typhi, and Vibrio cholera.

The research will be conducted over
              one year, with the assistance of two M.S. students.  Research results will be
              integrated with education through an NSF GK-12 program for area high schools,
              undergraduate courses, and an NSF REU program that involves university students
              from around the U.S. Research results will be disseminated through
              peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings, and international symposia.

