Title       : CAREER: Reference Resolution for Natural Language Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0233177

Award Number: 0233177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanda M. Harabagiu sanda@cs.udallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A major obstacle in building robust systems that extract and interpret
              information, and summarize and answer questions from texts, is the need to
              identify the entities referred to by pronouns or other referential expressions.
                This project extends the PI's prior work involving the development of an
              empirical reference resolution system that relies on several sets of heuristics
              that correspond to various forms of reference. In particula, the framework will
              be extended to learn semantic knowledge that supports consistency checks. This
              enhancement will provide high precision reference resolution and also enhance
              substantially the recall of 
referential links. The research will be evaluated
              using referenceannotated texts and the Penn Treebank corpora. The outcome will
              be a corpus-based method for reference resolution for both pronouns and nominal
              
expressions. First, the semantics of all referential noun phrases will be
              captured. Then, by extending the 
empirical environment with bootstrapping,
              this reference resolution technique should lead to a 
powerful tool capable of
              resolving reference correctly in a large variety of texts. Finally, the tool
              will be 
incorporated both in an information extraction system and in a
              question/answering system, to measure its 
contribution to the overall
              performance of these systems. The proposed research departs from previous
              approaches to reference resolution, in that it promotes data-driven techniques
              instead of relying on combinations of linguistic and cognitive aspects of
              language. The immediate pragmatic outcome indicated by the preliminary results
              should be a substantial recall enhancement.

