Title       : GLOBEC-01: Integration and Synthesis of the George's Bank Broad-Scale Survey
               Results
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0233800

Award Number: 0233800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585733             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Wiebe pwiebe@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence P. Madin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The GLOBEC NW Atlantic/Georges Bank study identified the pelagic early life
              stages of cod (Gadus morhua) and haddock (Melanogrammus aegleftus) and the
              copepod zooplankton, Calanusfinmarchicus and Pseudocalanus spp. as target
              organisms (GLOBEC, 1992) for an extensive and intensive effort to understand
              the underlying physical and biological processes that control the population
              dynamics of key populations of marine animals in space and time. Over a
              six?year period, broad-scale surveys of the Georges Bank and adjacent waters
              were conducted to collect samples for cohort and survivorship analysis of the
              target fish and zooplankton populations. These surveys included the collection
              of data on hydrography, acoustics, phytoplankton chlorophyll, competitors, and
              predators, as well as the target species, in order to provide a description of
              the biological and physical environment in which the target species resided.
              Phase IV of the US GLOBEC Georges Bank program is designed to synthesize the
              results from the program's earlier phases to provide an integrated
              understanding of the population dynamics of key, target species and evaluate
              how a varying climate may influence these populations. The intent in this
              project is to capitalize on the survey data sets to address two overarching
              questions: 1) What controls inter?annual variability in the abundance of the
              target species on Georges Bank (e.g., bottom up or top down biological
              processes, or physical, advective processes)? 2) How are these processes likely
              to be influenced by climate variability?  These activities and results will
              provide a fundamental foundation for a complete interdisciplinary synthesis
              involving all components of the GLOBEC Georges Bank program.
