Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Study of Quantum Hydrogen Fluids and Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0233203

Award Number: 0233203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrey F. Vilesov vilesov@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0233203
Vilesov

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project.  The principal investigator for the project is Professor Andrey
              Vilesov at the University of Southern California.  Professor Birgitta Whaley of
              the University of California in Berkeley will also be participating.  The
              Japanese collaborator is Professor Takamasa Momose at Kyoto University in
              Japan.  They will be undertaking research on the study of quantum hydrogen
              fluids and crystals.  They will combine several experimental and theoretical
              approaches to study the dynamics of pure and doped hydrogen clusters and
              crystals.  Theoretical calculations will provide detailed insights into the
              nature of the quantum statistical effects and the effect of the interaction
              with molecular chromophore core.  An important component of the project is the
              development of the pulsed Raman shifter based on solid para hydrogen crystal,
              the medium, which is characterized by large gain and extremely narrow lines. 
              This development may give a real break through in the field of pulsed far
              infrared laser technology (5-10 um), where there are no commercial lasers at
              present.       

The project brings together the efforts of three
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The
              U.S. researchers provide expertise of the growth and spectroscopy of pure and
              molecular doped hydrogen clusters inside ultracold helium droplets and
              theoretical interpretation of the results, whereas the Japanese group has a
              unique high resolution (10 MHz) difference frequency generation laser
              spectrometer and is proficient in infrared spectroscopy (3-10 um) of pure and
              molecular doped para hydrogen crystals.  The collaboration will offer great
              mutual benefits.  The project advances international human resources through
              the participation of a number of postdocs and graduate students.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.  Results of
              the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific
              journals.  


