Title       : JIETSSP: Nanomaterials for Space Solar Power
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0233776

Award Number: 0233776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryne P. Raffaelle rprsps@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Lau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian G. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Gennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An adjustment of the original statement of work outlined in the proposal is
              being made to reflect the reduced level of support. While the overall technical
              approach remains the same, the number of materials systems that will be
              investigated and their subsequent analysis will be scaled back.

We will
              reduce the number of conjugated polymers that will be investigated for our
              proposed devices. Year I will focus almost exclusively on the understanding and
              use of P3OT. This may be expanded in years 2 and 3 as dictated by our
              scaled-back theoretical modeling efforts. We will focus our modeling work
              towards the understanding of the important mechanisms in nanotube/quantum
              dot/P3OT films and the identification and analysis of other conjugated polymers
              that could be investigated in years 2 and 3. These theoretical modeling efforts
              will be completed in year 1.

We will restrict our quantum dot system
              synthesis efforts to those that we have previously identified suitable for this
              type of an application. Specifically, we will only concentrate on the
              incorporation of the CdSe and CuLnS2 into polymeric materials designed for thin
              film photovoltaic devices. The synthesis efforts and fundamental studies
              regarding these quantum dots will be completed by the end of year 2. We will
              concentrate our efforts in year 3 on fabricating and testing devices using the
              materials generated during first two years of the program. By reducing the
              number and variety of quantum dot systems and polymeric hosts investigated, we
              will no longer have any sub contracts in the third year of the program.

The
              derivatization attempts using thiols, amides, esters etc. to enhance covalent
              interaction with quantum dots will still be investigated but to a lesser
              degree. In addition, other nanotube purification studies using chromatographic
              techniques (i.e., gel permeation and reverse phase chromatography) will be
              eliminated. We will also forgo any study of ultransonically induced quantum
              dot/carbon nantoube interactions. Finally, the femtosecond laser spectroscopy
              studies designed to probe the energetics and the dynamics of ultrafast
              electronic transitions in colloidal semiconductor nanoparticles and nanotubes
              in solutions and from solid-state surfaces will no longer be within our scope
              of work.

With the notable exceptions outlined above, we will perform all
              other tasks outlined in the original proposal. The reduction in the number of
              materials investigated and extent of their analysis significantly reduces the
              man-hours required for this program. In addition, the materials and supplies
              costs are reduced by 1/3 each year accordingly, and the travel costs are also
              reduced proportionally. These changes will make it possible for us to still
              make a substantive contribution to the JJETSSP program within the revised
              budget we have submitted.

