Title       : Collaborative Research: Chemistry of Groundwater Transport Pathways Associated
               with a Coastal Lagoon System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0233657

Award Number: 0233657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodey Batiza                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard S. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1629,7241,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under this award, study will focus on understanding of reaction and transport
              pathways in permeable sediments and will attempt to determine how nutrients and
              other trace substances are transported and modified in the subterranean
              freshwater-seawater mixing zone connecting a Brazilian lagoon to the adjacent
              ocean. The study will also evaluate how these processes are altered by
              hydrologic forcing conditions. The field area is the barrier spit adjacent to
              the Patos Lagoon on the extreme southern coast of Brazil. This site was chosen
              because: 1) the PIs preliminary results demonstrate that this region is
              favorable to Submarine Groundwater Discharge (SGD) and they anticipate large
              chemical signals and exchange rates. 2) it is relatively unimpacted by human
              activity. 3) there are two ILTER Programs focused on this system, and 4) this
              system provides a contrast to the southeastern US coast. This study will
              identify relevant reactions and estimate the fluxes of nutrients and trace
              elements (using radium isotopes). The PIs will detenrnine if permeable
              sediments are a significant source or sink for the materials of interest, which
              reaction pathways control their behavior in the sediments, and how processes
              are affected by external forcing (primarily lagoon water level). The project
              has three components: 1) field campaigns, 2) laboratory kinetic experiments,
              and 3) synthesis of results through qualitative and quantitative analyses and
              simple numerical simulations. Field work will involve placement of wells both
              across the barrier spit and along the beach on the ocean side, benthic chamber
              deployments, and coastal cruises, the latter to establish offshore gradients of
              radium isotopes to assess SGD fluxes. Laboratory studies will use core cuttings
              in flow-through plug reactors to assess better the nature and kinetics of
              reactions. And finally, numerical simulations will be used to aid in
              interpreting results.

