Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Industry-University Partnership in Logistics
               -- Dynamic Thinking in Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9501446

Award Number: 9501446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond K. Cheung rcheung@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501446   This research is focused on the issue of building an
              industry-university partnership to support the development of new algorithms
              and methods for real-time decision making in logistics.  In a typical logistics
              system, there is a regular need for real-time decision making in vehicle
              routing, scheduling of vessels, management of vehicle inventories, and design
              of service offerings using constantly changing information.  New technologies
              such as the combination of satellites with high-speed data networks are making
              real-time data available to decision makers.  These new technologies have
              motivated the development of new stochastic, dynamic models for more accurate
              decision making.  This research presents a set of models for problems ranging
              from real-time vehicle routing to dynamic service network design.  A common
              mathematical foundation is presented that focuses on stochastic optimization
              and dynamic network modeling.  New decision models will be developed subject to
              various sources of randomness in demand level, travel times, service
              breakdowns, and resource availability.  The use of graphical visualization for
              validating models and communicating results to model users will be pursued. 
              The establishment of an industry-university partnership is not only to support
              the research and advise on the relevancy of the models to be developed but also
              to influence the educational curriculum in logistics.      Establishing a
              strong industry-university partnership in research and education requires a
              substantial effort in reforming the curriculum.  The goals of the educational
              component of this work are:   (1) to increase industry participation in
              university education, (2) develop new training programs for industry partners,
              (3) develop a laboratory for computational logistics, (4) increase internship
              and co-op opportunities for students in the logistics industry, and (5) improve
              the technical skills of students in modeling and solving problems in the field
              of logistics.  The impact of the resear ch to stu  dents and industrial workers
              will be significant.  The research has direct industrial application and if
              successful, will improve the economic competitiveness of the logistics and
              distribution industries.
