Title       : CAREER: Decision, Control and Optimization in Discrete Event Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9501652

Award Number: 9501652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin K. Chong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501652  Chong         The research aspect of this proposal deals with issues in
               decision, control, and optimization problems for Discrete Event  Systems
              (DESs).  DESs are dynamical systems that are driven by  the occurrence of
              physical events, and arise in virtually all  manmade systems, including
              manufacturing systems, communication  networks, distributed computer systems,
              logistic systems, and  vehicular traffic.  The proposal considers performance
              oriented  DES models, and focuses on the problem decision and control for 
              performance optimization.  Methods for optimizing DESs have  received
              significant interest in recent years, and show  tremendous promise for the
              development of efficient ways to  optimize large-scale complex man-made
              systems.       The proposal focuses on parametric and nonparametric  decision
              and control problems.  An objective of the study is to  couple perturbation
              analysis methods with optimization  algorithms, both parametric and
              nonparametric, with the aim of  gaining further rigorous understanding into
              when and why they  work, and developing algorithms and tools that will be
              useful in  DES decision and control problems.  This work emphasizes 
              applications in manufacturing systems, communication networks,  and real-time
              computer systems.       The education component of this proposal focuses on
              three  efforts.  The first effort is to develop and promote a program of 
              undergraduate involvement in research, through individual or team  projects. 
              The second effort consists of developing a  comprehensive research program and
              curriculum in the area of  modern control, including laboratory facilities for 
              experimentation and computing. The third effort concerns the  principal
              investigator's ongoing work in the professional  development and training of
              engineering students, primarily in  his capacity of as the branch counselor and
              faculty advisor of  the Purdue IEEE student branch.  ***
