Title       : Disorder and Correlations in Novel Two-Dimensional Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9501160

Award Number: 9501160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Adams adams@rouge.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501160  Adams  Experiments are proposed to study the transport properties of
              two very  different disordered two-dimensional systems. The first area of 
              study  is  the superconductor-insulator (S-I) transition in granular aluminum 
              films  by  the application of a parallel magnetic field to  drive  the 
              transition. This technique, which avoids complications associated with  flux
              flow resistance, has proven to be very useful in determining  the  relative 
              roles of disorder, Josephson coupling, and Coulomb  blockade  in the generic
              characteristics of granular film S-I transitions. These  studies  are 
              ultimately aimed at developing a superconducting  field-  effect  transistor in
              a granular system. In addition, studies  of  the  effects  of  disorder  and 
              electron-electron  interactions   in   the  transport  properties  of electrons
              sprayed onto  solid  hydrogen  are  being  made. This is a model system from
              which one can obtain valuable  insights into the transport properties of more
              conventional disordered  semiconducting systems.  %%%  Experiments  are 
              proposed to study the electrical properties  of  two  very different disordered
              two-dimensional types of material. The first  area of study concerns the 
              mechanisms involved in the destruction  of  superconductivity in very thin
              aluminum films. This work will  attempt  to  determine  the relative roles of
              disorder, superconductivity,  and  single   electron   charging  effects  in  
              the   generic   electrical  characteristics  of granular aluminum films at low 
              temperatures.  The  ultimate   goal   of   these  studies  is  the  
              development   of    a  superconducting field-effect transistor using granular 
              materials.  In  addition,  studies  of  the effects of disorder and 
              electron-electron  interactions in the electric transport properties of
              electrons sprayed  onto  solid hydrogen are being made. This material serves as
               a  model  from  which  one  can  obtain  valuable insights  into  the 
              transport  properties  of  more  conventional semic onducting materials,  such 
              as  those used in the microelectronics industry.  ***
