Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Differential Equations and Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1995       
File        : a9501122

Award Number: 9501122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Han Qing.Han.7@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                     ABSTRACT OF PROJECT                   
              Qing Han will continue his work  on the differential equations and the
              geometric measure theory and their applications. These include regularities of
              solutions to variational   problems, local structure and unique continuation of
              solutions to differential equations. One of the central problems he will
              continue to work on is the variational problem with free interfaces. It is
              closely related to the general regularity theory of minimal surfaces. The
              functional under the consideration consists of the modified Dirichlet integral
              and surface area. The difficulty arises as the two terms in the functional have
              different scaling factors. Behaviors of solutions under such scalings would be
              investigated. He will also study the structure of the singular sets of
              solutions to elliptic and parabolic differential    equations. This is one of
              the fundamental problems in the theory of  differential equations. He will
              investigate the effect of the smoothness of coefficients on the structure of
              singular sets. Such problems are related to the unique continuation of
              solutions. Another related problem is the size of the singular sets. It is
              expected that the appropriate Hausdorff dimension of such sets should be
              controlled by the frequency of solutions.           The problems of free
              interfaces and the singular sets originate from the material science and the
              control theory. In reality it is impossible to eliminate the singular sets, the
              so-called "bad sets."  Hence one of the central tasks is to investigate under
              what condition the singular sets can be controlled and under what condition
              such sets are small. Another    application involves the high-performance
              computing, in particular image processing. One problem is to recover the image
              from a distorted copy and the difference is measured exactly by the free
              interfaces and their singular sets. It is expected that such sets should be
              small enough to be neglected. The problems mentioned abo ve in the project are
              simplified mathematical models. It is expected that the discussion of these
              mathematical problems will improve the methods  to control the singular sets in
              various applications.
