Title       : CAREER: The MosquitoNet Mobile Computing Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9501799

Award Number: 9501799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary G. Baker mgbaker@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The research project will investigate operating system and  application
              issues in a network that includes mobile and  wireless hosts.  Recent advances
              in wireless technologies  and light-weight computers make it  attractive to
              build  networks that combine traditional workstations and servers  with
              portable computers. But portables will not achieve  equivalence to  stationary
              hosts unless the portables can  remain continuously connected  to the  network,
              even when changing locations or  communication devices.    The project,  called
              MosquitoNet, will  increase the  connectivity of mobile hosts using the 
              following approaches.    (1) Enable portable computers to move seamlessly from 
              one  communications medium to another; for example, from an  Ethernet
              connection  to a wireless modem, without rebooting  or restarting applications.
                 (2)  Determine the feasibility of hiding the resulting changes  in
              throughput,  latency and other network characteristics  from applications.   
              (3) Design a  simple interface to expose these changing  characteristics to
              applications as  necessary.    (4) Examine communication device usage patterns
              for use in  implementing battery life extension policies.    (5) Develop new
              file data  consistency algorithms for use in a  distributed mobile environment
              where  disconnection is  allowed but not mandatory.    The educational
              component of the  CAREER project will  modernize and vitalize the teaching of
              operating systems  and  distributed systems at the Stanford University. In 
              particular a new course  on wireless and mobile computing  will be introduced
              along with the introduction  of  new  teaching tools, topics and projects into
              the current  curriculum on  opepating systems and distributed systems.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
