Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Composition of Occupations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9501009

Award Number: 9501009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3563               (Estimated)
Investigator: Miller McPherson mcphersn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This research is concerned with describing and accounting for changes in the
              social compositon of occupations.  It uses a model based on an ecological
              theory of competition.  Niche overlap--shared sociodemographic characteristics
              among occupations--is expected to create competitive pressures that lead to
              changes in an occupation's basic niche.  The model is tested using data from
              the Current Population Survey Annual Demographic Files.  %%%   This research
              will contribute to sociological understanding of why occupations vary in
              composition according to age, gender, race, and similar characteristics and why
              occupations change their compositon over time.  This information should be of
              help to policy makers concerned with efforts to encourage occupational
              diversity.   In addition to the scientific gains to be achieved by the
              research, this award will materially assist a highly promising student in
              completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus it contributes to the
              future scientific manpower of the nation and the thorough training of the next
              generation of social scientists.           This research is concerned with
              describing and accounting for changes in the social compositon of occupations. 
              It uses a model based on an ecological theory of competition.  Niche
              overlap--shared sociodemographic characteristics among occupations--is expected
              to create competitive pressures that lead to changes in an occupation's basic
              niche.  The model is tested using data from the Current Population Survey
              Annual Demographic Files.  %%%   This research will contribute to sociological
              understanding of why occupations vary in composition according to age, gender,
              race, and similar characteristics and why occupations change their compositon
              over time.  This information should be of help to policy makers concerned with
              efforts to encourage occupational diversity.   In addition to the scientific
              gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a
              highly promising student in completing resear ch for the Ph.D. dissertation. 
              Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the
              thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.
