Title       : Dynamical Systems with Infinitely Many Degrees of Freedom in Mathematical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9501226

Award Number: 9501226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence E. Wayne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1245,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501226  Wayne  Professor Wayne's research will focus on a variety of partial 
              differential equations which arise in mathematical physics.  He  will  attempt
              to use ideas from dynamical systems theory to understand  the  geometrical
              structure of the phase space of these systems, and  how this  structure
              influences the solutions of these equations.  He will  study  two main classes
              of equations -- Hamiltonian partial differential  equations, and dissipative
              equations.  In the first context, he  will be  concerned with extending the
              applications of tools like the  Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theory which have
              proven useful in the  context  of finite dimensional Hamiltonian dynamical
              systems to this  infinite  dimensional context and also in understanding the
              stability of  the  resulting solutions.  In the context of dissipative
              equations he  will  apply both invariant manifold theorems and the
              renormalization  group to  study the long-time asymptotics of such equations,
              particularly  in  cases in which the linearized equation has continuous
              spectrum.  %%%  Wayne's research will focus on the behavior of solutions of 
              differential equations which arise in mathematical physics.   These  equations
              have solutions which may behave in a very complicated  fashion, and Professor
              Wayne will develop new techniques for  understanding their behavior.  In
              simpler examples the key to  this  understanding has often been the elucidation
              of certain key  geometrical  structures related to the solutions of these
              equations, and  Professor  Wayne's research will concentrate on discovering
              whether  analogues of  these structures exist in the more complicated, infinite
               dimensional  contexts that arise in his applications.  The sorts of equations 
              which  he will study arise in the propagation of waves on the surface of  a 
              fluid, the vibrations of crystals, and chemical reactions.  ***
