Title       : Ultrasonic Study of Hydrogen-Metal and Other Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9501550

Award Number: 9501550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Leisure leisure@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501550  Leisure    Ultrasonic  methods will be used to study hydrogen isotope 
              motion  in  the  rare-earth  metals,  and possibly  other  metals  as  well.  
              The  objectives of these studies will be to elucidate the unusual  dynamics  of
               hydrogen  in  these materials.  Experiments will be  performed  on  scandium, 
              lutetium,  and yttrium single crystals containing  hydrogen  and/or  deuterium.
                The experimental results will  be  used  to  test  modern  theories  of 
              quantum diffusion in solids.   The  movement  of  hydrogen  ions  between  the 
              lowest  vibrational  levels  of   nearby  interstitial  sites in a metal may be
              regarded as a  two-level  system  (TLS).   The  usual theory  assumes weak
              coupling of the  TLS  to  the  environment,  so  that  the  quantum  coherence 
              of  the  TLS  is  not  destroyed.   It  has been realized recently that the
              usual  theory  is  severely restricted because, in many cases the coupling of
              the TLS  to  electrons  in  metals,  or to phonons at higher  temperatures  in 
              any  material,   destroys  the  quantum  coherence.   Modern  theories   of 
              dissipative  quantum tunneling are not restricted to weak coupling  to  the
              electrons or phonons.  Novel ultrasonic techniques will be applied  to  several
              other problems.  Resonant ultrasound spectroscopy will  be  used  to  measure
              the complete set of elastic constants  of  materials  undergoing  phase
              transitions.  With the construction  of  a  10  kbar  pressure cell, the
              complete set of elastic constants of small  samples  will be measured under
              pressure.  %%%  Sound  waves  in  the frequency range 100 kHz to 100 Mhz 
              (ultrasound)  will  be  used  to study the motion of hydrogen ions in several 
              rare-  earth metals.  Hydrogen is highly mobile in these metals and moves  by 
              hopping  among  the  interstitial sites provided  by  the  host  metal 
              lattice.  The hydrogen motion is affected by the interactions  of  the 
              hydrogen ions with the host metal atoms via tbe thermal vibrations and 
              conduction  electrons of th e host metal. Hydrogen motion  affects  the  speed 
              and energy loss of the ultrasonic waves which are the  measured  quantities.  
              Low-temperature  hydrogen motion  cannot  be  understood  using   classical  
              physics,   but   requires   a   quantum-mechanical  description.  The hydrogen
              moves between nearby interstitial sites  by  quantum-mechanical tunneling, and
              the tunneling particle  is  strongly  affected by interactions with both the
              lattice thermal vibrations  and  conduction  electrons.   The resulting  motion
              is  called  dissipative  quantum tunneling.  It is an open question as to
              whether the theory of  dissipative  quantum  tunneling can quantitatively 
              describe  the  low  temperature  motion of hydrogen isotopes in metals,  and 
              it  is  this  question which the proposed study intends to answer.  A second
              part of  the  work  will  involve  the use of novel  ultrasonic  techniques  to
               measure the elastic properties of materials undergoing a  phase change  and  
              of   materials   under  pressure.   The   ability   to   measure 
              simultaneously the complete set of elastic constants at high  pressure  will be
              unique.  ***
