Title       : High Precision Landau Quantum Oscillation Measurements in the Normal and Mixed
               States of High-Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9501419

Award Number: 9501419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy G. Goodrich goodrich@rouge.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Lowndes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501419  Goodrich  In  this project, measurements of Landau quantum oscillations
              are made  on  high  temperature  superconductors in  both  the  normal  and 
              the  superconducting mixed states. Both epitaxial films of  yttrium  barium 
              copper  oxide and bismuth strontium rare-earth copper oxide, and  bulk  single 
              crystals  of  other superconductors are studied.  The  physics  investigated
              includes Fermi surface topologies, effective masses,  and  scattering rates for
              electrons in the normal state; the interaction of  normal  electrons  with 
              flux vortices in the  mixed  state;  and  the  behavior   of   superconducting 
               properties   of   high   temperature  superconducting  materials  in  the
              presence  of  a  strongly  Landau-  quantized  normal-state background. The
              Fermi surface measurements  in  the  normal state will give values for
              parameters that are crucial  to  theories of the mechanism of superconductivity
              in these materials. The  mixed  state  results  will  lead to a much  improved 
              description  of  electron-electron and electron-flux vortex interactions.  %%% 
              One of the problems limiting the development of materials that exhibit  truly 
              high-temperature superconductivity  (above the  temperature  of  liquid 
              nitrogen, -196 deg C) is that the basic mechanism  responsible  for 
              high-temperature superconductivity remains unknown.  The  present  work is
              directed toward gaining information about this mechanism in  a  variety  of 
              high-temperature superconductors by measuring fundamental  properties of the
              electrons that participate in superconductivity,  in  both  the
              super-conducting and normal (resistive) condition. By  using  strong  magnetic
              fields and measuring the quantized magnetism  of  the  electrons, precise
              values are obtained for parameters that are crucial  to theories of
              superconductivity. This information can then be used to  evaluate and test
              quantitatively these theories.  The measurements are  made  using specialized
              facilities at the National High Magnetic Field  Labo ratory,  at Louisiana
              State University, and at Oak Ridge  National  Laboratory.  ***
