Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Integrating Process into
               Design-for-Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9501857

Award Number: 9501857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin N. Otto knotto@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501857  Otto   A guiding fundamental theory and implementation methodology is
              proposed for leading a manufacturing enterprise in developing a virtual
              prototype of existing production systems.  A design team can then engineer a
              new concept and virtually simulate its manufacture using design modeling tools
              that are factory-calibrated for the actual production facility.  As a central
              part of the research, a new methodology will be created for applying
              statistical tools to provide confidence measures in the predictive capability
              of the system.  This work will integrate factory-floor manufacturing process
              metrics into the product development process.  The work will address three
              phases of a design and manufacturing enterprise:  manufacturing operation
              modeling, product modeling, and product-process integration.  The development
              of a new undergraduate engineering course is proposed in which students will
              learn to reverse engineer mechanical products by creating physical models of
              them and then using these models to optimize their configurations.  This will
              teach design teams to optimize real products.  Conventional modeling and
              optimization methodologies will be included in the course, but the course will
              be structured into a coherent reverse engineering methodology, and will include
              a design project to further develop students' understanding of product
              concepts, uncertainty, discovery of unforeseen physics, and real human
              interaction in design.   Creating production system design models using these
              manufacturing process data collection systems will permit quantitative
              evaluation of ease-of-manufacturing, assist in tolerance allocation, and help
              predict manufacturing difficulties early in the design phase.  This work aims
              to produce results that can significantly increase the productivity and
              competitiveness of firms that use it for their design and manufacturing
              processes.
