Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smoothed Nonparametric Hazard Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9501893

Award Number: 9501893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birgit Grund   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9501893 Grund Abstract  The main objective of the project is to develop
              smoothing methods for  nonparametric hazard regression with time-dependent
              regression coefficients,  in the framework of an additive hazard regression
              model (Aalen model).  The  Aalen model incorporates the possibility that both
              value and contribution  of  covariates may change over time.  Most important,
              no particular parametric  shape of this time-dependence is assumed.   In the
              current project, kernel smoothing will be used to estimate the  regression
              coefficient curves.  A major objective is to develop data-driven  bandwidth
              selectors, and to investigate their properties.  It is expected that  the
              resulting methods will improve upon currently used empirical estimates.  
              Moreover, kernel methods allow one to estimate the regression coefficient 
              curves themselves, as opposed to cumulative coefficients.  This is 
              particularly important for graphical data analysis. The new smoothing methods
              will be implemented in XLISP-STAT, an object- oriented programming language; a
              user-friendly interface will be provided.   Dynamic graphics will be used to
              support visual data exploration.  As part of  the project, the developed
              smoothing procedures will be used to analyze  epidemiological data. On the side
              of education, the development of a new lecture course on  ``Smoothing Methods
              in Curve Estimation'' for statistics majors at the M.S. or  Ph.D. level is
              proposed.  Research results of the current proposal will be  included.  Dynamic
              graphics software will be used to demonstrate smoothing  techniques in class,
              thus giving students access to cutting edge technology   An important problem
              in medicine is to predict the survival of patients,  given their current
              condition and treatment.  The condition of a patient is  described by
              "covariate values", such as blood cholesterol, blood pressure,  number of
              antibodies, etc.  A central problem in analyzing survival data is to  assess
              the influence of covariates;  for example, to quantify by how  much an 
              elevated level of blood cholesterol increases the risk of stroke. Often the 
              influence of covariates is known to change with time.  In this case standard 
              methods tend to fail. The proposed project develops risk estimates based on the
              Aalen model.  This  model is extremely flexible.  The influence of covariates
              is allowed to change  over time, without assuming any particular shape of this
              time-dependence  beforehand.   In this project,  modern smoothing techniques
              will be adapted to estimate the  influence of covariates.  Smoothing methods
              are extremely useful for  descriptive data analysis, and widely used in
              statistics.  In the context of  survival data, however,  the use of
              corresponding methods is a very recent  development, with many open problems.
              Part of the project is the user-friendly computational implementation of the 
              newly developed estimation procedures.  Interactive graphics will be used 
              extensively to support visual data exploration.  With the provided software, 
              smoothing methods in Aalen hazard regression will be available for 
              practitioners for the first time. The new smoothing procedures will be used to
              analyze epidemiological data. On the side of education, the development of a
              new lecture course on  ``Smoothing Methods in Curve Estimation'' for statistics
              majors at the M.S. or  Ph.D. level is proposed.  Research results of the
              current proposal will be  included.  Dynamic graphics software will be used to
              demonstrate smoothing  techniques in class, thus giving students access to
              cutting edge technology.
