Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Theoretic Problems in Model Theory and Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9501176

Award Number: 9501176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Cherlin cherlin@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501176  Cherlin       The project concerns the interaction of group theory
              (finite and  algebraic) with  model theory and set theory, as well as with some
                combinatorial issues that involve unusual combinatorial geometries.  Cherlin 
               will investigate a class of groups arising in model theory, whose simple  
              sections are conjectured to be algebraic groups.  Within this class, the  
              class of "tame omega-stable groups" provides a test case in which it is  
              conjectured -- the Borovik philosophy -- that a modification of the   strategy
              used in the classification of the finite simple groups will   suffice to prove
              the conjecture.  This amounts in practice to doing   somewhat more than the
              classification of simple algebraic groups over   algebraically closed fields,
              using methods of finite group theory, and very   little algebraic geometry
              beyond rudimentary properties of dimension.  The   Borovik philosophy has been
              fleshed out fairly clearly in odd   characteristic, and requires similar
              scrutiny in characteristic two.  (The   definitions of even and odd
              characteristic are group theoretic but quite   different from the ones used in
              finite group theory.)  Thomas will continue   the study of the cofinalities of
              permutation groups.  This investigation   goes back to a question of Serre, the
              precise answer of which is heavily   dependent on set theoretic hypotheses. 
              Results in this area tend to rely   heavily on delicate set theoretic forcing
              constructions and also involve   character theoretic computations relating to
              rapid generation by conjugacy   classes.  There are also relationships, largely
              obscure, between these group   theoretic cofinalities and more standard set
              theoretic cardinal invariants   attached to the continuum.  Most recently it
              has been seen that there are   also solid connections to pcf theory, an area of
              set theory developed by   Saharon Shelah.  This theory is seen as a new
              approach to cardinal   arithmetic that is less affected by independence
              phenomena than the   classical app roach.       Model theory attempts to
              classify mathematical theories.  The  "best" theories are those whose models
              (realizations) can be given   structural classifications.  Twenty years ago
              Zilber showed that all such   theories can be built from familiar algebraic
              structures: groups.  Cherlin   and Zilber then conjectured a classification
              scheme for the groups that   arise in this way. One promising route is to mine
              the literature on finite  simple groups.  As a result of the combined labors of
              about one hundred  mathematicians in journal articles filling about 10,000
              highly condensed  journal pages, the finite simple groups were classified.  A
              parallel  strategy is developed for a large class of the infinite groups
              arising in  model theory.  This should require considerably less than 100
              mathematicians  or 10,000 journal pages, for two reasons: (1) much of the work
              in the  finite case relates to the properties of 26 bizarre finite groups which
              are  not involved to any significant extent in the infinite case; (2) the
              somewhat  haphazard evolution of the original proof in the finite case, over
              more than  two decades, can be avoided on the basis of lessons learned from
              that proof.  It is nonetheless a large-scale project, and large-scale planning
              will be   critical to its success.  At the present time the plan, though still 
               incomplete, is already being implemented.  Cherlin will address the urgent  
              need for a "top-level" analysis to serve as a guide for the mathematicians 
              working on this strategy in parts of the U.S. and also in South America and 
              Europe.  Set theory has developed rapidly and steadily since Paul Cohen 
              settled some of the oldest questions in the subject in his 1963 breakthrough. 
              Many areas of mathematics involve surprisingly deep questions in set theory. 
              Recently this has been shown by Thomas to be the case in the study of the 
              structure of those infinite groups which are best approximated by finite 
              groups. Work in this area has two quite different aspects which mesh toge ther 
               well.  This subject serves as a site in which to develop new set theoretic 
              methods, providing a new link between computational methods in algebra and  set
              theory.  ***
