Title       : Isoperimetric-Type Inequalities Arising from the Study of Brownian Motion in
               Domains Normalized by their Inradius
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9501611

Award Number: 9501611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Housworth eah@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9501611  PI:  Elizabeth Housworth  Institution:  U. of Oregon 
              Title:  Isoperimetric-Type Inequalities Arising from the Study of Brownian
              Motion in Domains   Normalized by their Inradius       ABSTRACT:       This
              Career award will fund research on two main mathematical questions as well as
              an innovative education plan.  The first mathematical problem concerns an
              integral mean inequality which would constitute a sharpening of a known
              lifetime result for Brownian motion in convex, simply connected planar domains
              normalized so that the largest disk they contain has radius one (or
              asymptotically one.) The second problem concerns a packing measure analysis of
              harmonic measure which would provide an analogue to the results of Makarov
              which relate a lower bound on the growth of the derivative of a univalent
              function to the proper Hausdorff measure function for the support of harmonic
              measure on the boundary of a domain. The education plan includes redesigning
              the senior/beginning graduate mathematical statistics courses to give the
              students a feeling for data and teaching a course for undergraduate mathematics
              majors by a modified Moore method, in order to give our undergraduates insight
              into the process of doing mathematical and statistical research.      This
              award will fund both research in mathematics and course development in the
              mathematical sciences. During the award period, it is  proposed to redesign an
              upper level statistics course to include work with actual data instead of
              focusing entirely on the mathematical theory behind statistics. There are also
              plans to teach a course for mathematics majors using self-discovery techniques
              in order to give undergraduates insight into the process of doing mathematical
              research. Two mathematical questions will  be researched during the award
              period. One problem involves studying the pathological behavior of a certain
              class of mathematical functions. The techniques employed are related to those
              used for the study of fractals. The second pr oblem is derived from considering
              the lifetime of a particle  moving randomly inside a region and dying when it
              touches the boundary of the region.  Different regions allow the particle to
              live different lengths of time. Applications of this research are relevant in
              applied contexts, such as in studying stress on beams.
