Title       : Mechanism and Inhibitor Design for Sialyltransferases and Education in
               Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9501866

Award Number: 9501866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin A. Horenstein horen@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             l   >      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                        !      O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    l   >   l
                >        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    $       H       l                                        
                    D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      Rhonda Young                @     @J 9                 
                      @         e =       e                    !                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  C          
                                                                      v       x       x      
              x               &                !  T   k!  *                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                v                                            
                                                v           b                                
                                                                              9501866
              Horenstein Significant efforts are being made by the PI to help develop a new
              biochemistry curriculum at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and to
              develop an interdisciplinary research program which includes undergraduate
              participation. The PI has instituted and is further developing a new graduate
              level course entitled "Enzymes and Enzyme Mechanisms". Over the period of the
              CAREER award, the PI will use this course and pedagogies as a laboratory for
              dhe creation of a new textbook on the same topic. Additional planned course
              development and teaching activities include teaching a special topics course
              concerned with the use of isotopes in biochemical research, and teaching the
              senior level Biochemistry course.   In relationship to this latter course, the
              Biochemistry Division is currently investigating the creation of an electronic
              study guide in Biochemistry, operating over the internet with a local World
              Wide Web client. The study guide would enable students to access a vast amount
              of material that could not be presented in traditional printed format.  The PI
              is a co-investigator in his departments renewal application of its previous and
              highly successful NSF-REU award. His laboratory has sponsored an NSF-REU fellow
              among odher undergraduate researchers. The PI's undergraduate research
              commitment is strong.  In the first year of his appointment, a total of four
              undergraduates have worked on original and interdisciplinary research projects.
              Two have chosen to continue on, and three of the four have represented women
              and minorities. Undergraduate participation in the PI's research program is and
              will remain a priority.  The research component of this proposal presents a
              plan for the mechanistic characterization of rat-liver sialyltransferases
              utilizing steady-state kinetics and multiple kinetic isotope effect
              experiments. Sialyltransferases (ST's) catalyze the transfer of N
              acetylneuraminic acid(NeuAc), (or sialic acid), as its cytidine monophosphate
              conjugate(CMP-NeuAc), to an acceptor hydroxyl group typically at the terminus
              of an oligosaccharide chain of a glycoprotein or glycolipid. The resultant
              sialoglycoconjugates are recognition elements in a variety of processes
              including viral replication, inflammatory responses, and adhesion of metastatic
              tumor cells. Sialyltransferases have not yet been characterized in mechanistic
              detail, nor have selective inhibitors been reported. These compounds will
              further illuminate the mechanism of sialyltransferases.  The ST substrate
              CMP-NeuAc is an unusual one for a glycosyltransferase because it is a
              sugar-mononucleotide and the anomeric carbon of N-acetylneuraminic acid has an
              adjacent carboxyl residue. The interplay of these groups in glycosyl transfer
              is unkno wn and will be investigated in the course of the mechanistic
              investigation.  Steady-state kinetic techniques, kinetic isotope effect
              experiments, and computational approaches will be used to define the kinetic
              mechanisms and transition state structure for rat liver a(2~6) and a(2~3)
              sialyl transferases.  Parallel to the above investigations, ST's will be
              cloned, and overexpressed in yeast..  Current understanding of the mechanisms
              of glycosyltransferases, and especially sialyltransferases is limited. The
              availability of transition state analogue inhibitors for sialyltransferases
              would facilitate mechanistic studies, and perhaps allow for manipulation of
              glycosylation patterns in vivo. %%% The research program will involve
              determination of the chemical mechanism of enzymes called sialyltransferases.
              Sialyltransferases link a type of sugar, sialic acid, to carbohydrate chains of
              glycoproteins, often found on cell surfaces. In the longer term, the
              mechanistic information obtained will be used to design and synthesize
              inhibitors of these enzymes. Sialyltransferase inhibitors may be useful tools
              to elucidate the biological functions of sialic acid-containing glycoproteins,
              which are involved in inflammation and metastasis.  The education component
              involves the development of a biochemistry curriculum in the Chemistry
              Department at the University of Florida.  One new course at the undergraduate
              level is "Biochemistry Laboratory", in which students learn how to create and
              analyze recombinant DNA molecules using state-of-the-art techniques. Students
              then use the recombinant DNA to produce a human enzyme, which will be purified
              and analyzed. Undergraduate students are also involved in research in the
              Principal Investigators laboratory, providing them with actual research
              training. New graduate level courses include "Enzymes and Enzyme Mechanisms" in
              which the fundamentals of enzyme m
