Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Scattering Theory for N-particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9501033

Award Number: 9501033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Ralston ralston@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Izabella J. Laba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9501033  PI: Ralston  Scattering theory for N-particle systems      The
              subject of the proposed research is scattering theory for N-particle  
              Schrodinger operators with constant magnetic fields. In contrast to the   case
              when no magnetic field is present (which is now well understood),   very little
              was previously known about it despite its mathematical and   physical
              significance. The main task will be to prove asymptotic   completeness for such
              operators, i.e., to give a complete classification   of all solutions of the
              corresponding time-dependent Schrodinger equation   according to their
              large-time asymptotic behaviour. Recently C. Gerard and   the author proved
              asymptotic completeness for N-body systems containing no   proper neutral
              subsystems (this class includes atoms and positive ions).   The aim of the
              proposed research is to extend these results to the case of   general N-body
              systems, including negative ions and molecules. The main   problem here will be
              to analyze the dispersive behaviour of the neutral   subsystems. Their dynamics
              depends on their internal structure and   therefore may be very unstable under
              perturbations. A deeper understanding   of the geometrical structures related
              to the magnetic field will also be   required.    This research deals with
              fundamental questions about how the structure   matter is affected by the
              presence of a magnetic field. Almost all of   the earlier results on this
              subject were obtained under the simplifying   assumption that the motion of the
              nuclei is negligible; mathematically,   this means studying an approximation
              where nuclei have infinite mass.   However, this simplified model is not always
              appropriate in physics,   especially since our research has shown that there
              are important   qualitative differences between the properties of this model
              and a more   realistic one with finite nuclear masses. Furthermore, although
              this   problem is of considerable interest in physics and astrophysics (for  
              example, strong magnetic fields are ex pected to exist on the surfaces   of
              neutron stars), no predictions could be made on the basis of  experiments. The
              reason for this is that the magnetic fields that can be   generated in the
              labolatories are not strong enough for their effect on   the systems in
              question to be detected. One thus has to rely on a   theoretical analysis of
              the problem.
