Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Tycho Reference Catalogue, A
               Catalogue of Positions and Proper Motions of 1 Million Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9501044

Award Number: 9501044
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Morrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501044  Morrison      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Jane E. Morrison to
              work with Dr. Siegfried  Roeser at the Astronomisches Rechen-Institut in
              Heidelberg,  Germany.    The Astronomisches Rechen-Institut is beginning a
              project to    produce a catalogue of positions and proper motions of one   
              million stars, called the Tycho Reference Catalogue (TRC),    by combining two
              international catalogues:  the Astrographic    Catalogue (AC) and the Tycho
              Catalogue.  It will be an    extension of the Hipparcos system to higher star
              densities    and fainter magnitudes.  The catalogue will be produced as a   
              collaboration between scientists in Germany, Denmark,    Sweden, Russian and,
              by way of this postdoctoral fellow's    participation, the United States.  An
              additional by-product    proper motion catalogue, less precise than the TRC,
              but    containing roughly 4 million stars will be compiled using    the
              Astrographic Catalogue and the Guide Star Catalogue. The    TRC will have
              widespread applications to many fields of    astronomy, such as, studies of
              galactic structure, binary    stars, stellar clusters, and secular parallaxes.
              ***
