Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Nonlinear Diffusion and Diffusive Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1997   
File        : a9501511

Award Number: 9501511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Cohen dscohen@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9162,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A model has been developed for the theoretical description of large classes of
              problems  involving nonlinear diffusion and diffusive transport in modern
              polymeric materials. Of paramount  importance in many applications is the
              formation and propagation (according to prescribed time rules)  of multiple
              sharp (shock-like) diffusive fronts usually involving non-equilibrium, time
              dependent  diffusion processes, mechanical relaxation, and unusual physics and
              chemistry at fixed and moving  boundaries and at interfaces between glassy and
              rubbery states of the polymer. Precise understanding  and coltrol of these
              fronts is critical for the technological design, fabrication, and use of these 
              devices. In collaboration with an experimental group at Columbia University,
              the model will be  employed to attempt to understand the basic science involved
              in non-Fickian diffusion of types Case  II, Super-Case II, Sorption Overshoot,
              and Two-Stage at the glass-rubber transition. Various  technological problems
              will be formulated, and techniques will be devised to solve the resulting 
              nonlinear partial differential  and integral equations involving unusual
              boundary conditions at fixed  and moving boundaries.  Polymers, composites, and
              synthetic modern materials are replacing traditional  materials in many
              scientific, engineering, commercial, and military applications, and wholly new 
              devices, applications, and even entire new fields are emerging because of the
              existence of these new  materials. This has resulted from rapid and
              simultaneous developments in materials science, synthetic  chemistry, and
              biotechnology. The list of important scientific and technological advances
              being  achieved and contemplated is truly astounding. For example, it is now
              thought that fundamental  advances can be made in the areas of new adhesives,
              light-weight and incredibly strong bonding  materials and sheet molding
              compounds, heat shielding devices, pharmaceuticals and medical drug  delivery
              systems, exotic composites designed through self-assembly at the
              micro-structure level,  devices that work as a result of understanding and
              controlling glass-rubber phase change boundaries,  and environmental protective
              and clean-up devices and materials. Observation and experiments with the  new
              materials clearly indicate that, in many respects, classical theories and
              results are not  applicable. New theories and models, and the analytical and
              numerical techniques needed to analyze  them, will be developed in this
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
