Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical And Quantum Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9501233

Award Number: 9501233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Sattinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9501233 Sattinger  The isospectral flows of a second order  energy dependent
              Schrodinger operator will be investigated. The  associated inverse scattering
              problem cannot be resolved by the  Gel'fand-Levitan-Marchenko method; but
              instead must be treated by  solving a Riemann-Hilbert problem on an appropriate
              Riemann  surface. The flows themselves divide into two cases. The two  distinct
              flows have global solutions only when the initial data  is restricted to
              suitable invariant submanifolds. The asymptotic  behavior of the solutions will
              be investigated using the recent  methods developed by Deift and Zhou for
              analyzing long time  asymptotics of solutions to Riemann-Hilbert problems. The
              nature  of the break-down of the solutions for inapprmpriate data will be 
              investigated. The Hamiltonian for the three wave interaction  contains a cubic
              interaction term and a kinetic energy term that  allows unbounded positive and
              negative energies, as in quantum  electrodynamics. The model thus contains a
              number of interesting  features, including creation and annihilation processes.
              The  model serves as a paradigm for such processes in elementary  particle
              physics.   Modern techniques for analyzing nonlinear  waves will be applied to
              models of physical interest. The first  model consists of equations
              approximating waves in fluids. These  models allow for singularities to
              develop, similar to waves  breaking in the ocean. An attempt will be made to
              analyze the  structure of the singularities. The second model consists of 
              quantum versions of classical equations that arise in nonlinear  optics. The
              system exhibits processes similar to those in  elementary particle
              interactions, in which particles are created  and destroyed.
