Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Control of Variable Coefficient Partial Differential
               Equations: Elastic Bodies and Schrodinger Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9501051

Award Number: 9501051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Horn horn@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501051  Horn  This project focuses on boundary controllability and
              stabilization of elastic systems and  has the two primary objectives.  The
              first is to address the question of controllability of  a Kirchhoff plate model
              with nonconstant coefficients in the principal part of the  differential
              operator and with control acting as a moment on the boundary.  Because of  the
              close relationship between the Kirchhoff plate and a time-dependent
              Schroedinger  equation with potential, as a first step, a general technique
              which relies on local  smoothing properties of the solution is used to
              establish exact boundary controllability  the Schroedinger equation with
              continuous coefficients.  These results will then be  utilized to establish
              exact boundary controllability of the Kirchhoff plate equation.  The  second
              major goal is to resolve the issue of controllability for the equations of
              three-  dimensional linear elasticity, an issue which naturally arises when
              moving from two-  dimensional plate models to mathematical models of general
              three-dimensional elastic  bodies.  Results currently available assume very
              strict geometric conditions on the  domain even when the control is acting on
              the entire boundary.  To examine the  boundary controllability problem for the
              fully coupled system while eliminating these  stringent geometric restrictions,
              an approach based on energy estimates and microlocal  analysis techniques will
              be used.  Derivation of trace regularity estimates for the solution  of the
              system of linear elasticity will be a critical step in the process.   
              Extensions of boundary controllability results from linear, constant
              coefficient distributed  parameter systems to systems with nonconstant
              coefficients are mf great importance  both mathematically and physically. 
              Accurate mathematical modeling of many important  physical systems requires
              that spatial inhomogeneities be admitted into the model and  that the physical
              parameters in the model be permitted to vary with time. For this  reason, it 
              is important to develop a control theory based on these more accurate models 
              of the physical world.  In particular, a control theory for such models based
              on boundary  sensors and actuators is sought, since one of the most important
              applications of such  a theory is to the problem of controlling large flexible
              structures, where the natural  locations for both measurements and controls are
              the joints and outer edges of the  structure.  Because both elastic plate
              models and equations of linear elasticity may be  used to model components,
              such as airfoils and solar panels, of many structures,  understanding how such
              elements can be controlled is a significant step to the  development of a
              comprehensive control strategy for complex systems.  ***
