Title       : CAREER: Configurational Defect Arrangements in Multi- Component Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9501856

Award Number: 9501856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerbrand Ceder gerd@lanai.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501856  Ceder    This CAREER proposal contains both educational and research 
              components.  The educational part involves the development  of a Computing
              Initiative in the Materials Science and  Engineering department at MIT.  The
              investigator is  contributing towards the integration of the teaching of 
              modelling and computation in materials into both the  undergraduate and
              graduate curricula.  He is working with  software and hardware vendors to
              support this initiative and  is setting up a support structure for the
              instructors of the  core materials classes.  He is developing a new graduate 
              course on computational materials science.  The research  component develops
              methods used to predict phase diagrams  and defect arrangements in
              multi-component oxides.  This  approach makes it possible to predict defect
              arrangements in  oxides.  Two applications on which attention is being  focused
              are stabilized zirconias and order-disorder in the  pyrochlore-forming oxides. 
              %%%  As part of NSF's new CAREER program geared toward  academically young
              investigators, this project involves both  educational and research components.
               The educational part  supports the development of a Computing Initiative in
              the  Materials Science and Engineering department at MIT.  The  investigator is
              contributing towards the integration of the  teaching of modelling and
              computation in materials into both  the undergraduate and graduate curricula. 
              He is working  with software and hardware vendors to support this  initiative
              and is setting up a support structure for the  instructors of the core
              materials classes.  He is developing  a new graduate course on computational
              materials science.  The research component develops methods used to predict 
              phase diagrams and defect arrangements in multi-component  oxides, which are
              both of scientific and technological  interest.  This approach makes it
              possible to predict defect  arrangements in oxides.  Such work leads to a
              better  understanding of the relation between composition, the rmal  treatment,
              and properties of a system, and therefore  ultimately to better materials.  ***
