Title       : CAREER: Optoelectronic Materials and Device Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9501703

Award Number: 9501703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Lord   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501703  Lord  The main educational goals of this project are to further the 
              development of courses in the area of optoelectronic materials and  devices. 
              This includes:    1) Improving the required junior-level Electronics I and II 
              sequence by encompassing basic concepts of device physics and  adding more
              laboratories on optoelectronic devices.    2) Continuing the development of the
              lecture component of an  elective course on Optoelectronic Materials and
              Devices and adding  a laboratory to it.  These courses address such topics as
              crystal  growth, lasers, photodetectors, and fiber optic systems.    3)
              Developing a new elective course on Materials Characterization  for electrical
              engineers and other interested students.  Techniques  covered in this course
              would include atomic force microscopy (AFM),  photoluminescence (PL), and X-ray
              diffraction.    The main research goal of this project is to explore the growth
              of  lattice mismatched materials for long wavelength device operation.   Low
              temperature compositionally-graded buffer layers will be used  in the molecular
              beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of lattice mismatched  materials to produce
              photodetectors at long wavelengths such as 2  um where lattice-matched
              materials are not available.  Different  profiles for accomplishing a
              compositionally-graded buffer layer  including linear composition grading,
              linear source temperature  grading, and small step grading will be compared. 
              Such materials  will be characterized using various techniques including atomic
               force microscopy (AFM), photoluminescence (PL), transmission,  photocurrent,
              and X-ray diffraction.  This research will contribute  significantly to the
              growth of a multitude of technologically  interesting materials on the
              relatively small number of available  high quality substrates.  ***
