Title       : Bayesian Methods for Multiple Sequence Alignment and RelatedStatistical Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9501570

Award Number: 9501570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun S. Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9501570  Liu  Abstract (technical)    Multiple sequence alignment is crucial in
              research on the  structure and function of gene   products, through promoting
              the detection and description of  sequence motifs;  aiding   efforts at protein
              modeling, structure prediction and  engineering; and  shedding light on  
              molecular evolution and phylogeny construction in molecular  systematics.  We
              recently   presented new local  alignment algorithms (Lawrence et al. 1993, 
              1994) based on Bayesian   modeling and  Gibbs sampling. In this project, we
              propose to  develop several extensions   of our original Bayesian model  to
              accommodate various practical  situations, and to   investigate several
              statistical problems arisen from our study of  the alignment problem. On   the
              applied side, we wish to accomplish the following: (1) relax  the existence
              assumption   and develop Bayesian models to simultaneously detect and align 
              the common  multiple   motifs in the sequences; (2) combine the idea of
              Markovian  structure modeling of   sequence data (e.g., hidden Markov Model)
              with the block-based  method of Lawrence et.   al. (1993) to enhance the
              alignment of multiple motifs; (3)  modify and apply  the   methodology
              developed previously and in this project to several  other important biological
                problems: the detection of subtle sequence signals in noncoding  DNA region;
              the   prediction of protein secondary structures; and the combination  of
              threading and alignment.   On the theoretical  side, we attempt to (4)
              understand the nature  and potential of predictive   updating in connection
              with the bootstrap,  the Bayesian  bootstrap, and general   nonparametric
              problems; (5) develop model selection criteria that  are useful for  
              determining pattern width in alignment problems; (6) study the  influence of
              prior   specifications  on the results and frequency properties of these 
              results in  Bayesian   classification problems; and finally, (7) study
              convergence  properties of several sampling   algorithms.    During  the award
              period, I will develop my own styles on teaching  introductory probability  
              and statistics courses with an emphasis on statistical thinking,  and get
              involved in a   program designed to attract talented undergraduates into our 
              field. I will also make an effort   to develop new graduate level courses on 
              current research areas  such as image processing,   missing data, Markov Chain
              Monte Carlo, genetics and biology. My  guideline for directing   graduate
              students is: independence, connections, and creativity.            9501570  Liu
                 Abstract (nontechnical)    A wealth of data concerning life's basic
              molecules, proteins and  nucleic acids, has emerged   from the biotechnology
              revolution. The human genome project has  accelerated the growth   of these
              data. Multiple observations of homologous protein or  nucleic acid sequences
              from   different organisms are often available.  However, since  mutations and
              sequence errors   misalign these data, multiple sequence alignment has become
              an  essential and  valuable    tool for  understanding the structures and
              functions of these  molecule, aiding efforts at   protein modeling,  structure
              prediction and engineering; and   shedding light on molecular   evolution and
              phylogeny construction in molecular systematics.  Traditional algorithms for  
              finding such alignment are either too computationally expensive  so as to limit
              their   applications or too heuristic so that the sensitivity to subtle 
              patterns is lost.  We recently   presented new local  alignment algorithms
              (Lawrence et al. 1993,  1994) based on a    probabilistic model of the
              sequences and a  stochastic simulation  technique  called the   Gibbs sampler.
              In this project, we propose to develop several  extensions of our original  
              probabilistic  model  to accommodate various practical  situations, and to
              investigate several   statistical problems arisen from our study of the
              alignment  problem. On the applied side,   we wish to accomplish the following:
              (1) relax the existence  assum ption and develop    more general mixture 
              models to simultaneously detect and align   common  patterns in   multiple
              homologous biological sequences; (2) investigate the  connection between our  
              method and  other successful approaches such as the hidden Markov  modeling;
              (3) modify   and apply  the methodology developed previously and in this 
              project to several other   important biological problems: the detection of
              subtle sequence  signals in noncoding DNA   region; the prediction of protein
              secondary structures; and the  combination of threading and   alignment. On the
              theoretical  side, we attempt to (4) understand  the nature and potential   of
              the  predictive updating, a new  iterative simulation method,   in connection
              with the   bootstrap,  the Bayesian bootstrap, and general nonparametric 
              problems; (5) develop model   selection criteria that are useful for
              determining pattern width  in alignment problems; (6)   study the influence of
              prior specifications  on the final  alignment results; and finally, (7)   study
              convergence properties of several stochastic simulation   algorithms.    
              During the award period, I will develop my own styles on teaching  introductory
              probability   and statistics courses with an emphasis on statistical thinking, 
              and get involved in a   program designed to attract talented undergraduates
              into our  field. I will also make an effort   to develop new graduate level
              courses on  current research areas  such as image processing,   missing data,
              Markov Chain Monte Carlo, genetics and biology. My  guideline for directing  
              graduate students is: independence, connections, and creativity.
