Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theory and Applications of Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9501514

Award Number: 9501514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Craig craigw@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Walter Craig    NSF DMS 9501514    The principal investigator will pursue a
              research program in four areas of   the theory of partial differential
              equations, all of which are interesting   problems in mathematical analysis,
              and all of them motivated by problems   in mathematical physics and applied
              mathematics. The first topic is the   continued development of methods of
              Kolmogorov, Arnold and Moser (KAM)   that are suited to systems with infinitely
              many degrees of freedom. This   includes nonlinear evolution equations such as
              the nonlinear wave   equation, nonlinear Schrodinger equation, versions of the
              Korteweg deVries   equation, and the water waves system of equations for the
              free surface of   a fluid. The intent of the work is to understand the stable
              motions of   these nonlinear evolution equations, and to describe some of the
              principal   invariant structures of the infinite dimensional phase spaces in
              which   they are posed. The second project concerns further the water wave
              system,   and its asymptotic scaling limits in the most physically important
              scaling   regimes. This analysis sets rigorous bounds on the descriptions of
              waves   in free surfaces by modulation theory and by long wave theories
              described   by the Boussinesq and the Korteweg deVries equations. Several new
              elements   of analysis have already been introduced which are useful in
              numerical   modeling of the fluid dynamical problem.   The third research
              project concerns the evolution of singularities of   Schrodinger's equation, in
              both the linear and nonlinear cases. The goal   is to understand the location
              and structure of the singularities of the   fundamental solution, which is
              microlocal information and is related to   the classical trajectories of the
              high energy particles. Finally, the   fourth subject concerns the quantum
              mechanical inverse spectral problem,   the object being to understand the
              spectral transform in the three principal   settings of scattering theory,
              Floquet theory and the theory of random   potentia ls, and to quantify the
              similarities between these settings.       As mathematics is the language of
              the sciences, physical phenomena   are understood through the properties of
              solutions of the equations  of physics, which are for the most part partial
              differential equations.   The investigator's principal interests are in the
              equations which   describe conservative phenomena, which are most often
              Hamiltonian   systems. The problems that are addressed in this project proposal
               are all of central importance in the physical and engineering sciences,   and
              govern a remarkable variety of systems, from fluid motions of  the ocean
              surface to the nonlinear quantum mechanics of semiconductor   devices. The
              goals of all four projects are to understand important   aspects of the
              solutions of these equations, all of which are relevant   to the understanding
              of the systems, and many of them which also present   very challenging problems
              in mathematical analysis. One observation is   that it is remarkable that one
              finds related structure in systems which   describe very different phenomena.
              For example in the first project   there is a relation between the description
              of nonlinear quantum   mechanics and wave phenomena in water surfaces; this
              becomes clear   only in the mathematical analysis of the two systems.
              Furthermore the   mathematical analysis has in some cases led to improvements
              in the   modeling of the physical systems, and to the implementation of new  
              computational procedures for predicting wave phenomena, which is a   topic
              relevant to ocean and climate modeling in the Federal strategic   interest area
              of global change and the environment.
