Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Survey of Woodlark Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9501966

Award Number: 9501966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Damon fhd@Virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Plog  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Damon    Under the direction of Drs. Frederick Damon and Stephen Plog, Mr. 
              Simon Bickler will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He  will conduct
              an archaeological survey and excavation on Woodland  Island in the Milne Bay
              Province of Papua New Guinea. A  systematic survey will be carried out to
              develop a model of  prehistoric settlement on Woodlark, focusing initially
              along the  coastlines of a central strip of the island. Particular areas of 
              interest, including a prehistoric stone axe quarry and  archaeological features
              such as stone megaliths and trenches will  be examined in particular detail.
              Surface collections of pottery  and other artifacts will provide a rough
              chronological sequence  for the settlement of the island. In addition, clay and
              stone  sources will be sampled to provide the basis for a petrographic  and
              chemical characterization program to model larger interisland  trade.   
              Melanesia, which includes Woodland Island is well known to  anthropologists
              because of the "Kula" exchange system which  developed there. People who speak
              different languages and live on  widely separated islands engage in a complex
              ritual exchange  system in which items of symbolic value are traded among
              specific  interlocking sets of groups in very tightly defined ways. Because  of
              its unique nature and the role it serves to bind widely  separated groups into
              a common social network, it has been the  object of intense anthropological
              study. However it is not known  when or how this system developed and it has
              not been possible to  study how this system developed. The goal of Mr.
              Bickler's work  is to provide such information.    This work is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data  of interest to many archaeologists and
              social anthropologists. It  will shed light on social organization of people
              who live in  traditional societies and will assist in the training of a 
              promising young scientist.  ***
