Title       : Support for the Annual Meteoritical Society Meeting, Smithsonian Institution,
               Washington DC, September 11-15, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9501547

Award Number: 9501547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12862              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn MacPherson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the 58th annual meeting of the Metoritical
              Society which will be held in Washington, DC in  September, 1995.  Additional
              support is provided by NASA, the Carnegie Institution of Washington, The
              Barringer Foundation, JEOL  USA Inc., and the Smithsonian Institution.  Funding
              from the National Science Foundation will be used for travel grants for
              students  and for scientists from the former Soviet Bloc countries.  This
              meeting is a valuable forum for presentation of new scientific results, 
              exchange of scientific ideas, and stimulation of potential collaborative work. 
                Meteoritical Society meetings are technical conferences with wide
              international participation.  Meeting venues generally alternate  between
              Europe and the United States, reflecting the sub-equal membership in the
              Society from the two continents.  These meetings  typically draw scientists
              from Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India,
              Japan, the Netherlands, Russia,  Switzerland, the UK, and the United States. 
              As many as 400 participants are expected at the Washington meeting.   
              Technical sessions are dominated by mineralogical, isotopic and chemical
              studies of meteorites, theoretical studies of early solar system  processes,
              and field and theoretical studies of impact phenomena.  The overall scientific
              theme is learning about the formation and  evolution of our solar system and
              its components, and solar systems in general.  Recent topics of interest have
              included the nature and  origin of interstellar grains found in chondrite
              meteorites, the distribution of short-lived radio-nuclides and their role in
              early planetary  melting, the nature of volatiles in Martian  SNC  meteorites
              and their implications for the volatile budget on Mars, the origin of 
              isotopically-anomalous material in the early solar system, and the possible
              secular variations in the meteorite population bombarding  Earth over the past
              several tens of thousands of years.  A special session at the 1995 meet ing
              will be devoted to the formation and  evolution of the asteroid belt and the
              relation between the meteorite population and the asteroid population.  A
              plenary session is  planned to address the state of planetary sciences in
              general together with an overview of science learned from meteorites collected 
              through the highly successful Antarctic Search for Meteorites program.  A
              public lecture at the National Air and Space Museum  addressing a topic of
              popular interest is also planned for one evening.
