Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Number Theory and Allied Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9501101

Award Number: 9501101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160250             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Andrews andrews@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dale Brownawell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501101:  Andrews Abstract.  This award supports the research of Professors
              George Andrews and W. Dale Brownawell in combinatorics, number theory and
              commutative algebra.  One main theme of this research is to develop new methods
              in q-series and hypergeometric series to further discoveries in the theory of
              partitions, number theory, representation theory and the applications of random
              graphs in computer science.  A second direction is to study an algorithmic
              effective Nullstellensatz, isogeny of Drinfeld modules, independence criteria
              in diophantine rings, and zero estimates for solutions of differential
              equations.      This research is in the general areas of combinatorics and
              number theory, and also involves the interaction of these areas with
              commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.  Combinatorics attempts to find
              efficient methods to study how discrete collections of objets can be arranged. 
              The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
              communications.  For example, the design of large networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer
              science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
              research.  Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
              numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of
              one whole number by another.  It is among the oldest branches of mathematics
              and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.  However,
              within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse
              applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
              communication systems.
