Title       : CAREER: Design and Analysis of Efficient Graph Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9501712

Award Number: 9501712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monika R. Henzinger mhr@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This CAREER project focuses on both research and educational goals. The
              research  component of this project addresses fundamental questions in
              interactive systems  such as programming  environments or on-line access to
              travel services.  A key  factor for the success of interactive  systems lies in
              their speed and, thus, in  efficient algorithms for interactively handling
              requests.  One powerful paradigm  in the design of efficient algorithms is to
              reduce the amount of recomputation  by storing essential information gathered
              during earlier computational steps in  a suitable data  structure for later
              use.  In interactive situations an  additional difficulty arises:  The problem 
              instance changes incrementally,  which requires dynamic data structures.  While
              efficient dynamic data  structures are widely used, efficient dynamic data
              structures for graphs are  still in the research  phase.  This project includes
              the following research  goals:     (1)   Design of dynamic data structures
              which exploits recent progress  in using approximation and randomization in the
              design of graph algorithms; (2)  Applications of dynamic data structures to
              improve the efficiency of algorithms  for incrementally changing problems. 
              These applications can be used on problems  which do not necessarily fit the
              dynamic framework.  For example, using dynamic  techniques, a  faster algorithm
              for the consensus tree problem is explored.  This algorithm has applications in
              computational biology and in the theory of  databases; (3) Implementation of
              dynamic data structures for graphs,  which  extends the widely-used Library of
              Efficient Data Types and Algorithms (LEDA).  The Educational Component of this
              CAREER Grant includes the goals in  undergraduate and graduate education:  (1) 
              At the undergraduate level a basic  goal is to redesign the senior-level
              algorithms course to teach the use of  efficient advanced data structures by
              asking for implementations of algorithms  in homework assignments and projects
              using LEDA;  (2)  A second basic goal is to  promote the advancement of women
              engineers by:  Counseling and mentoring female  students; Giving presentations
              to industry and students; Participating in  workshops which are sponsored by
              Cornell University's outreach program,  Expanding Your Horizons Program, for
              (female) middle school students.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
