Title       : GEM: Data-Based Models of the Geospace Magnetic Field for the GEM Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1997  
File        : a9501463

Award Number: 9501463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai A. Tsyganenko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mauricio Peredo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Raytheon Tech Services Co
	      4400 Forbes Boulevard
	      Lanham-Seabrook, MD  20706    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  It is proposed to develop a new data-based model of the Earth's 
              magnetospheric magnetic field.      Modeling the geospace plasma environment is
              the essence of the GEM  project, and one of its special tasks is an accurate
              representation  of the distant geomagnetic configuration.  The model will be 
              specifically designed to meet the needs of the Geospace Circulation  Model
              providing the community with flexible tools to handle  magnetospheric current
              systems and quantitatively represent their  contributions to the total field.  
               The proposed study will be based on magnetometer data from many  spacecraft,
              accumulated over tens of years, and will use  sophisticated mathematical
              methods, allowing a flexible  representation of the observed fields.  The new
              model will provide  a realistic quantitative description of the geomagnetic
              field for  a wide range of distances, as a continuous analytical function of 
              the position, Earth's dipole tilt angle, solar wind  characteristics, the polar
              cap area, and appropriate geomagnetic  disturbance indices.    One of the
              principal goalq of this project will be to represent not  just the average
              magnetospheric configurations, but also its large-  scale time variations. 
              Specifically, it is intended to  quantitatively model such phenomena as       
              (i)   compression/expansion of the magnetopause in response to            
              solar wind gusts,       (ii)  gradual re-distribution of the magnetic flux
              during the             substorm growth phase, induced by the interplanetary    
                         magnetic field, and       (iii) formation of the substorm electric
              current system             leading to the collapse of the previously stretched 
                         configuration.    The main product of this effort will be computer
              codes for deriving  the time-varying model magnetic field.
