Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Multivariate Process Monitoring with
               Correlated Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9501903

Award Number: 9501903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina M. Mastrangelo cm4m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501903   This research is focused on the quality control problem of
              understanding processes whose behaviors are affected by multiple,
              autocorrelated variables.  Traditional statistical process control (SPC) is
              based on a single variable and the assumption of normality, independence, and
              homogeneous variance.  This research capitalizes on the inappropriateness of
              these assumptions and the use of a single variable as a basis to understand and
              control a process when indeed in today's industrial environment there could be
              multiple, autocorrelated variables.  The objective of the research is to
              systematically explore the behavior, sensitivity, and consistency of several
              multivariate quality control methods when autocorrelated multivariate data is
              present.  These methods include the multivariate EWMA, principal component
              analysis, and multiple time series.  The research was motivated by the lack of
              sufficient analytical tools to handle statistical process control situations in
              which multiple correlated factors influence the behavior of a process.  The
              research plans to pursue the use of different forms of models to address the
              problem.  The educational component of the research presents the investigator's
              teaching philosophy, methods of tracking teaching performance, and students
              understanding and involvement in the materials being taught.  The investigator
              will deploy and integrate the research outcome into classroom by developing a
              new combined course in statistics and quality control with emphasis on the use
              of these techniques to solving industry-relevant problems in statistical
              process control.  In addition, the techniques investigated in the research for
              the purpose of improving processes will be used to improve teaching
              effectiveness.   The potential for the research is good.  The outcome of the
              research can advance the body of knowledge in the broad area of multivariate
              process control.  This will lead to a better understanding of process behavior
              and method of control.  Improved control has  a positive relationship to
              productivity and consequently, on competitiveness.  By disseminating the
              research outcome through classroom instructions, students will gain an
              understanding of how process behavior is affected by process control
              parameters.  They will also gain valuable experience on how to monitor and
              control processes in actual industrial settings.
