Title       : Near-Field Optical Spectroscopic Studies of Thin Film Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9501773

Award Number: 9501773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Buratto buratto@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  lateral structural
              characterization of organic and inorganic layers  in the nanometer length
              domain.  During the tenure of this three-  year continuing grant, Professor
              Buratto and his students at the  University of California - Santa Barbara will
              utilize near-field  scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) in conjunction with
              established  spectroscopic techniques to probe the local structure and dynamics
               of thin-film optical and opto-electronic materials with nanometer  resolution
              and single molecule sensitivity.  Component clustering,  conformational
              analysis, molecular ordering, and environment  fluctuations of self-assembled
              monolayer and multilayer films,  conducting and semiconducting polymer films,
              and inorganic  semiconductor quantum structures will be examined.  Charge
              carrier  transport, diffusion, and trapping in these systems will also be 
              characterized.  These studies should provide useful insights into  the role of
              localized chemistry and physics in the performance of  these materials.  Also
              during this grant period, Professor Buratto  will pursue an educational
              development plan that includes the broad  introduction of laser spectroscopy in
              undergraduate physical and  analytical chemistry courses, and the development
              of new courses in  nonlinear optics and microscopy for advanced undergraduate
              and  graduate students.    The ability to characterize optical and
              opto-electronic materials  in the nanoscale regime is essential to
              understanding the  structure-performance relationships of these technologically
               important systems.  Through application of near-field scanning  optical
              microscopy and other complementary optical spectroscopic  techniques, this
              CAREER research project will lead to a fundamental  understanding of the local
              chemistry and physics of these thin-film  organic and inorganic materials, as
              well as insights into  relationships between local ord er/disorder and
              materials  performance.  The educational development aspects of this CAREER 
              project will enrich the physical and analytical chemistry  curriculum available
              to undergraduate and graduate students at the  University of California - Santa
              Barbara.
