Title       : CAREER: Data Transmission Techniques: Trellis-Decoding and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9501345

Award Number: 9501345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Vardy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              NCR-9501345  Alexander Vardy    The first focus of this research is on decoding
              of trellis codes.   The work will attempt to establish new lower bounds on the
              trellis  complexity of linear codes, to investigate the asymptotic trellis 
              complexity of linear codes, to find the optimal sectionalization of  a given
              trellis, to tabulate bounds on the trellis complexity for  all of the
              best-known linear codes, and to extrapolate the results  to lattices and sphere
              packings. The  second activity is the  development of novel data transmission
              techniques suited to  specific channels of practical importance and extending
              beyond the  classical error control approach.  Guided by the general principle 
              that the channel structure should be taken into account in a  well-designed
              communication system, the following channels will be  considered:  bursty
              intersymbol interference channels, such as  present day digital voice
              transmission, both twisted pair and  wireless, and emerging digital subscriber
              loops;  maximum a  posteriori likelihood channels characterized by a nonuniform
              a  priori distribution on the set of possible messages, arising in  fixed rate
              quantization without entropy coding; channels  characterized by an arbitrary
              specified set of most likely error  patterns, such as those arising in
              concatenated coding, logic  networks, and man-made noise environments;  and
              channels  characterized by subjective distortion criteria, rather than the 
              overall system BER, such as those arising in speech and image  coding.       
              NCR-9502582  Konstantopoulos, Takis    This is a proposal about the development
              of a rigorous approach  toward network management and performance analysis for
              high-speed  networks considering local and global aspects of a network 
              management system.  Local aspects include the design of flow  controllers at
              the edges of the network that take into account the  provision of quality of
              service and the interaction between users  in a network switch.  The
              investigator will extend recently  develop ed techniques that are based on the
              so-called reflection  mapping, develop testing techniques and simulations, and
              compare  these to existing schemes.    The investigator will also study traffic
              modeling.   He will  develop rigorous methods for validating self-similar
              traffic  processes arising from the operation of an integrated services 
              high-speed networks and use such models in establishing performance  analysis
              methods.    Studying the global aspects of a management system involves using 
              a macroscopic picture of the network currently being developed by  the
              investigator.  The picture strips out the minutiae of the  operation of the
              network, while retaining its dynamic character (it  is not static).  The
              investigator proposes the use of such a  picture by a network management system
              in order to predict,  prevent, and correct undesirable behavior that might lead
              to  degradation of services across the network.
