Title       : Gloval Bifurcation & Asymptotics Behavior in Nonlinear Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9501497

Award Number: 9501497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Ward ward@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mubenga N. Nkashama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              501497  Ward    Systems of ordinary or parabolic partial differential equations 
              serve in modeling many physical systems. The differential  equations typically
              contain parameters whose values correspond to  physical properties of the
              system. Such a system generates a  dynamical  system in an appropriate phase
              space. To understand a dynamical  system  we should determine its compact
              invariant sets, which  contain  the  non-transient solutions such as
              equilibria, periodic solutions,  or ones  of greater complexity. It is
              important also to determine the  behavior  of the transient solutions with
              respect to the non-transients.  Finally,  one should know how all of this
              depends upon the parameters. For  example,  a parameter change may induce a
              stable or hyperbolic equilibrium  state  to bifurcate into one or more
              time-periodic solutions, or ones  with a  more complex time structure. The
              Conley homotopy index theory  contains  concepts and methods that can be used
              to prove existence, and  determine  the properties, of compact isolated
              invariant sets in a dynamical  system.  Like topological degree the index is
              locally constant, and if the  index  changes as a parameter crosses a value, a
              bifurcation is implied.  A  major part of this project is the application of
              Conley homotopy  index  methods to study bifurcation in systems of
              reaction-diffusion  equations.  The investigators will: (I) Continue
              investigations of continua  of  full bounded solutions bifurcating from trivial
              solutions in  infinite  dimensional dynamical systems, especially in nonlinear
              reaction-  diffusion systems. Using Conley homotopy index methods Ward 
              recently  demonstrated conditions for the existence of such bifurcating 
              continua.  Two of the main goals of this project are to fully describe the 
              global  aspects of these continua, and to apply the results to the study  of 
              global bifurcation of equilibria in gradient systems. (II) Study  bifurcation
              and persistence in reaction-diffusion models arising  in  population biology an
              d chemistry. Physically meaningful solutions  must  have non-negative
              components. In this connection the  investigators  propose the development of a
              homotopy index bifurcation theory  for  nonlinear ordinary and parabolic
              partial differential systems  which  have an invariant non-negative cone. (III)
              Build on their earlier  work  on nonautonomous differential equations. In
              particular, they will  continue the development of a homotopy index based
              theory for  nonlinear  time-dependent ordinary and parabolic partial
              differential  systems. In  this case a dynamical system is not generated in the
              space of  initial  values, but one can associate a skew-product flow and use
              the  Conley  theory to study its invariant sets. From this one can derive 
              information regarding the original system. The investigators will  focus  on
              existence, dynamics, and bifurcation phenomena. (IV) Study  related  problems
              for semilinear parabolic partial differential equations  with  nonlinear
              boundary conditions, such the existence and asymptotic  stability of periodic
              solutions, and the effect of interactions  between  the spectrum of the linear
              part of such equations with the  nonlinearities.  %%%   Differential equations
              model physical phenomena such as  mechanical  systems, chemical reactions, and
              the spread of disease.  An  initial state  (e.g., initial number of infected
              individuals) then evolves over  time  according to the laws of the system
              expressed by its equations.  This  constitutes a dynamical system. A goal of
              dynamical systems  theory is to  describe how the states of the system evolve.
              Thus, the number of  fish  of a given species in a lake might tend toward a
              steady, fixed  population,  while the number of  individuals infected at any
              given time with  a  transmittable disease, such as  chicken pox,  may exhibit a
               periodic  behavior, peaking every six or seven years. To understand a  complex
               dynamical system one should determine the non-transient or  long-term 
              phenomena such as equilibria, time-periodic  regimes, and others  perhaps  of a
              more complex nature, the relation between the transient  solutions  and the
              non-transients, and how this all depends on system  parameters.  Mathematical
              models depend upon certain parameters fom the  physical system,  such as the
              volume of a lake in a study of its fish population or  diffusion  rates in a
              chemical reaction. The nature of the long-term  behavior of a  system may
              depend upon its parameter values. If the parameters  change,  the number or
              structure of the non-transient solutions can  change.  Such a parameter
              dependent change is a bifurcation. Another kind  of  bifurcation occurs when
              the behavior of the transients changes,  as when  an equilibrium point (a
              non-transient) loses stablity with a  parameter  change. Non-transient
              solutions correspond to invariant sets in  the  dynamical system. The homotopy
              index theory was developed by  Charles  Conley and others to analyze the
              existence and properties of  isolated  invariant sets in dynamical systems. It
              also can be used to show  that  bifurcations must take place at certain
              parameter values. A main  part  of this project involves the application of
              Conley homotopy index  methods to bifurcation phenomena in systems of
              reaction-diffusion  equations. Reaction-diffusion systems of partial
              differential  equations  relate diffusion phenomena, such as diffusion of a
              chemical in a  medium,  with reaction rates, as in a chemical reaction. They
              serve as the  mathematical models of  a great many phenomena, including 
              chemical  reactions, population densities, and climate.  The investigators
              will: (I) Continue investigations of continua  (families of solutions joined
              together) of bounded solutions  bifurcating  from equilibrium solutions in
              nonlinear reaction-diffusion  systems.  By using Conley homotopy index methods
              Ward recently found  conditions  for the existence of such bifurcating
              continua. Two of the main  goals  of this project are to fully describe the
              global aspects of these  families of bifurcat ing solutions, and to apply these
              results to  study  global bifurcation of equilibria in gradient systems
              (systems  which,  in the long run, will reach an equilibrium state). (II) Study
               bifurcation and persistence in reaction-diffusion models arising  in 
              population biology and chemistry. (III) Build on their  earlier  work  on
              time-varying systems of differential equations. Such systems  exhibit 
              phenomena different from the time-independent systems discussed  above.  The
              investigators will continue to develop a homotopy index based  theory  for
              nonlinear time-dependent ordinary and parabolic partial  differential  systems.
               ***
