Title       : Singular Perturbation & Riemann Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9501255

Award Number: 9501255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Schecter schecter@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Biao Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501255  Schecter and Lin  The investigators propose to continue their research
              on composite  wave-front solutions for singularly perturbed partial 
              differential  equations and on Riemann problems for systems of conservation 
              laws.  Lin proposes to extend his earlier work on the construction of 
              asymptotic expansions for composite wave-front solutions of  reaction-diffusion
              equations, and on a shadowing lemma approach  to  proving that there is a true
              solution near such an expansion, to  more  general singularly perturbed partial
              differential equations and  to  partially singularly perturbed systems.  He
              also proposes to  extend to  higher dimensional systems the SLEP method for
              studying the  stability  of such solutions in a special case.  Schecter
              proposes to build  on  earlier work that characterized structurally stable
              strictly  hyperbolic  Riemann solutions for systems of two conservation laws in
              one  space  dimension.  He proposes in particular to extend this work to the 
              non-strictly-hyperbolic case, to find all codimension one Riemann  solutions by
              examining the violation of each of the conditions  for  structural stability,
              and to study each codimension one  bifurcation in  detail.  Schecter and Lin
              together propose to look at whether  Lin's  approach to singular perturbation
              problems will enable one to  regard a  Riemann problem solution as the start of
              an asymptotic expansion  of a  solution to an associated parabolic problem. 
              %%%  Sharp wave fronts occur in many areas of science.  From the  mathematical
              viewpoint, they arise as solutions of partial  differential  equations that
              model various physical situations.  The  investigators  propose to continue
              their research on wave fronts.  For one type  of  partial differential
              equation, reaction-diffusion equations, Lin  has  developed a method of
              calculating formal solutions in which  several  sharp fronts separate more
              slowly changing portions of the  solution.  He has also developed a rigorous
              method, modeled on the  "shadowing  lemma " of dynamical systems theory, of
              showing that there is a  true  solution near the calculated formal solution. 
              He proposes to  extend  this work to more general partial differential
              equations.  He  also  proposes to use his approach to extend a technique that
              has been  used  in a special case to study the stability of such solutions. 
              For  another type of partial differential equation, systems of two 
              conservation laws in one space dimension, Schecter has studied  solutions in
              which jump discontinuities separate slowly changing  portions.  These arise as
              solutions of Riemann problems, in which  the  initial state of the system
              consists of two constant values  separated  by a single jump.  Schecter has
              characterized the Riemann  solutions  that are structurally stable, in the
              sense that the basic  character of  the solution does not change when the
              initial states are varied  slightly.  He proposes to extend this work in a
              number of  directions,  for example, by identifying the simplest ways in which
              structural  stability can break down.  Schecter and Lin together propose to 
              look at  whether Lin's approach to calculating formal solutions with sharp 
              wave  fronts will enable one to a regard a Riemann solution as the  start of 
              such a formal solution to a more realistic partial differential  equation.  ***
