Title       : Ensemble Forecasting of Convective Weather Events Using a Mesoscale Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9501532

Award Number: 9501532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Warner warner@rap.ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian-Wen Bao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501532  Warner        Due to nonlinearities in the physics of the atmosphere,
              deterministic  predictions of the atmosphere have their limitations.  A
              technique known as  ensemble forecasting is believed to provide a mechanism for
              improving forecasts of  the atmosphere.  Ensemble forecasting involves running
              a series of numerical  predictions by changing, within reason, model initial
              conditions or model physics.   The objective is to provide forecasts that
              define the range of  possible solutions.   These techniques have shown promise
              for forecast improvement.        A joint project between the Cooperative
              Institute for Mesoscale  Meteorological Studies and the University of Colorado
              is proposed with the  objective to develop and test ensemble forecasting
              techniques for mesoscale models.   The proposed research will focus upon the
              difficulties involved in accurately  predicting mesoscale convective weather
              events.  Three specific objectives of the  research are:  1) to develop a 
              technique to modify the mesoscale model initial  conditions to define the
              ensemble group that maximizes the span of model solutions  across the
              predictability phase space using a minimum number of simulations, while 
              requiring that the ensemble initial conditions remain constrained to the error 
              characteristics of the available observations; 2) to explore the results of
              this  technique for both strongly and weakly forced large-scale environments;
              3) to  determine the applicability of using varying model physics in ensemble
              forecasting  methods..        Knowledge gained from this study will provide
              necessary information on how  to efficiently produce an ensemble forecast using
              a mesoscale model.  It is  anticipated that the model results also will provide
              some guidance on predicting the  model skill for given convective weather
              events.  ***
