Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Characterizing the Dynamics of Spatio-Temporal Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9501077

Award Number: 9501077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dieter H. Armbruster dieter@math.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Kostelich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501077  Armbruster         The apparent spatial coherence of many large-scale
              systems with  complex dynamics implies that the underlying behavior can be
              described  mathematically with relatively few degrees of freedom. The goal of
              this  research project is to elucidate the dynamical mechanisms that underlie
              such  spatio-temporal behavior by using a qtandard mathematical tool, sometimes
                called Karhunen-Loeve (K-L) analysis. In addition it is planned to apply some
                of the methods used so successfully for chaotic time series data to spatio- 
              temporal data. By using K-L analysis to find an approximate low dimensional  
              model of some of the spatio-temporal behavior, methods that have been  
              developed for chaotic time series data may be applicable to spatially  extended
              data.  In addition, it is planned to investigate control strategies for  
              spatio-temporally chaotic dynamics by developing appropriate control 
              mechanisms for suitable low-dimensional approximations.        The apparent
              spatial coherence of many large-scale systems with  complex dynamics implies
              that the underlying behavior can be described  mathematically with relatively
              few degrees of freedom. The goal of this  research project is to elucidate the
              dynamical mechanisms that underlie such  spatio-temporal behavior.  Examples
              currently under investigation include the  analysis of the onset of turbulence
              in 2-dimensional fluid flow and the  analysis of the dynamics of cellular
              flames that is complicated in space and  time.  This study is intended to
              characterize the spatio-temporally complex   motion of  the flame cells in
              order to develop a phenomenological model as a  prerequisite for systematically
              controlling the behavior of such cellular  flames. The long term potential of
              this research is considerable. The  experiments on flames are typical of many
              spatio-temporally complex  problems.  As a result of this research, fundamental
              mathematical insights  into the processes that generate and drive
              spatio-temporal structures are  expe cted. Such insight is a prerequisite for
              any advanced technological use  of nonlinear dynamics, for example, to control
              combustion processes or to  suppress and control boundary layer turbulence
              along airfoils.  ***
