Title       : CAREER: Empirical Investigations of Software Inspections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9501354

Award Number: 9501354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam A. Porter aporter@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This CAREER award supports research and instruction in the  empirical
              evaluation of software inspection methods.  Software  inspection is a  widely
              used, but very expensive validation  process.  Initial research has 
              demonstrated that many of the  assumptions underlying this process are
              incorrect  and, therefore,  this research involves the following three families
              of  experiments.  (1) Comparing defect detection techniques.  This  experiment
              compares the cost-effectiveness of systematic  inspection techniques with that
              of  the standard Ad Hoc and  Checklist approaches.  Its hypothesis is that 
              systematic  inspection techniques are more effective that the nonsystematic 
              ones currently being used.   (2) Cost-benefit studies.  This  experiment is 
              conducted on a live development project to  compare the tradeoffs between 
              minimum inspection interval and  maximum effectiveness for several different 
              inspection  approaches.  Its hypothesis is that several recently proposed 
              methods significantly increase interval, but provide only a  slight improvement
               in effectiveness.  (3) Inspection entry  criteria.  This experiment attempts 
              to establish whether or  not an artifact's quality affects inspection 
              effectiveness.  Its  hypothesis is that traditional inspections are not 
              effective for  artifacts with very high or very low defect density.    This 
              research is also producing materials that enhance both  graduate and 
              undergraduate teaching.  This includes a  4-week teaching module in which 
              students perform experiments, collect and  analyze data, and test  hypotheses
              as part of a graduate software engineering  course.  An  undergraduate software
              development course is being developed in which all students  work together  to
              develop one large-scale application, for real  customers with real needs.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
