Title       : CAREER: Structural Properties and Irrelevant Attributes: Implications for
               Learning and Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9501660

Award Number: 9501660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Hellerstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The research component of this project addresses  fundamental questions in
              computational learning theory and  complexity.  It also  addresses specific
              learning problems that  are motivated by practical  applications. 
              Computational learning  theory provides a framework for the  formal study of
              problems in  machine learning.  The first goal of this project  is to determine
               necessary and sufficient conditions for learning, prove lower  bounds, and
              design learning algorithms.  A focus is on query  models of  learning, which
              represent situations in which a learner  can ask questions of a  teacher or
              expert, or perform experiments.  Emphasis is placed on  the effect of forbidden
               projections on the learnability of investigating   Boolean function classes.  
               The project also aims to determine structural  properties of  languages, in
              order to prove complexity results.  It is directed  particularly at resolving
              open questions concerning automata with  powers of  both randomness and
              nondeterminism.    Another major goal of the project   is to develop algorithms
              for learning in the presence of irrelevant data.    A particular  problem is to
              develop PAC (Probably Approximately Correct)  algorithms that are robust in the
              presence of irrelevant attributes   in the following way:  they  depending on
              only a few more attributes   then the concept they are  learning.  This problem
              is theoretical but   motivated by practical applications, such as medical
              diagnosis.  In these applications,  output hypotheses are used for future
              prediction  (diagnosis).  Determining the value of an attribute is expensive
              perhaps  involving a clinical test, and therefore it is desirable to limit  the
              number of  attributes whose values must be determined.    The educational
              component of this  project includes goals in both  undergraduate and graduate
              education.  At the  undergraduate level  a basic goal is to make theoretical
              courses accessible and  intellectually exciting to a wide range  of students. 
              Methods for  achieving  this goal include the following:  preparing handouts, 
              introducing historical  and biographical material, presenting  algorithms to
              students using algorithm  animation, and using  computer lab `algorithm
              experiments.`    At the graduate  level, the project includes teaching a
              graduate  course in computational  complexity theory with a significant 
              research component.  In addition, a  reading group in  computational learning
              theory, started last year, will be  continued.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
