Title       : Interactions and Coherence in f-Electron Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9501528

Award Number: 9501528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Lawrence jmlawren@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501528  Lawrence  Technical Abstract: This project investigates a new
              intermetallic  compound   of  ytterbium,  indium,  and  copper,  with  
              physical  properties   which   display  a  complex  character   and   whose 
              understanding would have major impact on the field  of  condensed  matter 
              physics. The compound has a first-order phase  transition  where  the  lattice 
              constant and valence change  discontinuously  with  no  change  in  symmetry.
              Additional,  novel  thermodynamic  properties are encountered in the series of
              compounds obtained by  substitution  of  silver for indium. The principal 
              investigators  have  succeeded in the difficult task of growing single 
              crystals  of  these  materials  which will exhaustively  characterized  via 
              resistivity, susceptibility, thermal expansion, elastic constants  and neutron
              scattering as a function of temperature, pressure and  magnetic  field. The
              equation of state will be determined  in  an  effort to understand the basis
              for the phase transition in  terms  of  electronic and magnetic properties of
              these highly correlated  electron, or "heavy fermion",  materials.  %%% 
              Non-Technical  Abstract:  A  small number  of  metals  exhibit  a  property 
              analogous to the condensation of a gas to a liquid:  as  the  temperature  is 
              lowered below a critical  temperature,  the  density  changes  discontinuously,
               with  no  change  in  crystal  symmetry.  There is an accompanying decrease in
              the  strength  of  the  magnetism  of the metal. The investigators in  this 
              project  have  recently  learned  how to grow  large  crystals  of  a  new 
              intermetallic compound displaying the condensation behavior.  The  project 
              involves  a  thorough investigation  of  the  structure,  magnetism,  and 
              electronic behavior  of  the  compound  and  its  alloys.  The goal is to
              understand the nature of the interactions  between  electrons  which drive the
              condensation,  in  particular  there  seems to be subtle interplay between the
              magnetism of  the  material  and its co hesive energy. Such studies will
              improve  our  understanding of the conditions under which electrons  in  solids
               help  to coherently bond the atoms in the crystalline state.  The  results may
              provide important information for the entire field of  metal physics and
              magnetism.  ***
