Title       : Electron Transport in Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9501438

Award Number: 9501438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Westervelt westervelt@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501438  Westervelt  Coupled   two  and  three  quantum  dots,  artificial 
              molecules,  including chains and rings of dots will be fabricated on gallium- 
              arsenide/aluminum-gallium-arsenide  heterostructures  from  UCSB.  Such  
              structures  on  semiconductors  will  enable  the  PI   to  compensate for the
              effect of impurities and defects on the energy  of  the  electrons and the dot
              to dot coupling. Coulomb  blockade  and  dot  capacitance at ultra-low
              temperatures will be  used  as  spectroscopic  tools  for electron states in 
              single  and  couple  quantum  dots.  Additional  probes such  as  localized 
              microwave  excitation  via  miniaturized striplines, and spatially  resolved 
              scanning probe measurements currently under development  will  be  used to
              characterize electron states and transport in single  and  coupled  dots.  The 
              objective is  to  elucidate  the  nature  of  electron  states  in  coupled
              dots and  to  search  for  possible  collective  quantum phenomena. The
              behavior of  electrons  inside  these structures is of great current interest,
              both for practical  and  for  fundamental reasons. The controlled  motion  of 
              single  electrons  through  coupled quantum dots is  the  basis  for  new 
              approaches to electronics and computation.  %%%  This project investigates
              semiconductor "quantum dot", structures  which  are  so small that they are
              also referred to as artificial  atoms  and  molecules. Their fabrication is
              complex and  involves  collaboration  between workers at Harvard and UC  Santa 
              Barbara.  The  behavior of electrons inside these structures  is  of  great 
              current interest, both for practical and for fundamental reasons.  The
              controlled motion of single electrons through coupled quantum  dots  is  the 
              basis  for  new  approaches  to  electronics   and  computation.  For example,
              a goal is to develop  single  electron  devices  in  which each bit is
              represented by a single  electron,  whose  state may be optically switched.
              Unlike "real"  molecules,  the  size and cou pling between the quantum dots can
              be varied  by  fabrication  methods to produce new phenomena not normally 
              found  in  molecules.  Measurements  of the  Coulomb  blockade  and  dot 
              capacitance   at   ultra-low  temperatures  will   be   used   as 
              spectroscopic  tools for electron states in  single  and  coupled  quantum
              dots.  ***
