Title       : CAREER: Optically-Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study of Two-Dimensional
               Electron Systems in Strong Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9501925

Award Number: 9501925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean E. Barrett sean.barrett@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501925  Barrett    The proposed research utilizes a new experimental technique,
               "Optically Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance", to study the  fundamental
              quantum mechanics of the two-dimensional electron gas  (2DEG) in strong
              magnetic fields.  Optical pumping of interband  transitions in a quantum-well
              structure with circularly-polarized  laser light incident along the applied
              magnetic field direction  results in non-equilibrium spin polarization of
              electrons in the  well.  Nuclei in the materials that form the well, e.g.,
              GaAs,  are dynamically polarized via their hyperfine coupling to the  electron
              spins, and their NMR signals monitor the electron spin  state in the well.  The
              research objectives are to map out (1)  the spin configuration of the
              many-particle ground state, and (2)  the elementary excitations and their
              energy splitting from the  ground state.  OPNMR experiments will also search
              for evidence of  occurrence of the Wigner crystal phase.  %%%  The proposed
              research will employ a new experimental technique,  "Optically Pumped Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance" (OPNMR), to study  the fundamental quantum mechanics of the
              two-dimensional electron  gas (2DEG) confined in quantum-well nanostructures
              fabricated  from compound semiconductors such as gallium arsenide.  Optical 
              pumping of interband electronic transitions using circularly-  polarized laser
              light applied along the direction of an applied  magnetic field results in
              non-equilibrium polarization of the  spins of electrons in the well.  Nuclei in
              the semiconductor  material from which the well is fabricated are consequently 
              dynamically polarized through their interactions with the  electrons, and their
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signals  serve to monitor the state of the
              electron spins in the well.  The research objectives are to map out (1) the
              spin configuration  of the collective (many-particle) lowest energy state of
              the  electrons in the well as a function of the number of electrons,  and (2)
              the so-called elementary excita tions of the electronic  system and their
              energy splittings from the lowest energy state.  OPNMR experiments will also be
              used to search for evidence of the  so-called electron (Wigner) crystal, an
              exotic organization of  electrons onto a two-dimensional lattice within a
              heterostructure  layer, which is believed to exist under certain experimental 
              conditions.  ***
