Title       : GEM: Applications of a Modular Open Magnetosphere Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9501898

Award Number: 9501898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Hill hill@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia H. Reiff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank R. Toffoletto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The proposed work would apply an existing modular model of the open 
              magnetosphere to three problems that are critical to the NSF  Geospace Modeling
              Program.  The objectives of the proposed work are  to develop a predictive
              understanding of (1) injection of solar-  wind plasma through the dayside
              magnetospheric cusp, (2) externally  or internally imposed time variations of
              the polar cap  configuration, and (3) reverse convection driven by a nearly 
              northward interplanetary magnetic field (IMF).  The proposed method  combines
              physical-numerical modeling with spacecraft data analysis.    The model,
              developed over the past decade with partial support of  the GEM program,
              describes the quantitative mapping of the solar  wind electric field from the
              magnetopause to the polar ionosphere  along interconnected magnetic field
              lines.  A machine-potable,  user-friendly version of this model for
              steady-state applications  has recently been made available to the GEM research
              community.  A  recent extension of this model permits relaxation of the steady-
               state assumption for time-dependent applications.    The first application,
              modeling of cusp ion injection, involves an  ongoing collaboration with T.
              Onsager to couple his Liouville  mapping procedure with the modular open
              magnetosphere model to  produce quantitatively realistic simulations of cusp
              ion  distributions for comparison with real spacecraft data for a  general
              range of input solar-wind/IMF conditions.  This study is  intended to elucidate
              the mechanism(s) if injection of solar-wind  plasma at the dayside magnetopause
              to form the cusp and adjacent  boundary features.    The second application
              will explore two types of quasi-static time  evolution of the polar cap, those
              driven externally by solar-  wind/IMF variations and those driven internally by
              magnetotail  dynamics as communicated to the ionosphere by the electric field 
              mapped from the tail merging line.  This study will exploit the  unique
              properties of the polar cap not only as an obs ervation site  but also as a
              reference frame for theoretical-numerical modeling.    The third application
              will continue a collaboration with N.U.  Crooker to develop a quantitative
              model of the overdraped lobe  configuration proposed by her to explain the
              otherwise enigmatic  observation of sunward convection on putatively open lobe
              field  lines connected to the solar wind during intervals of nearly  northward
              IMF.  This and related northward-IMF phenomena represent  perhaps the widest
              gap in present theoretical understanding of  solar-wind-magnetosphere coupling.
