Title       : Scalable Static Techniques for Exhaustive and Incremental Analyses of C Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9501761

Award Number: 9501761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356869             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara G. Ryder ryder@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Landi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 In software systems, tools such as compilers, testers, and  debuggers require
              static semantic information, both to  insure their correctness  and to enhance
              performance.  Incremental update algorithms, which only calculate  data  flow
              information affected by the program changes, avoiding  total  recalculation,
              efficiently provide consistent  documentation for a large  evolving software
              system.  Previously, incremental techniques for Fortran-like  languages and
              exhaustive analyses for C programs have been  developed. When  these analyses
              of C systems produce  solutions, they are inexpensive and high  quality;
              however,  often the analyses exhaust available resources without  yielding a
              complete solution, especially for larger  programs (over 5,000-10,000  lines of
              code). This research  aims at expanding the applicability of exhaustive 
              techniques to handle a wider class of programs and  developing incremental 
              techniques for C systems. The work  is performed by an academic and industrial
              team,  focusing on the development of new analysis  techniques and their
              testing on research industrial  applications.    Goals are to: (i) scale the
              existing  prototype to handle  programs with 10,000 to 100,000 lines of code,
              (ii) develop  techniques for analyzing modules without analyzing the  entire
              program (i.e., a  separate compilation mode of  analysis),(iii) develop
              incremental techniques for  interesting interprocedural static analyses for
              languages  with general purpose  pointers, and (iv) enhance the  theoretical
              infrastructure for semantic analysis  of modern  programming languages (i.e.,
              C, C++, and Fortran 90).    The research  explores techniques for varying the
              precision  of alias information by designing  new, flow-insensitive  methods,
              to augment our current flow-sensitive ones.  Partitioning the program variables
              allows for an aliasing  solution with varying  degrees of precision for
              different  sets of variables.  Experiments are  conducted varying the  value of
              k for these different sets, using k-limiting to  handle dereferencing in
              recursive structures. A hybrid  incremental analysis  algorithm is used as a
              basis for  incrementalizing side effect analysis of C  programs.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
