Title       : Structure and Properties of Fullerene Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9501325

Award Number: 9501325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Stephens peter.stephens@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laszlo Mihaly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  9501325  Stephens    Recipients of this grant will investigate the
              relationship between the  structural  and  electrical properties of fullerene 
              based  compounds.  The  sample  preparation  effort will be  concentrated  on 
              conducting  polymeric fullerides of A-carbon-60 composition, where A is an 
              alkali  metal,  and  related compounds.  Materials obtained from collaborators 
              will  also  be  investigated.  X-ray diffraction and infrared  optical 
              spectroscopy  will  be performed in the laboratory  of  the  principal 
              investigators  at  Stony Brook, and also at the  National  Synchrotron  Light 
              Source  at  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory.   Direct  current  electrical
              transport will be measured in Stony Brook.  In addition  to  being  a 
              potentially  useful material in  electronic  and  structural  applications, 
              the  carbon-60 molecule is also challenging  for  basic  research, as it
              provides systems in which the electron-phonon coupling  (on  the  molecule) and
              the electron transport (between the molecules)  may be independently tuned. 
              %%%  Among the myriad compounds synthesized from buckminster fullerene (the 
              carbon-60   molecule),  three  groups  have  particularly  interesting 
              properties:  the  superconductors, the organic ferromagnets,  and  the 
              electrically  conducting polymers.  The research team at  Stony  Brook  has a
              proven track record in the investigation of these materials, and  continues  to
               explore new compounds based on this remarkable,  highly  symmetric  molecule. 
               The  main focus  of  the  research  is  on  the  relationship  between
              structural and electrical properties.   The  two  most extensively utilized
              experimental tools will be X-ray diffraction  and  optical spectroscopy.  This
              project will benefit greatly from the  extensive use of instrumentation  and
              collaboration with scientists at  the  Brookhaven National Laboratory. 
              Research on fullerenes may  lead  to  novel electronic and structural
              materials.  The effort funded here  contributes significantly t o this broader
              goal by utilizing the unique  experimental capabilities available to the
              investigators.  ***
