Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Mathematics in Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9501404

Award Number: 9501404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Reed reed@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob J. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reed       The investigator and his colleagues use mathematical and 
              computational tools to investigate processing of auditory  information in the
              dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN) and the lateral  superior olive (LSO) of the
              lower brainstem.  The purpose of the  study of the DCN is to understand how the
              DCN functions to extract  spectral information from complex sounds.  The
              purpose of the study  of the LSO is to understand the mechanisms by which it
              computes  and encodes azimuthal sound location by using interaural intensity 
              (and time) differences.  The purpose of both projects, which is  based on
              realistic neurophysiology and neuroanatomy, is to  understand how large groups
              of cells collectively perform  calculations.  In addition, a mathematical
              investigation of the  reasons underlying the apparent stability of trophic
              developmental  schemes as opposed to the instability of forward stochastic 
              schemes is carried out.  The investigators also investigate the  properties of
              reaction-hyperbolic partial differential equations.  Equations of this type
              occur in the transport of materials in  nerve axons (and other eukaryotic
              cells).  Previous modelling  studies have raised mathematical questions about
              the existence and  behavior of approximate travelling waves in
              reaction-hyperbolic  systems of partial differential equations.  Singular
              perturbation  techniques are used to extend to the nonlinear case previous 
              results on special linear cases where approximate travelling waves  have been
              shown to exist in the limit where the chemical rate  constants get large. 
              Probabilistic methods are used to derive  closed form approximate solution
              formulas in this asymptotic  limit.  Since little is known about how
              probabilistic techniques  can be used in linear and nonlinear hyperbolic
              systems (as opposed  to elliptic or parabolic systems), this work may have
              important  applications to other hyperbolic systems.       The investigators
              use mathematical and computational tools to  investigate the processing of
              audit ory information by cells in the  brainstem.  The purpose of the project
              is to understand how large  groups of nerve cells work together to perform
              calculations such  as localizing sounds in space or recognizing the sound
              source by  analyzing the pattern of frequencies contained in the sound.  This 
              not only gives insight into how we hear and how the brain works,  but should
              also suggest designs for technological devices that  perform similar functions
              in the control systems of robots.  The  investigators also investigate a class
              of partial differential  equations that arise in the transport of materials in
              nerve axons.  These equations not only allow one to better understand how 
              materials are transported in normal nerve cells, but also give  insight into
              the breakdown of transport that occurs in the  presence of some workplace
              toxins and in certain diseases such as  Alzheimer's disease.
