Title       : Nonlinear Wave Interactions & Singular Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9501073

Award Number: 9501073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Esteban G. Tabak tabak@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9216,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9501073  Tabak       The proposed work concentrates on open problems in wave  
              propagation arising in the natural sciences. The first   problem addresses the
              diffraction of weak shock waves, where   an apparent contradiction, known as
              the von Neumann paradox,   has been puzzling physicists and mathematicians for
              almost   five decades. The paradox concerns the ubiquitous occurrence   of
              three-shock intersections in a regime where, in principle,   they are not
              allowed.  It is proposed to study this problem within   the context of a
              simplified asymptotic model. The results so far   suggest that the solution to
              the paradox may involve an additional   singularity arising at the
              triple-point. The second problem   regards the long-scale behavior of winds,
              concentrating on the   formation of fronts between warm and cold air masses in
              the   atmosphere. The mathematical structure of this problem is   surprisingly
              similar to the one associated with the question of   formation of singularities
              in three-dimensional incompressible   fluids.  Both problems involve a
              combination of physical modeling,   asymptotic analysis and analytical and
              numerical solution of   partial differential equations.     Both proposed
              problems have practical as well as theoretical   significance. Shock
              diffraction occurs in a variety of scenarios,   such as supersonic flight,
              flood waves and even medical   applications, when focusing sound waves are used
              to destroy   kidney stones. A better understanding of the diffraction process  
              would therefore impact not only our knowledge of waves in nature,   but also
              our capacity for predicting wave intensity amplification   due to focusing and
              reflection in engineering devices. The   formation of sharp fronts between air
              masses in the atmosphere,   on the other hand, is an important and ubiquitous
              phenomenon.   Understanding its mechanics would enhance our ability to  
              predict weather and climate changes. The surprising relationship   between this
              problem and the question of singularity for mation in   incompressible fluids,
              on the other hand, provides a promising   alternative way to study a mechanism
              which may play a fundamental   role in turbulent intermittency.
