Title       : CAREER: Broadcast Disks: Technique for Data in Management in Asymmetric
               Communication Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9501353

Award Number: 9501353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Franklin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many emerging networked applications have the property that communication among
              nodes is asymmetric.  Typically, servers can and/or must send much more data to
              clients than clients send back to the servers. Examples include wireless
              networks with mobile clients, cable and direct satellite broadcast  TV systems,
              information dispersal and information retrieval applications. Broadcast Disks
              technique  exploits the characteristics of such environments, by treating a
              broadcast stream of data that are  repeatedly and cyclicly transmitted as a
              storage device. The essence of this approach is to  superimpose multiple
              broadcast programs (or `disks`) spinning at different speeds on a single 
              broadcast channel; in effect, creating an arbitrarily fine-grained memory
              hierarchy. The technique  also integrates the use of client storage resources
              for caching and prefetching data that is delivered  over the broadcast. The
              Broadcast Disks approach provides improved performance for non-uniformly 
              accessed data and increased availability of important data. The challenges
              being addressed in this  project include: broadcast program  generation,
              caching and prefetching strategies, and adapting to  volatile data, changing
              client needs, and communication errors. The results of this research will be 
              techniques, analyses, and prototype implementations of this novel approach,
              which has the potential to  significantly improve the performance and
              availability of future distributed computing systems.   The  education portion
              of this project aims to develop new courses, software tools and laboratories
              that  will provide students at all levels with more direct, hands-on experience
              in building database systems  and applications.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
