Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Groups of Finite Morley Rank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9501415

Award Number: 9501415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huseyin A. Nesin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501415  Nesin       Nesin's work concerns the classification of simple groups
              of finite  Morley rank.  Morley rank, a 30-year-old concept due to Michael
              Morley,   measures in some sense the complexity of the structure.  In a
              structure of   finite Morley rank, certain subsets (the so-called definable
              subsets) are   endowed with a natural number, and these natural numbers behave
              like the  "dimension" of the set to which they are attached.  For example,
              every  variety over an algebraically closed field is a structure of finite
              Morley  rank. In particular, every algebraic group over an algebraically closed
              field  is a group of finite Morley rank.  The Cherlin-Zil'ber conjecture states
              a   partial converse: A simple group of finite Morley rank is an algebraic  
              group over an algebraically closed field.  If true, the conjecture will show  
              that the concept of algebraic group is independent of the base field when   the
              latter is known to be algebraically closed: just a concept of dimension  
              satisfying certain simple axioms is enough to insure that a simple group is  
              an algebraic group, i.e., a geometric object.  Apart from its use in model  
              theory, this almost philosophical (even metaphysical!) consequence of the  
              conjecture suffices to make the subject worthwhile.  If the conjecture is  
              false, it will give rise to new groups that are not algebraic but that  look
              very much like both infinite algebraic and finite groups.  Nesin's   research
              is a fundamental part of the program of showing the   Cherlin-Zil'ber
              conjecture.       The primary purpose of mathematics is the understanding of 
              geometry and natural numbers.  Algebra was invented to understand better the  
              nature of geometry and numbers.  The concept of dimension is, of course, very  
              important in geometry; in general, any geometric object has dimension.  One  
              can ask the reverse problem: suppose each object in a class has a   dimension
              and that these dimensions behave well, i.e. they satisfy some   natural axioms.
               Is it then true that th ese objects are geometric?  The work   of Nesin
              concerns this problem in a particular setting.  His objects are   groups.  His
              research is part of a large project whose goal is to show that   groups on
              which a certain concept of dimension is defined are groups of   transformations
              of a geometric object.  ***
