Title       : Code Clustering for Universal Image Coding and Other Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9501977

Award Number: 9501977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Effros effros@systems.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop reasonable complexity,  source
              independent coding algorithms. Source independent algorithms  are crucial to
              the design of robust systems for applications such  as image coding and mobile
              communications. In applications of this  type, the statistics of the source and
              channel in operation are  typically unknown a priori, and the performance of
              the strategy  employed is sensitive to those unknown  statistics.    The
              approach taken is the two-stage approach developed in the  source coding
              literature. Given a space of possible sources and a  particular coding strategy
              (e.g., VQ, DCT-based transform codes,  etc.), for each source in the space
              there exists an optimal code.  Designing a single code is equivalent to
              quantizing the space of  possible codes to 0 bits; the entire space of optimal
              codes is  approximated by a single code that does well on average across the 
              data. The two-stage coding literature demonstrates that in general  we should
              quantize the space of possible codes more finely. Some of  the rate should be
              spent on describing which code, in a family of  codes, should be used on the
              source in operation. Specific projects  being completed in this research
              include the development of a  universal DCT code compatible with existing JPEG
              and MPEG image and  video coding standards, a universal KLT code, a universal
              wavelet  packet code, and a universal channel code.    The main objectives of
              the education plan are to develop and  maintain an exciting atmosphere of
              active learning for  undergraduate and graduate students. This objective is
              being  accomplished through innovative programs geared at helping students  to
              participate fully in their own education and by developing an  atmosphere that
              encourages the maximum possible exchange between  students, faculty, and
              members of local industry.
