Title       : Mathematical Scienaes: Computational Modeling of Swimming Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9501048

Award Number: 9501048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Fauci ljf@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fauci       The investigator develops and implements computational  methods for
              modeling the fluid dynamics problems of aquatic animal  locomotion across a
              wide range of animal sizes.  Of interest are  both the dynamics of a single
              organism and the relationship of its  morphology to its motility properties,
              and the collective  hydrodynamic interactions of groups of swimmers with each
              other  and their environment.  Applications studied include bacterial 
              chemotaxis in micropores, spermatozoa motility in the reproductive  tract, and
              the coupling of active and passive tissue properties to  the external swimming
              mechanics of a leech.  Bacterial chemotaxis  in micropores is of special
              interest, because the transport  behavior of microorganisms through porous
              media is important in  studying the contamination of groundwater supplies. 
              Although  bioremediation, the process by which microbes degrade  contaminants,
              has field scale implications, the detailed study of  pore-level behavior of the
              coupled fluid-contaminant-microbial  system is essential.  The project's
              computational model includes  the detailed analysis of hydrodynamics,
              contaminant reaction,  diffusion and convection, and the chemotactic responses
              of the  swimming microbes.  This allows the systematic study of the  influence
              of different parameters, such as swimming speed,  diffusion rates, microbial
              uptake rates, as well as stochastic  parameters relating to the likelihood with
              which microbes change  their swimming direction in response to the evolving
              contaminant  field.  This is difficult, if not impossible, to examine in a 
              laboratory environment.       The project studies the way organisms swim, using
               computational models.  The organisms studied vary in size from  bacteria to
              leeches.  Of paramount importance in the study of  bacterial transport in
              micropores is the growth of biofilms.  Under  certain physical and chemical
              conditions, microbes adhere to each  other and the local pore structure.  This
              biofilm growth affects  and is affe cted by the local flow characteristics and
              contaminant  transport.  The computational model has the ability to model 
              complex, dynamic fluid-structure interactions.  Agglomeration is  modeled by
              exerting appropriate binding stresses between discrete  representations of
              organisms, that may hold them together, or, if  fluid stresses are large, may
              yield and release the organisms.  The  model is a powerful tool for
              understanding biofilm processes at a  micropore level.  This has important
              consequences for environmental  problems.
