Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Developing Engineering Criteria for the
               Inclusion of Disabled Employees (DECIDE) in the Workplace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1998  
File        : a9501654

Award Number: 9501654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lesia L. Crumpton-Young crumpton@engr.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501654   The goal of this research is to develop engineering design criteria
              that will assist in modifying industrial tasks and environments to allow the
              inclusion of persons with disabilities.  Specifically, the following objectives
              are pursued:  (1) develop engineering criteria for designing occupational tasks
              and environment to accommodate persons with disability, (2) cmntribute to
              research efforts aimed at designing occupational environments to accommodate
              disabled persons, (3) assist in increasing the number of qualified engineers
              available to transfer and implement the findings from the research in
              industrial settings or work places.  The research will identify various
              strategies, survey tools, and analysis techniques that can be readily used in
              an industrial setting.  These parameters will then be evaluated and validated
              in an industrial setting for possible inclusion in the design methodology.  One
              of the tangible outcomes of the research is the development of an intelligent
              computer based system to assist in making decisions associated with designing
              and retrofitting work tasks and work places to accommodate disabled persons. 
              Paraplegic and the visually impaired constitute the core group on which the
              research is targeted.   Several benefits can be ascribed to this research if it
              becomes successful.  The impact on the national economy can be significant as
              many more people with physical disabilities can enter the workforce and
              contribute to the productivity of the country.    Many people with disabilities
              will experience economic gains, and gains in the sense of security from
              workplace hazards and injuries resulting from very poor systems design.  The
              research outcome can advance the state-of-knowledge in accommodating the needs
              of the disabled.  This  will lead to the production of design standards for
              tools and workplaces that will not only benefit disabled persons but also the
              entire general population.
