Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Greedy Growing and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9501926

Award Number: 9501926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew B. Nobel nobel@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9501926 Nobel  Binary trees play an important role in the methodology of
              statistics and engineering.  Classification trees have been applied to variety
              of statistical problems, ranging from mortality studies to the recognition of
              functional groups in gene sequences.  Quantization trees have been applied to
              the compression of medical images and sampled speech.  The problem of designing
              good classification and quantization trees from finite data sets is usually
              addressed through the use of greedy growing algorithms.  While the empirical
              behavior of these algorithms is well understood, there has been little theory
              to support their use, or to examine their behavior on large data sets.  The
              proposed research will undertake a systematic study of greedy growing
              algorithms.  It has three broad objectives: To develop theoretical tools that
              will provide a means of  rigorously analyzing such algorithms; To apply these
              tools to the analysis and comparison of existing algorithms; To use these
              tools, in conjunction with computer simulations, in the design of new
              algorithms for specific applications. A key feature of the proposed research is
              that it addresses classification and quantization in the same framework. 
              Educational activities  will be one of the key responsibilities of the
              principal investigator during the duration of the grant. The Statistics
              Department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  has a strong
              tradition of graduate and undergraduate education. Maintaining the tradition
              entails a strong commitment to  teaching, as well as interaction with students,
              both inside and outside of the classroom. We hope to further the tradition
              through the development of new courses, which will introduce students to the
              basic ideas behind the proposed research.  Subject to departmental approval, 
              graduate level courses in  Statistical Pattern Recognition and Complexity-based
              Statistical Methods will be developed. A reading course will be designed to
              encourage advanced graduate students to undertake  superviqed research in the
              proposed area of study.   Tree-structured methods of data analysis play an
              important role in statistics and engineering, because they are easy to
              implement and  lend themselves to ready interpretation. Tree-structured
              procedures  have been applied to statistical problems ranging from the study of
              housing prices to the  prediction of heart attacks.   Related procedures  have
              been applied by engineers to the compression of medical images and human
              speech.   In each application, a suitable tree must be constructed from 
              experimental data sets that are typical of the behavior under study. In
              practice, trees are frequently designed by greedy growing algorithms,  which
              build a tree iteratively, from the ground up. While these  algorithms are well
              understood from an experimental standpoint, there has been little theory to
              support their use, or to examine their behavior on very large data sets.   The
              proposed research will undertake a systematic study of greedy growing
              algorithms.  It has three broad objectives: To develop theoretical tools that
              will provide a means of  rigorously analyzing such algorithms; To apply these
              tools to the analysis and comparison of existing algorithms; To use these
              tools, in conjunction with computer simulations, in the design of new
              algorithms for specific applications. A key feature of the proposed research is
              that it addresses statistical and engineering applications within the same
              framework.  Educational activities  will be one of the key responsibilities of
              the principal investigator during the duration of the grant. The Statistics
              Department at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  has a strong
              tradition of graduate and undergraduate education. Maintaining the tradition
              entails a strong commitment to  teaching, as well as interaction with students,
              both inside and outside of the classroom. We hope to further the tradition
              through the development of new courses, which will introduce graduate students
              to the basic ideas behind the  proposed research. In addition, a reading course
              will be designed to encourage advanced graduate students to undertake
              supervised research in the proposed area of study.
