Title       : Investigation of Thermal Effects in Small Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9501108

Award Number: 9501108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin N. Wybourne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501108  Wybourne  The phase memory of electrons is maintained in samples with
              dimensions  less   than  the  electron-electron  and  electron-phonon 
              interaction  lengths.  In this situation there is no dissipation in the sample,
              and  parts  of  the  sdample outside the classical current  path  influence 
              transport  phenomena  associated with the electron's  phase.   In  the 
              proposed  research,  a related transport regime in  which  the  sample 
              dimensions are greater than the electron-electron interaction  length,  but 
              less than the electron-phonon relaxation length, will be studied.  In  this
              case phase memory is lost, yet dissipation within the  sample  remains 
              unlikely.  To study the relationship between dissipation  and  sample geometry,
              electron transport measurements will be made on metal  microstructures  of 
              different  shapes  under  conditions   far   from  equilibrium.  Fluctuations
              in the electron energy loss are anticipated  when  the  electron-phonon 
              relaxation length  approaches  the  sample  dimensions.  Dissipation in the
              sample is expected to be dependent  on  the  acoustic mode confinement in the
              structure, especially  when  the  confined  acoustic  mode energy spacing is
              greater than  the  internal  energy of the electron gas.  %%%  Many 
              experiments have been reported on phase coherence and  ballistic  electron
              transport for which energy dissipation occurs mainly  in  the  circuit 
              contacts.  Little experimental work has been directed towards  the  onset  of 
              dissipation in microstructures (as in computer  chips)  that occurs when the
              characteristic length associated with energy loss  becomes   comparable  to 
              the  sample  dimensions.   In  the  proposed  research,   electron  transport 
              measurements  will  be   made   under  conditions  far  from equilibrium in
              order to study  the  relationship  between energy dissipation and the geometry
              of  a microstructure.  The  connection  between  dissipation and the acoustic 
              properties  of  the  microstructures will also be inve stigated.  ***
