Title       : Analyzing & Improving Numerical Algorithms for Eigenproblems Using Singularity
               Theory and Riemannian Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9501278

Award Number: 9501278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan S. Edelman EDELMAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9501278  Edelman    This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early   Career Development Award.  The research component will focus on
              the   application of new geometrical ideas to analyze and improve numerical  
              algorithms.  Part of the program will involve the derivation and study of an  
              optimization technique on the Grassman manifold suitable for solving the  
              Kohn-Sham equations of the local density approximation to Schroedinger's  
              equation used in condensed matter physics and in materials science.  The  
              second part of the program involves the application of singularity theory to  
              analyze and explain the behavior of certain numerical algorithms widely   used
              in eigensystem analysis and systems and control.  The education   component
              will include further development of a new course in scientific   computing at
              the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  Computers with a   projection
              system will be used in undergraduate and graduate courses in   numerical
              analysis and applied mathematics in order to bring new insights   into the
              material.  Mentoring and training of new researchers will also take   place and
              will integrate the research and educational activities.    The National Science
              Foundation strongly encourages the early   development of academic faculty as
              both educators and researchers.  The   Faculty Early Career Development
              (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-  wide  program that provides for the support
              of junior faculty within the   context of their overall career development.  It
              combines in a single   program the support of quality research and education in
              the broadest sense   and the full participation of those traditionally
              underrepresented in science   and engineering.  This program enhances and
              emphasizes the importance   the Foundation places on the development of full,
              balanced academic   careers which include both research and education.
