Title       : CAREER: Micro/Nano-Fabrication of Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9501716

Award Number: 9501716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Collard david.collard@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1773,9146,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501716  Collard    Demand for smaller, more versatile electronic and
              opto-electronic  devices  continues to grow in order to increase packing 
              density,  efficiency  and  operational speed. The search  for  smaller  and 
              smaller devices has now reached the final frontier, the molecular  scale. 
              Further reduction in device size must occur  at  a  level  which  addresses 
              ensembles of molecules,  or,  more  intriguing,  discrete molecules. Through
              the use of scanning probe microscopic  techniques   and   with  novel 
              molecular  building   blocks   of  pi-conjugated  polymers that have already 
              been  synthesized,  we  propose  to create defined, robust, and functional
              nanostructures  which will test the limits of ultraminiaturization. This
              approach  relies  on  the  modification of substrates  with  monolayers  of 
              monomers  that  serve  as templates for polymer  deposition.  The  research 
              program  will  provide  insight  into  approaches   for  integration  and
              nanofabrication of various electronic  materials  and  will  furnish  materials
              and methods  that  provide  precise  control  over  the  interfacial  behavior 
              of  composite  systems  relevant to the electronics industry.  %%%  In  the 
              long  term,  organic  nano-architectures  promise  great  flexibility in the
              design of microcircuitry elements and  quantum  wave  devices.  The key issues
              to be addressed in  this  research  include:  What  materials  can be used to 
              fabricate  micro-  and  nanostructures; how can nanoscale features be produced;
              what  are  the  limits of feature dimensions, and what are the stability and 
              properties of these features?    We are currently involved in a number of
              programs at Georgia Tech  and  in  the Atlanta area to increase the involvement
              of students  in technical education, including programs for minorities, women, 
              and   precollege  students.  Through  an  undergraduate  outreach  program   to
               science  museums  we  are  developing  illustrative  interactive  chemistry
              exhibits, and a vibrant demonstrat ion  and  workshop  program.  Curriculum 
              development  activities   include  development of an advanced organic chemistry
              course based  almost  entirely  on problem solving, introduction of a polymer
              chemistry  course,   and   development   of   interdisciplinary   laboratory 
              experiments.  ***
