Title       : The Normal State and the Metal-Insulator Transition of High Critical Temperature
               Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9501504

Award Number: 9501504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Lindenfeld lindenf@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marta Z. Cieplak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501504  Lindenfeld  The  proposed  research addresses the question to what
              extent  and  in  what manner the occurrence and properties of the
              superconducting state  of  high-Tc  materials  are influenced by the continuing
               presence  of  properties related to the magnetic order of the insulating
              state.  The  compounds may be transformed from one state to the other by
              changes in  the  concentration of their constituent elements, by the  addition 
              of  other  elements, or by the application of high magnetic fields.   Each  of
              these paths will be followed, and a a variety of properties will be  measured,
              with emphasis on the magnetoresistance over a wide range  of  temperatures.  
              Aligned  thin  films  of  high-Tc  materials  will  be  prepared at Rutgers by
              pulsed laser deposition.  Initial emphasis will  be placed on lanthanum
              strontium copper oxide material that has led to  the  production of thin films
              with transition temperatures  and  other  properties that are of particularly
              high quality.  %%%  The  proposed research investigates the extent and manner
              in which the  occurrence and properties of the low-temperature
              superconductivity  of  so-called  "high-Tc"  materials  are influenced  by  the
               presence  of  properties  related to the magnetic characteristics of the 
              insulating  form of the material. These compounds may be changed from insulator
              to  superconductor  by  changes in the concentration of their  constituent 
              elements, by the addition of other elements, or by the application  of  strong 
               magnetic   fields.   Each  of  these   approaches   will   be  investigated, 
              and  a  variety of properties will  be  measured,  with  emphasis  on the
              electrical resistance in the presence of  an  applied  magnetic  field 
              (magnetoresistance). Thin films of high-Tc  compounds  prepared  at  Rutgers by
              pulsed laser deposition  techniques  will  be  studied, with initial emphasis
              on lanthanum strontium copper oxide,  a  material  whose  superconducting 
              transition  temperature  and   other  propertie s are of particularly high
              quality.  ***
