Title       : Synthesis and Reactions of Novel Lanthanocene Catalysts and A Rethinking of
               Bowdoin's Advanced Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9501647

Award Number: 9501647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Broene rbroene@bruin.bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Richard D. Broene, Chemistry Department, Bowdoin College, is   supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry   Program of the
              Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career   Advancement Award for
              research into the synthesis of chiral   cyclopentadienyl complexes of
              lanthanide metals and for restructuring   Bowdoin College's chemistry
              laboratory courses in order to provide   cross-boundary training for chemistry
              students. The research concentrates   on a series of C-2 symmetric lanthanocene
              complexes, which will be   prepared by selectively varying the substituents on
              tethered   cyclopentadiene ligands. The ability of these compound to  
              stereoselectively catalyze cyclizations and polymerizations of  
              ketimine-olefin substrates will be evaluated. Within the educational   portion
              of the project the introductory organic chemistry laboratory will   be
              redesigned and a junior level comprehensive laboratory will be   instituted in
              order to incorporate more active student participation and   to provide
              students with a more realistic outlook on modern chemistry. An   outreach
              program will be instituted in order to develop an interest in   chemistry among
              precollege students.   A goal in modern industrial and laboratory chemistry is
              the design of   compounds which will effect very efficient, very specific
              chemical   transformations. In this project a new series of complexes will be  
              prepared. The shape of these compounds will be carefully designed so that  
              they will induce the coupling or polymerization of small organic   molecules in
              a fashion where one possible `mirror image` product is   formed to the
              exclusion of the other. The educational portion of the   project aims at
              providing a more realistic and visual introduction to   various chemical
              concepts at the precollege, the lower, and the upper   undergraduate levels.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
