Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Krein Space Operator theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9501304

Award Number: 9501304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89998              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Rovnyak jlr5m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Dritschel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,9178,9251,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9501304  Rovnyak       An approach to Krein space operator theory will be
              developed   based on factorization and extension properties of operators.  
              Continuous Krein space operators have natural isometric and   unitary
              extensions, allowing a reduction of the study of general   operators to a more
              tractable case. New tools in the form of   index formulas give conditions for
              the existence of   factorizations. A new form of the Krein space commutant
              lifting   theorem is sought which has applications similar to the Hilbert  
              space case. A related prmblem is to develop a unified algebraic   and analytic
              theory of the Krein space Schur class of   operator-valued holomorphic
              functions. This part is in   collaboration with several European colleagues and
              features   colligations to study indefinite kernels and reproducing kernel  
              Krein spaces.   Examples from interpolation theory and univalent   functions
              will be considered. Factorization properties of   selfadjoint operators on
              Krein spaces will be applied to the   study of hyperinvariant subspaces. Other
              areas of application   include compact perturbations of selfadjoint operators
              and a   search for a Weyl-von Neumann theorem in Krein spaces. Numerical  
              techniques will be used in combination with recent decompositions   for finite
              matrices in an effort to obtain information on the   general form of numerical
              range for finite-dimensional spaces.       Interpolation problems and linear
              systems have long been   important in pure and applied mathematics, as well as
              in   technology.  It is only recently that mathematicians have been   looking
              into the possibility of generalizations to new settings   such as indefinite
              inner product spaces.  Preliminary results   indicate that this line of
              investigation could turn out to be as   fruitful as the classical theory has
              been.  The problems   naturally raise new questions about other areas of
              operator   theory on indefinite inner product spaces.  These have to do with  
              structural properties of operators such a s invariant subspaces   and numerical
              ranges.  Connections with related areas of   mathematics such as coefficient
              problems in classical complex   analysis will also be explored.    ***
