Title       : Static and Dynamic Behavior of Unsaturated Soils - Theory and Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9501718

Award Number: 9501718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kanthasamy K. Muraleetharan muralee@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1041,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9501718  Muraleetharan  The objective is to develop a fully-coupled analysis
              procedure to  study the static and dynamic behavior of unsaturated soils, and 
              to validate the analysis procedure using geotechnical centrifuge  model test
              results.    The analysis procedure involves the finite element implementation 
              of the equations governing the dynamic behavior of a three-phase  system
              consisting of pore fluid, pore gas and soil skeleton. The  governing equations
              are derived by extending Biot's formulation  for the dynamic behavior of a
              fluid-saturated porous media to a  three-phase system, with an independent
              verification using  mixture theory. In developing these governing equations,
              special  attention is focused on defining the appropriate set of  constitutive
              equations.    This analysis procedure will improve the understanding of the 
              behavior and design for static and earthquake loading of  structures such as
              landfill clay covers and bottom liners and  compacted soil embankments. The
              developed analysis procedure will  also help to prevent the huge financial
              losses caused each year  by the damage to houses, buildings, roads and
              pipelines resulting  from the shrinking and swelling of soils. Furthermore, the
               analysis procedure as well as the centrifuge tests will provide a  better
              understanding of the flow of water through unsaturated  soils, an important
              problem in studying the migration of  pollutants through soils.    EDUCATION
              PLAN    The education plan is a comprehensive approach to familiarizing 
              undergraduate and graduate students with the emerging  cross-disciplinary field
              of geo-environmental engineering and  current research and industry practices
              in geotechnical and  geo-environmental engineering.    An objective is to
              introduce more multi-disciplinary real world  design problems into the
              undergraduate courses, such as  introducing multi-media modules in the teaching
              of basic  principles so as to  allow the students to explore a certain  topic
              at their own pace. Another objective is to  acquire a small  teaching
              centrifuge for undergraduate students and to introduce  them to this important
              research tool in geotechnical and  geo-environmental engineering.    Graduate
              students are encouraged to acquire a broad knowledge  base by combining both
              experimental and analytical aspects in  their research, as well as working on
              projects with other faculty  outside their thesis or dissertation topics. 
              Development of a  graduate level course called "Environmental Geotechnology",
              which  can also be taken as a professional elective by undergraduate  students,
              emphasizes the importance of geotechnical issues in  solving environmental
              problems.  ***
