Title       : CAREER: Approximation Algorithms for Graph-Theoretic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9501355

Award Number: 9501355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122757             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samir Khuller samir@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Graphs are powerful tools that can be used  to model objects and 
              relationships between objects.   Indeed, many distinct problems can  be cast as
              optimization   problems in graph theoretic terms.  Specifically, graph theory  
              provides an excellent way to model problems  related  to transportation,
              network design, scheduling,  robotics and many other areas.  It is used to
              develop  and illustrate the power of different  algorithmic tools.  There  are
              three broad areas from which the particular  problems  considered in this
              proposal are abstracted: (1)  Network  Design: How can a network that connects
              a given  set of sites be built?  How can  the network be made  reliable, and
              also provide high bandwidth between sites  (while keeping the cost low)?  Such
              fundamental  questions are addressed here.  (2)  Motion Planning: How does an
              agent navigate in an  environment?  What are  good navigation strategies for 
              navigating in unknown environments?  In this  case the  agent discovers the
              environment by actually touching  obstacles.  How  does an agent record an
              approximate map  of the environment, when working with  limited memory?       
              (3)  Scheduling:  Precedence based scheduling problems  arise  in the context
              of manufacturing and compilation for  parallel machines.  How can effective
              heuristics for  such problems be designed?  For most of these  problems  it is
              very difficult to obtain even an approximate  solution in  polynomial time.    
               Education Plan:    Most computer scientists are constantly  faced with the
              task of  designing algorithms to solve problems.  Although these  arise in 
              many different contexts, some basic principles underlie the  design of 
              efficient algorithms and data structures.  As a part of the Education  Program
              of this CAREER award, the PI is planning:    (a) to undertake the training of 
              students in designing algorithms, and (b) to teach them the importance of 
              re-examining existing algorithms so as to make them simpler and more efficient.
               An algorithms lab  where students undertake projects, implement algorithms,
              and  act  as consultants to students in other research groups is a significant 
              step in this direction.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
