Title       : Infrared Matrix Isolation Studies of Cyclic Hydrocarbons with Nitrogen and
               Oxygen Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9501428

Award Number: 9501428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89664              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Samet Samet@Dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professor Cindy Samet of the Chemistry Department of Dickinson   College will
              engage in a study of the hydrogen bonding in   hydrocarbon-base complexes in
              the condensed phase.  The goal of the work   is to investigate the C-H hydrogen
              bonding and its dependence on the   hybridization of the s and p orbitals of
              the carbon, and on the presence   of electron withdrawing constituents.  The
              principal technique for   carrying out this work is matrix isolation Fourier
              transform   spectroscopy.  This research project will also enhance the research
                opportunities for undergraduate students at Dickinson College.  This project
              represents the debut of a young woman faculty member as an   independent
              research scientist.  Hydrogen bonding represents an    interaction between
              strongly bound molecules which form a weakly bound   complex.  The linking
              agent is a hydrogen atom proton of one molecule,   the proton donor, which
              forms a weak bond with the partner, the proton   acceptor molecule.  Hydrogen
              bonding plays an important role in the   structure and bonding of organic
              materials, including those of biological   importance.  The initial studies of
              this research will be followed up   with work on larger systems such as organic
              crystals and large   biomolecules.  The chemistry curriculum of Dickinson
              College has recently   been revised and now contains research as a requirement
              for chemistry   majors.  This project will strengthen the undergraduate
              chemistry   curriculum and thereby contribute to an improved education of the
              next   generation of scientists.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
