Title       : CAREER: Applications of Convex Programming in Combinatorial Optimization: A
               Mathematical, Algorithmic and Computational Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9501941

Award Number: 9501941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farid Alizadeh alizadeh@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The semidefinite programming problem  (SDP),  including implementation of
              numerically stable   interior point  algorithms, mathematical properties of the
              feasible sets, and   in  particular  applications of SDP in combinatorial
              optimization are  being   investigated.  First,  two versions of the
              primal-dual interior  point  SDP   algorithm are being  implemented. One
              version is in  MATLAB and is intended as an   easy to use  and change software
              for  small to medium size problems.   Another implementation  is in FORTRAN 90
              and is intended for high performance   parallel and  vector/pipelined machines
              and is meant to solve large scale    problems.  In  addition feasibility of
              active set methods for  SDP  is being   investigated. Next  applications of SDP
              in general 0-1  integer programming   problems are being  studied. The
              feasibility of  branch and bound SDP techniques   which solve an SDP  problem
              at  each stage but may require far fewer branchings   overall is being 
              investigated.  If such an approach is found to be practical,    general purpose
               programs will be developed.  In theoretical  investigations,   the following 
              applications of SDP are being studied:  parallel   computational complexity of
              the  Lovasz number of graphs,  approximation algorithms for the   minimum
              vertex cover  problem,  applications to the general matching problem, and  
              polyhedrality  of  the feasible sets of SDPs under affine transformations. The 
                connection of  primal--dual method of linear and semidefinite  programs to  
              the problem of  quadratically constrained quadratic  programming is being  
              investigated. In  addition, those cones are being investiagted whose associated
                optimization  problem  leads to  complementarity relations that are bilinear
              forms;   programming, quadratically constrained quadratic programming   and 
              SDP are  examples of such problems.    For teaching plans, active  
              participation in  helping RUTCOR  establish a masters program is planned.  
              Courses in semidefinite programming  and in  computational  biology in graduate
              school, and a course designed  to survey   various software  available for
              optimization problems  are being developed. At   the undergraduate  level
              teaching of  courses in the affiliated departments of   computer science, 
              mathematics and statistics is expected. Also a  textbook on SDP is in
              preparation.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
