Title       : CAREER: In-situ Adhesive-less Joining of Thermoplastics and Their Composites to
               Metals in Net-Shape Processes and an Integrated Design and Processing Education
               Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9501646

Award Number: 9501646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karthik Ramani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501646  Ramani   The primary objective of this research is to develop in-situ
              processes to join thermoplastic composites to metals in net-shape processes.  A
              hot-melt process and compression molding process will be used as model
              environments.  The surface preparation, contact pressure during consolidation,
              heating and cooling rates, hold times at melt and recrystallization
              temperature, effect of bond line thickness and uniformity, and anodization to
              increase durability will be included in the process development cycle.  The
              residual stresses will be modeled as a function of the process parameters,
              validated, and then used to improve the process.  Known characterization
              techniques x-ray diffraction (XRD), digital scanning calorimetry (DSC) and
              scanning electron microscopy (SEM), will be used to evaluate the polymer
              crystallinity and structure of the interface.  The mechanical properties of the
              joint will be determined.  The results will then be applied to filament winding
              and injection molding and optimized using the models concurrently with
              experimental characterization.  The effects incorporating fibers on the
              residual stresses and performance of the joint will be determined.  Preliminary
              experimental and modeling results are encouraging.  Induction heating will be
              incorporated to increase the process speeds, reduce polymer residence time at
              melt, and make the process attractive for applications.  At the teaching front,
              a new curriculum that integrates design and processing will be developed.  A
              synergistic combination of engineering fundamentals, hands-on, modeling,
              multi-media, inter-disciplinary experiences and industrial perspective will be
              used.  A dual purpose composites processing laboratory will be developed
              further.  The laboratory component of the dual-level composites processing
              course will be enhanced through the use of interdisciplinary experiences and
              completed research.  A hands-on broad-based materials and manufacturing
              processes course will be developed with a colleague.  The   features that
              distinguish this teaching proposal are development of a new dual-level
              technical elective in "Design for Processing" (DFP) in conjunction with a
              "Virtual Processing Lab" (VPL).  The DFP course will make strong linkages
              between design and processing by providing virtual process experiences.  This
              course will integrate demonstrations, process models, and computer tools to
              provide unique experiences to impact a greater number of students than hands-on
              courses.    The undergraduate teaching plan, research experiences, and training
              of highly qualified graduate students in the laboratory will have a broad
              impact and serve future needs of industry. Student research and training will
              be enhanced through summer employment in the participating industries which
              will also ease technology transfer.  The combined research and teaching
              programs in design and processing will offer unique experiences to students. 
              By selecting three diverse non-competitive collaborating industries, namely
              bio-medical, automotive and aerospace major reduction in assembly, tooling and
              processing costs by reducing the times and steps to manufacture may be seen in
              applications such as bio-medical implants, suspension linkages, airframe
              structures, and metal bearing sleeves.
