Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear Output Feedback Control of Constrained Multivariable Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9501368

Award Number: 9501368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Henson henson@che.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Henson   9502327    This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant
              which includes both a research as well as an educational component.   
              Research:  The PI's research focuses on the development of nonlinear output
              feedback control strategies for constrained multivariable processes.  More
              effective estimation and control techniques are needed for chemical processes
              as a result of increased demands on productivity and product quality.  In order
              to provide satisfactory performance, industrial control systems must account
              for multiple inputs and outputs, nonlinear dynamic behavior, process
              constraints, and lack of on-line measurements.  The objective of this research
              is to develop a computationally efficient control strategy for chemical
              processes that exhibit these characteristics.  The control system has three
              distinct components:  (1) a nonlinear closed-loop observer which provides
              on-line estimates of unmeasured state variables; (2) a multivariable
              input-output linearizing controller which accounts for process nonlinearities;
              and (3) a multivariable linear model predictive controller which compensates
              for process constraints.  The control strategy will be analyzed theoretically
              and evaluated via simulation using representative chemical and polymerization
              reactor models.  A collaborative arrangement with DuPont will allow the control
              scheme to be applied to an industrial polymerization process.  This test will
              facilitate technology transfer to industry.    Education:  The teaching plan is
              designed to enhance the educational opportunities available in the Louisiana
              State University Chemical Engineering Department.  The specific goals of the
              plan are to: (1) improve the department's computer facilities; (2) revise the
              curriculum for the department's process control courses; (3) computerize
              experiments in the department's undergraduate laboratories; (4) revitalize the
              department's undergraduate research program; (5) establish a minority student
              program in the department; and (6) participa te in the department's graduate
              student recruitment program.
