Title       : CAREER: The Development of Group-III Nitride LED's and Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9501785

Award Number: 9501785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke F. Lester luke@chtm.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501785  Lester  In close collaboration with the University of New Mexico's
              (UNM)1  established group-III nitride (III-N) MOCVD growth effort, a study  of
              innovative processes to improve the fabrication technology for  III-N
              optoelectronic devices is proposed.  A contact metallization  will be developed
              that will improve dopant activation and contact  resistance by actively
              scavenging the hydrogen that causes  compensation in MOCVD grown III-Ns. 
              Compared to other methods of  extracting hydrogen, such as thermal annealing,
              this approach will  have the advantage of preventing surface dissociation that
              is  detrimental to contact formation.  This new contact scheme will  also be
              used in conjunction with hydrogen-based reactive ion  etching (RIE) to develop
              novel, low-damage etch processes for pre-  metallization surface preparation. 
              A dry-etching process will also  be developed for the fabrication of laser
              mirrors to replace the  difficult task of cleaving III-Ns grown on sapphire. 
              With these  better processes, III-N LEDs and diode lasers will be fabricated to
               characterize by optical and electrical pumping the radiative  processes found
              in III-N materials and to determine the effect of  dislocations on device
              operation.  The ultimate goal of the   research effort--the development of a
              reliable, blue diode laser--  would be a major technological innovation and is
              critical towards  improving the storage capacity and affordability of
              high-density  optical media and the quality of optical displays.    In the
              educational field, emphasis will be placed on teaching  students the scientific
              and communications skills that will make  them more competitive in the job
              market and better able to interact  with and motivate their fellow scientists
              and engineers.   Educational activities will focus on new course development in
              the  area of II-V semiconductor device fabrication and testing,  undergraduate
              and graduate research advising, outreach activities  to local high schools to
              promote the study of engineeri ng in  college, the involvement of traditionally
              underrepresented groups  in research, and the mentoring of graduate students in
              industry  through summer job employment.  ***
