Title       : Kinetics of Charge-Density Waves: Time Resolved X-ray Scattering Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9501119

Award Number: 9501119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Brock jdb20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9501119  Brock    The  objective  of  this  research  program  is  to  measure 
              the  transient structural response of a charge-density-wave  (CDW)  to  sudden 
              changes  in  either the driving  electric  field  or  the  temperature.   These
                data  will  be   used   to   test   modern  nonequilibrium  statistical 
              mechanical  theories  developed   to  describe  the  growth  of  materials in
              the  presence  of  random  impurities  and defects. A common theme running
              through  many  of  these  models  is the derivation of an equation of motion 
              for  a  hydrodynamic  variable  such as mass density,  concentration,  or 
              temperature.  The Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation is an  example  of  such   an  
              equation  of  motion  which  has  recently   received  considerable   attention
               in  the  literature.    Formally,   the  equations  of  motion  for the
              various correlation  functions  of  interest  follow  directly from the
              equation of  motion  for  the  hydrodynamic variable. In spite of the
              well-defined nature of the  question, there are very few direct experimental
              tests of any  of  these  models.   However, x-ray scattering  measurements  of 
              the  transient  structural response of the CDW's are nearly ideal  for  such 
              tests. To first order, one can consider CDWs to  be  nearly  sinusoidal 
              quasi-one-dimensional density waves  and  x-rays  are  diffracted  by  the 
              periodic structure.  Detailed  equations  of  motion describing the local phase
              of this density wave have  been  proposed.  This project will test these models
              by applying a time-  dependent  driving electric field, or temperature to  the 
              sample  and  then measuring the transient structural response of the  CDW 
              using  synchrotron  based, time-resolved,  high-resolution  x-ray  scattering.
              Comparison will be made with previous measurements of  transients  in  the 
              electronic transport by  performing  in-situ  current-voltage measurements. 
              %%%  In  recent  years, mathematical models describing the  growth  of 
              materials   have  received  cons iderable  attention  because   of 
              technological  interests  in growing novel  materials.  From  the  theoretical,
              point of view, this interest is due, in large  part,  to  predictions  that
              materials growth should  exhibit  phenomena  similar to those exhibited by
              systems at phase transitions (e.g.,  at   the   critical   temperature  where  
              a   material   becomes  superconducting). Consequently, the successful
              theoretical  tools  developed  in  the  1970's to study phase transitions  are 
              being  brought  to  bear  on  this new problem. In spite  of  the  large 
              theoretical effort, there are very few direct experimental  tests  of  any  of 
              these models. X-ray scattering measurements  of  the  evolution of a
              charge-density-wave (CDW) system are nearly  ideal  for  experimental  tests
              for some of these growth  models.   CDWs  occur  at  low  temperatures in
              certain  metals.  Although  their  origin  is  quantum mechanical, in the
              simplest approximation,  a  CDW  can be thought of as a small but repetitive
              variation in the  average  density of atoms. In many cases, when an electric 
              field  is  applied to the sample, the CDW responds by "sliding"  rigidly 
              through  the  crystal.  This project will test  these  models  by  applying  an
               electric field (or change in  temperature)  to  the  sample and then use
              x-rays to measure the structural evolution of  the CDW.  ***
