Title       : Career: Probabilistic Methods and Algorithms to Solve Protein Folding Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9501997

Award Number: 9501997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie A. Berger bab@theory.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The project is in the area of computational molecular biology;  specifically
              it addresses problems in protein folding and the self-assembly   of virus
              shells.  The `grand challenge` problem associated with protein folding  is to
              determine how a protein will fold in 3-dimensions when given  only its  amino
              acid sequence.  An important first step in tackling the protein folding 
              problem is a solution to the motif  recognition problem (i.e., given a known 3D
               structure, or motif, determining whether this motif occurs in an unknown amino
               acid  sequence).  The goal of this effort is to develop new algorithms, based 
               solely on the right pairwise correlation probabilities, which out perform
              existing  motif recognition algorithms. An implementation  of these algorithms,
              is being  programmed.  In fact, the package  is aiding in the discovery of the
              coiled-coil  motif in such  viruses as Mollney murine leukemia, influenza
              hemagglutinin, and  HIV.  The coiled-coil motif is thought to be the mechanism
              by  which proteins  fuse with or bind to the cell membrane.   This  continuing
              research deals with  recognizing motifs when less data  is available,
              predicting inter-strand  interactions in motifs, and  finding new insights into
              the 3-dimensional  structure of  proteins.    The second part of the project
              involves studying the  self-assembly  of virus shells.  In particular, by
              computationally modeling how  these shells are built, it is hopefully possible
              to suggest ways  of interfering  with the growth of these viruses and of
              causing  their deformity.    The  Educational Component of this CAREER Grant
              includes:  (a) Development of  interdisciplinary (computer science,
              mathematics,  and biology) undergraduate  and graduate courses and curriculum
              in  computational molecular biology,  discrete mathematics and the  theory of
              (biological) algorithms; (b) Development of  both  undergraduate and graduate
              seminars in computational molecular  biology.  Participation of undergraduate
              students in developing  the extended system  project and the Virus Shell
              Assembly project.  (This is part of the Research  Experiences for
              Undergraduates  Program at NSF and Undergraduate Research  Opportunities
              Program  of MIT.)                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
