Title       : GEM: Examination of Substorm Trigger and Development Mechanisms Based on
               Multisatellite Observations in the Near Earth Tail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9501546

Award Number: 9501546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shin-ichi Ohtani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In this project the investigators will study tail current  disruption during
              substorms by making use of multisatellite  observations.  Tail current
              disruption plays an important role in  releasing magnetic energy which has been
              stored in the near-Earth  tail before a substorm onset.  Recent observations
              have shown that  tail current disruption initiates in the near-Earth
              magnetotail and  then expands both azimuthally and radially, corresponding to
              the  expansion of substorm activities at the ionosphere.  Thus, the  spatial
              expansion of tail current disruption is one of the most  essential features
              associated with substorms.  The main objectives  of the project are (1) to find
              the dependence of the spatial  developmental of tail current disruption on tail
              magnetic  configurations, and (2) to find magnetic conditions that are 
              necessary for triggering the (local) onsets of tail current  disruption.  To
              achieve these objectives the investigators will  focus on preonset magnetic
              conditions .  Data to be used include:  magnetic field data from geostationary
              satellites and elliptically  orbiting satellites.  Magnetic signatures will be
              interpreted in  terms of the tail field configuration and the enhancement in
              the  tail current intensity.  This study is the first attempt to  statistically
              examine the mechanisms of the trigger and the spatial  development of current
              disruption in terms of preonset magnetic  configurations.  The understanding of
              such mechanisms is one of the  main goals of magnetospheric physics.  The
              results of this project  will put important constraints on future theoretical
              and  observational studies of substorm physics, and will be useful as an  input
              for more global studies, such as coordinated ground and  satellite data
              analyses and global simulations of magnetospheric  substorms.
