Title       : Career Development in Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9501980

Award Number: 9501980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Bentil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9501980  Bentil    This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early   Career Development Award.  The research component will focus on
              a   mechanical approach to biological pattern formation.  This
              interdisciplinary   modeling project will focus on studying and constructing
              realistic model   mechanisms that capture key biological processes that may be
              involved in   spatial patterning and showing how they are orchestrated.  Model 
               applications will include mechanisms for the generation of embryonic  
              fingerprints.  Particular emphasis will be placed on (i)  development of  
              analytical and numerical techniques for the solution of model equations,   such
              as perturbation theory and the use of the level set approach for the   solution
              of Hamilton-Jacobi-type equations coupled with parabolic   equations, (ii)
              biological interpretation of the results in terms of insights and  
              predictions, (iii) model comparisons based on currently known biology, and  
              (iv) model refinements as they apply to specific biological patterning  
              problems such as the development of fingerprints.  It is expected that this  
              work will result in a much better understanding, both mathematically and  
              biologically, of the mechanical effects of cell traction on cell motion and  
              cell aggregation within embryonic tissues, and should, therefore, provide  
              significant insight into how this relatively new mechanical approach to  
              modeling biological patterns could be used to address pattern formation  
              problems in developmental biology.  The education component will focus   on an
              interdisciplinary mathematical modeling curriculum for   undergraduate and
              beginning graduate students.  It is proposed to design,   develop, and
              implement a coordinated biomathematical modeling   curriculum for life science
              students that will initially be adopted at the   University of Massachusetts,
              Amherst and, therefore, available to the other   four colleges (Amherst,
              Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, and Smith) in the Five   Colleges Consor tium through
              the established student and faculty exchange.    The curriculum will consist of
              two parts:  the first part will be a bridge   between calculus and its
              applications and it will involve technology in the   classroom.  It is expected
              that this course will provide the textual material   necessary to support a
              substantial modeling course.  The second part will be   a sequence that will
              introduce students to contemporary biomathematical   modeling.  It is expected
              that this course will cover quantitative topics that   will help life science
              students deal with the numerical and technical   information they will
              encounter.  Regular meetings with undergraduate   course directors and other
              interdisciplinary faculty members will be an   important part of this mission. 
                The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early   development
              of academic faculty as both educators and researchers.  The   Faculty Early
              Career Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-  wide  program that
              provides for the support of junior faculty within the   context of their
              overall career development.  It combines in a single   program the support of
              quality research and education in the broadest sense   and the full
              participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science   and
              engineering.  This program enhances and emphasizes the importance   the
              Foundation places on the development of full, balanced academic   careers which
              include both research and education.
