Title       : Development of a Sampling Strategy for the Verification of Global Transport
               Models Using Airborne Radon Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9501112

Award Number: 9501112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Kritz mkritz@asrc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1307,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9501112  Kritz, Mark A.  State University of New York at Albany 
              Title: Development of a Sampling Strategy for the Verification of         
              Global Transport Models Using Airborne Radon Measurement    Although the
              verification of global transport models using airborne  radon measurementq has
              received attention at two major workshops,  the observations available thus far
              for intercomparsion with model  predictions are fragmentary and were not always
              obtained using a  sampling strategy designed with such intercomparsions in
              mind.  In  this project we will work closely with two prominent global 
              modeling groups on the development of such a strategy, with  emphasis on
              designing a measurement program which will permit the  evaluation of competing
              computational schemes for parameterizing  vertical convective transport in 3-D
              models.    In this effort the global circulation and assimilation wind models 
              under development at the Global Climate Dynamics Program at NCAR  and at the
              Data Assimilation Office at the NASA Goddard Space  Flight Center will be used
              to stimulate free tropospheric radon  distributions over North America using a
              variety of convective  parameterizations.  Working with researchers in these 
              organizations, the PI will examine these distributions and simulate  the radon
              concentrations which would be encountered and sampled by  instrumentation on an
              aircraft following various flight paths  through such distributions in order to
              develop flight plans and  sampling strategies which would allow an efficient
              evaluation of  model performance.  In this effort the PI will also use the
              radon  vertical profiles acquired by his group in the summer of 1994. (The 
              1994 data set will also be made available to the modeling community  on the
              internet.)    This research is important because it attempts to develop an 
              observational basis for testing and improving the way GCMs  simulation vertical
              transports.
