Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Inverse Problems in PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9501510

Award Number: 9501510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61309              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor M. Isakov isakov@twsuvm.uc.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9501050  Isakov    The basic goal of this project is a study of global
              uniqueness  and stabili  ty for several fundamental inverse problems. The next
              aim is to  develop some ef  ficient numerical algorithms for their solution.
              Generally, an  inverse problem  consists in finding a coefficient of source
              term in a partial  differential equa  tion from an additional boundary or
              scattering data. Also of  interest are cer-  tain unknown domains entering a
              boundary value problem. Elliptic,  parabolic, an  d hyperbolic equations will
              be studied. Accordingly we focus on  the inverse  conductivity problem, inverse
              scattering and seismic problems.  The additional  data which are generated by
              single or many   boundary measurements will be considered. A special attention 
              will be paid to  use of local boundary data, finite number of scattering 
              frequencies, and to  identification of non-linear equations. The powerful
              methods of  PDE and Complex  Variables are supposed to be used which include
              potential theory,  Carleman type  estimates, complex geometrical optics, and
              Fourier Integral  Operators. The work  is planned to be a deep theoretical and
              subsequent numerical  investigation of  challegning applied problems, like
              acoustic, electrical, and  seismic prospec-  ting in geophysics and medicine,
              as well as cracks detection and  finding physi-  cal constitutive laws from
              results of boundary measurements of  physical fields.  %%%  This project is
              dedicated to challenging and important problems  of applied  mathematics which
              will be studied by contemporary mathematical  means. This is  expected to
              answer several questions about possibility of  evaluation of  important
              characteristics of physical and medical objects from  relatively cheap 
              ,non-destructive, and feasible exterior measurements. A deeper  understanding
              of  nonclassical and hard mathematical questions will generate better  and
              reliable  numerical algorithms. This must lead to efficient methods of  medical
              diagnostic  from electrical, magnetic, and u ltrasound data, of cracks 
              detection. The method  s of finding (non-linear)   laws governing several
              complicated  systems in che-  mistry and engineering promises to enhance
              possibilities of  mathematical simula  tion and to reduce cost of developement
              of new technologies.  ***
