Title       : Quality Technology for Variation Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1995  
File        : a9501217

Award Number: 9501217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijayan N. Nair vnn@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9501217  Nair   This research is concerned with the development of efficient
              methods for parameter design, an approach for variation reduction introduced by
              Taguchi. In parameter design, the goal is to achieve robustness by reducing the
              sensitivity of the product or process to uncontrollable disturbances (noise
              variables). The research will exploit the structure inherent in parameter
              design experiments to obtain efficient techniques. Both static problems with
              fixed target as well as situations with dynamic characteristics will be
              studied. The applicability of parameter design will also be broadened by
              developing methods for more complex split-plot experiments and for studies
              where the noise variables cannot be controlled, as in on-line investigations.
              Models and methods for analyzing non-standard data, such as count or
              categorical responses or data from mixture models, will be developed. Finally,
              the case of multiple quality characteristics will be considered and a
              systematic data analysis strategy will be developed. Software will be developed
              to facilitate the application of the models and the analysis techniques
              provided.   The importance of quality improvement methods in today's
              competitive market cannot be over emphasized. Industrial experiments are
              expensive and time consuming to conduct.  Therefore, it is important that
              efficient methods of design and analysis are used to maximize the quality of
              information from such studies.  The outcome of this research will enable
              product and process engineers to conduct parameter design studies more
              efficiently, especially in dynamic systems. If successful, the methods
              developed as part of this research will broaden the scope of engineering
              applications to include more complex experimental situations, on-line studies,
              and the analysis of different types of data.  The research will also yield a
              comprehensive, systematic strategy for analyzing multiple quality
              characteristics as commonly found in practice.
