Title       : Computer Simulation of Reactors for Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1991  
File        : a9161060

Award Number: 9161060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kailash C. Karki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Innovative Research Inc
	      2520 Broadway St NE, Suite 200
	      Minneapolis, MN  55413    612/378-0320

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) processes are used on a large                  
                                                                                             
              scale for the preparation of electronically active and                         
              insulating layers for electronic and optical solid state                       
              devices.  The flow, heat and mass transfer processes, and                      
              chemical reactions in a CVD reactor play a critical role in                    
                                                                                             
              the quality of devices formed by CVD processes.  The fluid                     
              dynamics in a CVD reactor is characterized by large                            
              temperature gradients, strong temperature dependence of the                    
                                                                                             
              gas properties, combined forced and buoyancy-induced                           
              convection, and homogeneous gas phase and heterogeneous                        
              surface reactions.  Accurate models of CVD processes can be                    
                                                                                             
              used to design new systems and decrease the number of                          
              exploratory experiments needed, which may be very expensive.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This Phase I, Small Business Innovation Research project                       
              consists of the initial portion of an overall program to                       
              develop and validate an accurate and efficient three-                          
              dimensional numerical model for some common CVD reactor                        
              configurations.  The main features of the model will be: (1)                   
                                                                                             
              solution of the governing equations on a body-conforming grid                  
                                                                                             
              so that complex configurations can be accurately represented;                  
                                                                                             
              (2) a higher-order representation of the convection and                        
              diffusion terms in the transport equations; (3) an efficient                   
                                                                                             
              algorithm for the solution of the coupled discretization                       
              equations; (4) variable physical property formulation so that                  
                                                                                             
              the important temperature dependence can be taken into                         
              account; (5) ability to solve conjugate problems so that                       
              conduction in reactor walls can be considered without                          
              requiring any arbitrary boundary conditions at fluid-solid                     
              interfaces; (6) a realistic representation of the reactor wall                 
                                                                                             
              temperature distribution; and (7) completely flexible code                     
              structure so that any reaction scheme can be incorporated.                     
                                                                                             
              The end product expected will be an acurate computational                      
              model for flow in practical CVD reactors.
