Title       : Diamond Film Generation from a Combustion Jet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1991  
File        : a9161303

Award Number: 9161303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Keil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AeroChem Research Labs
	      P. O. Box 12
	      Princeton, NJ  085420012    609/921-7070

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at development of a method for                           
              combustion- flame production of diamond films; this method has                 
              the potential for deposition of large area films on complex                    
              shapes.  In this work, flames will be supported in a                           
              combustion chamber wivh subsequent expansion of the product                    
              flame gases through  a converging-diverging nozzle to form a                   
              supersonic jet which will be directed against a substrate for                  
              deposition of the desired films.  This approach has the                        
              potential to mitigate previous problems associated with                        
              diamond-film deposition such as poor uniformity and high                       
              levels of grain impurities via control of the chemical                         
              reactions and transport phenomena, thus leading to efficient                   
              and uniform utilization of the combustion-generated active                     
              species in production of high-quality diamond films.  The                      
              basic principles involved in this approach are: isolate the                    
              active portion of the fuel-rich combustion product cloud                       
              (which contains high levels of species which lead to diamond                   
              deposition); freeze the chemistry in that cloud through the                    
              rapid nozzle expansion process; transport this "frozen" stream                 
              rapidly to the surface to be coated; modify the                                
              uniformity/composition/temperature in an optimum fashion in                    
              transit; and establish a thin, uniform boundary layer at the                   
              substrate surface across which the active species can diffuse                  
              to strike the growing diamond film.                                            
                                                                                             
              The proposed method for applying combustion-generated diamond                  
              films will significantly impact a potential billion dollar                     
              market.  When perfected, this new technique will provide a                     
              practical, portable, low-cost method of applying diamond                       
              coatings to materials as diverse as machine tools and                          
              electronic parts.
