Title       : A System for Measuring Capillary Blood Flow and Organ Perfusion Using Doppler
               Ultrasound Aided by Contrast Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1992   
File        : a9161006

Award Number: 9161006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Schrope   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RESHET Inc
	      401 City Avenue
	      Bala Cynwyd, PA      215/222-9117

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5345,
Abstract    :
              This project will continue research on a new method to analyze                 
              blood flow in deep tissues of the body which have slow blood                   
              flows and small volumes of movement using doppler ultrasound.  In              
              order to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio from these tissues a               
              contrast agent, consisting of galactose microparticles that trap               
              air bubbles, will be employed.  Due to the nonlinear properties                
              of this contrast agent, the doppler shifted second harmonic of                 
              the transmitted ultrasonic frequency will provide a signal with                
              desirable properties for use in the system.  At the second                     
              harmonic, the doppler shifted echoes from tissues not containing               
              the contrast agent (surrounding tissues) will be reduced in                    
              comparison to tissues containing the agent (capillaries).                      
                                                                                             
              The concept previously was tested using a mock flow system.  It                
              is now proposed to do in-vitro experiments using excised animal                
              organs.  The design of hardware which will allow the transmission              
              of one ultrasonic frequency and the detection of the second                    
              harmonic of that frequency also is a part of the project.                      
                                                                                             
              This research is extremely important since no other medical                    
              device is available to make such critical measurements.  When                  
              fully tested and developed, this device should be able to compete              
              in the medical imaging device marketplace.
