Title       : Multi-Rate Trellis-Coded Modulation for Multipath Fading Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1992   
File        : a9161131

Award Number: 9161131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay M. Jacobsmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ENSCO Inc
	      5400 Port Royal Road
	      Springfield, VA  22151    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4095,
Abstract    :
                   This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's            
              (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is              
              designed to provide an opportunity for small business, particularly            
              the small high technology firm, to participate in NSF research.                
              Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to select promising             
              proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality research.              
              Phase II is the principal research project.  Phase III is the                  
              conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications             
              and technological innovation supported by follow-on private                    
              venture capital or other non-federal financing.                                
                   This Phase I project addresses multipath fading on radio                  
              channels for high speed digital communications.  The principal                 
              investigator is investigating a new approach that adapts the system            
              data rate to the time-varying signal-to-noise ratio at the radio               
              receiver.  The objectives are to determine the feasibility of rate             
              changing algorithms and adaptive synchronization; develop a measure            
              of waiting time performance; and determine the effects of queueing,            
              a noisy feedback channel, rate changing overhead, and propagation              
              delay.  The approach employs trellis coded modulation in an                    
              adaptive scheme where the data rate varies by changing the                     
              number of bits per channel symbol.
