Title       : Hydraulic Constraints on Transpiration and Stress Tolerance of Cold Desert
               Shrubs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9319180

Award Number: 9319180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sperry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319180  Sperry  Disruption of water transport in the physical process of
              cavitation in xylem conduits occurs at xylem pressures that can differ widely
              between species. These cavitation pressures set unambiguous limits to maximum
              drought tolerance and water transport capacity. Cavitation is also caused by
              freeze-thaw cycles and sets additional limits to water transport under
              conditions when freezing and thawing occurs in the xylem water. The proposed
              research will evaluate the role cavitation and whole -plant hydraulic
              conductance play in conferring the necessary summer drought tolerance for the
              cold-desert shrub Artemesia tridentata while at the same time promoting maximum
              stomatal conductance and xylem flow when water is available in spring but
              freeze-thaw cycles are common. This work will extend current efforts to
              characterize the integration between physically  limited hydraulic parameters
              of water transport and physiological-morphological responses to stress
              including turgor maintenance, stomatal closure, and leaf abscission. At the
              same time, the research will complement and perhaps help explain previous work
              which has extensively characterized seasonal patterns in water relations,
              photosynthesis and growth in this species. Genetic differentiation in hydraulic
              limitations to water flow will be evaluated among the three ecologically
              distinct subspecies vaseyana, wyomingensis, and tridentata. The patterns found
              in A. tridentata will be compared to the herbaceous perennial A. ludoviciana to
              obtain further insight into stress responses related to life history; this will
              also provide an evolutionary perspective becaus e woody Artemisia probably
              evolved from congeneric herbaceous ancestors. Field monitoring of soil and
              plant water relations, leaf area and phenology for two-three years under
              differing water regimes will be evaluated in the context of laboratory
              determinations of the cavitation response to freeze-thaw cycles and water
              stress that form the basis of predicting maximum possible flows without
              cavitation. Greenhouse/lab experiments will allow more precise determination of
              responses to soil and atmospheric drought and evaluate whether water stress is
              sensed in the root vs. the leaf. The ultimate outcome will be a better
              understanding of the adaptations of cold-desert shrubs to their unique seasonal
              climatic regime, and a critical evaluation of how cavitation and hydraulic
              conductance considerations are integrated into whole plant stress responses. 
              ***      ~                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                             J   P                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     E   J   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               !         !   
                     !              F                                   J                    
                  P         J     4    CG Times    Symbol  & Arial    Tms Rmn  " Helv       m
                m         m                         h          S % S %      ^             /  
                   Rochelle D Ray Rochelle D Ray                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
