Title       : Internet Access to Large Government Data Archives: The Direct Edgar Access
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1994   
File        : a9319331

Award Number: 9319331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $666528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajit Kambil akambil@stern.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9319331   Kambil  The Internet computer network is a U.S. priority, receiving 
              substantial backing from agencies ranging from the National  Science Foundation
              to NASA to the Department of Defense.  This  infrastructure is widely available
              in university, research, and  government institutions.  The Internet and
              related initiatives  are a key part of the emerging National Research and
              Education  Network.  While the network is already in place there is
              considerable work  to be done to make large data archives available over this 
              infrastructure.   This project investigates techniques by which  the government
              can make large archives available to the public  over the Internet.  A key goal
              of the project is to provide an  example for agencies from which they can learn
              to directly  provide information to the Internet in a cost-effective manner. 
              This project will develop and demonstrate ways to post large  government data
              archives on the Internet for access by  researchers and the general public. 
              The two-year project will  use the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
              EDGAR Database  as a test database and will develop and implement techniques to
               provide the low-cost management and dissemination of these data  archives. 
              The goal of the project is to develop techniques that  can be used directly by
              government agencies another information  providers, giving these organizations
              the tools and knowledge to  allow them to place government information on the
              Internet for  direct access by researchers and the general public.  Secondary 
              goals o the project are to make key financial archives from the  SEC available
              to researchers and the general public who would not  otherwise have access to
              the information.
