Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Seventeenth International Biometric Conference - August
               8-12, 1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9319948

Award Number: 9319948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne Billard lynne@stat.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to support travel expenses of approximately 25 U.S.
              scientists, approximately ten participants who have an official capacity such
              as organizers and invited speakers and approximately fifteen young
              investigators (including women and minorities), to attend the 17th
              International Biometric Conference. The meeting will be held August 8-12, 1994
              in Hamilton, Ontario. The strength of the meetings lies in the broad
              international participation of statisticians, biologists and mathematicians
              interested in quantitative and statistical aspects of biology, genetics,
              epidemiology, pharmacology, medicine, public health and other fields. Topics to
              be discussed on statistical topics directly related to these issues include
              quality management, mixture distributions, neural networks, genetics, repeated
              measures and longitudinal data analyses, spatial models and climatic change in
              fisheries, bioassay calibration, epidemics, DNA and protein sequences, Gibbs
              sampling and resampling computer intensive methods, spatial and temporal
              environmental modelling, frailty models, cancer models and ecological impact
              analysis; all of which have direct bearing on solutions to the major concerns
              of today including ecology and the environment, AIDS, cancer and heart disease,
              plant science epidemiology, agriculture, forestry, etc. In addition,
              discussions on fundamental statistical issues of repeated measures, structural
              inference, image processing and causal inference all have direct application to
              current health related and agricultural sciences. It is anticipated that the
              Conference, which is the major international meeting of biostatisticians and
              biometricians throughout the world will be attended by 500 or more scientists
              from the international community. This proposal requests funds to support
              travel expenses of approximately 25 U.S. scientists consisting of approximately
              ten participants who have an official capacity such as organizers and invited
              speakers and approximately fifteen young investig ators (including women and
              minorities), to attend the 17th International Biometric Conference to be held
              August 8-12, 1994 in Hamilton, Ontario. The strength of the meetings lies in
              the broad international participation of statisticians, biologists and
              mathematicians interested in cutting edge research and the application of
              quantitative and statistical methods to of biology, genetics, epidemiology,
              pharmacology, medicine, public health and other fields. It is anticipated that
              the Conference, which is the major international meeting of biostatisticians
              and biometricians throughout the world will be attended by 500 or more
              scientists from the international community.
