Title       : Prosody in Language Comprehension and Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9319272

Award Number: 9319272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernanda Ferreira fernanda@eyelab.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Henderson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319272  Ferreira    ABSTRACT    The purpose of this project is to explore the
              architecture of the language processing system by examining how prosody is
              created and used.  More specifically, the goals are to:  (1) elaborate a model
              of prosodic production proposed recently by Ferreira (1993), which in turn will
              shed light on more global models of production; (2) use this model to develop
              and test hypothesis about how prosodic information might be used and integrated
              with syntactic and semantic information during auditory language comprehension;
              and (3) develop an online task for examining auditory language comprehension,
              an auditory analogue of the moving window task.  In addition, by combining
              research in production and comprehension, this project will shed light on the
              important question of how the language production and comprehension systems are
              related.  The proposed studies are divided into two sections, one on production
              and one on comprehension.  The production experiments employ a paradigm in
              which participants view a picture or answer a question and generate a sentence
              in response to the stimulus.  These studies designed to explore the prosody of
              spoken sentences employ a paradigm in which speakers read a sentence, memorize
              it, and produce it upon receipt of a cue.  These experiments will examine the
              syntactic and phonological factors influencing the durational and pitch
              properties of spoken sentences.  The comprehension experiments will use a
              technique Ferreira has recently developed called the Auditory Moving Window,
              which measures processing load across a sentence.  (To allow comparison of
              sentence processing in the auditory and visual domains, the comprehension
              studies will also be conducted using eye movement monitoring and the visual
              moving window paradigms.)  The listeners will hear sentences containing
              prosodic cues normally produced by speakers for those sentences, either with or
              without biasing lexical and contextual information.  The goal of these studies
              is to examine how t hese sources of information interact during auditory
              language processing.
