Title       : Theoretical Methods For Molecular Potential Energy Surfaces and Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1995   
File        : a9319929

Award Number: 9319929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Pulay pulay@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project, which treats three specific computational methods   in
              molecular electronic structure theory, is supported by the NSF   Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program.  Topic (1) extends   Pulay's current
              Unrestricted Natural Orbital Complete Active Space method   (UNO-CAS) to large
              molecules (e.g. molecules with 24 nonhydrogen atoms)   and provides a more
              accurate description of excited electronic states.    Topic (2) effectively
              includes higher-order corrections in low-order   Generalized Moller Plesset
              perturbation theory by relaxing the reference   function.  Topic (3) employs
              gauge-invariant atomic orbitals for ab   initio quantum mechanical calculation
              of NMR properties, and explores the   use of similar techniques in density
              functional theory.    Laboratory experiments and theoretical predictions, using
              computer models   based on the quantum mechanical equations of motion of the
              electrons,   today contribute as equal partners to the understanding of
              chemical   behavior. The evolution of modern  methods for molecular electronic 
               structure computation has had a major impact on virtually every field of  
              chemistry from the study of small molecules in the earth's atmosphere to  
              large molecules of biochemical importance.   The development of these  
              mathematical methods and their implementation into large scale computer  
              programs is the result of hundreds of man years of effort.  This project  
              continues this tradition of developing practical, widely applicable,  
              theoretical tools.  The goal of this project is to improve the speed and  
              accuracy of molecular electronic structure computations, to extend these   to
              larger molecules, to treat excited electronic states (important for   optical
              properties and certain classes of chemical reactions), and to   better
              understand fundamental relationships between molecular structure   and observed
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra.
