Title       : Simulation of Chemical Reactions in Solution With the Combined Quantum
               Mechanical and Molecular Mechanical Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9319930

Award Number: 9319930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiali Gao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jaili Gao is funded by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to perform computer simulations of chemical reactions   in
              solution.  A combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical   methodology
               is being developed  which combines ab initio Hartree-Fock   and  molecular
              orbital techniques with statistical mechanical Monte Carlo   simulations to
              study chemical reactions in solution for very simple   chemical species. 
              Analogous calculations on more complex chemical   species will employ
              semiempirical Hamiltonians such as AM1 and INDO/S in   conjunction with Monte
              Carlo simulation techniques.  Reactions to be   studied include the
              decarboxylation of 3-carboxybenzisoxazoles and the   ionization of  t-butyl
              chloride in aqueous solution..  In addition to   studies of chemical reactions
              in solution, solvent effects on electronic   absorption spectra of chromophores
              will be examined using the same model.    Computer simulations of chemical
              reactions in solution provide important   molecular level insights into the
              factors which influence reaction rates.    In particular specific contributions
              which solvation and accompanying   polarization make to lowering barriers to
              chemical reaction can be   studied in detail.  Many of the more interesting
              bond breaking reactions,   however, exhibit quantum effects which cannot be
              modeled effectively   using empirical potentials.  Gao's approach involves the
              use of a   combined simulation approach which uses Monte Carlo and molecular
              orbital   theory to treat the quantum degrees of freedom undergoing change
              during   the chemical reaction.
