Title       : Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food Web Structure in the Ross Sea:
               Primary Productivity, New Production and Bacterial Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9319222

Award Number: 9319222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Ducklow duck@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9319222  Ducklow  The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
               but intense.  There is an increasing body of evidence that in  many Antarctic
              habitats, the most active period may be very early  in the season, a period
              that has not been emphasized in previous  investigations.  This project is part
              of an interdisciplinary  program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
              phytoplankton  bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the
              Ross  Sea.  The overall program will test hypotheses related to the  initiation
              of the phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of  ice melt, the mechanisms
              controlling phytoplankton growth and  productivity in spring, the implications
              and short-term fate of  high productivity in spring, and the transition from
              spring to  midsummer conditions.  This component will conduct a set of 
              process-oriented experiments designed to elucidate the controls  of
              phytoplankton productivity, growth and accumulation as well as  the mechanisms
              which control bacterial abundance and productivity  in Antarctic waters. 
              Specifically, the relative photosynthetic  and nutrient (nitrate, ammonium)
              characteristics of diatom- vs.  Phaeocystis-dominated assemblages will be
              examined to test if  Phaeocystis simply grows faster under spring conditions in
              the  Ross Sea.  Phytoplankton and bacterial biomass, productivity and  their
              interactions will be measured to elucidate the complex 
              physical-chemical-biological interactions which occur.   Substantial
              understanding of the mechanisms controlling  phytoplankton growth and
              productivity in spring, the implications  and short-term fate of high
              productivity in spring, and the  transition from spring to midsummer conditions
              will result from  this research.  Finally, because the Antarctic is the ocean's
               largest high-nutrient, low biomass system, and hence has the  greatest
              potential for sequestering carbon dioxide, knowledge of  the dynamics of the
              Ross Sea phytoplankton will also increase our  understanding of the carb on
              cycle of the Southern Ocean.
