Title       : Context Information and Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1995     
File        : a9319549

Award Number: 9319549
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Murnane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319549  MURNANE    The overall goal of this research is to understand how
              context information affects recognition memory.  This will provide a deeper
              understanding of the ways in which the learning environment and the environment
              in which remembering takes place interact and will be useful in developing
              optimal learning environments and in providing aid to the memory impaired.    
              Many current theories of memory divide information into two broad classes.  The
              information one is trying to remember is called item or target information. 
              Other information that is stored in memory with the  target information is
              called context information.  Context information  may include information about
              the physical environment in which the target information was learned
              (environmental context), stray thoughts that occurred while the target
              information was learned (semantic context), or the learner's mood while the
              target information was stored in memory (emotional context).  Context
              information plays a critical role in many explanations of how people can
              retrieve individual episodes or events from among the many similar events
              stored in memory. However, studies that use recognition to measure memory
              performance often fail to find that changes in context information have an
              effect, raising serious questions about whether context information in fact
              plays the critical role assigned to it by current theories.    Murnane will
              address the role played by context information in recognition through the
              continued development and testing of his own context model, a formal model of
              context and recognition.  The context model is a generalization of several
              computational memory theories that share the characteristic that recognition
              decisions are based on information derived from a large set of items stored in
              memory rather than on information derived only from the memory representation
              of the test item.     Murnane will test his model against two dominant
              hypotheses about why manipulations of context information sometimes  fail to
              produce predicted results, the mental reinstatement hypothesis and the
              outshining hypothesis.  The basic idea of the mental reinstatement hypothesis
              is that subjects imagine, or mentally reinstate, the learning context when
              tested in a different context, and then use this mentally reinstated context
              information in making recognition decisions.  Mental reinstatement is assumed
              to be just as effective as physically reinstating the context (e.g., by placing
              the subject back in the learning context during the recognition test). 
              Murnane's context model makes different predictions from the mental
              reinstatement hypothesis; these will be tested in a series of experiments that
              will (a) clarify the conditions under which mental reinstatement is effective,
              (b) determine whether mental reinstatement is as effective as physical
              reinstatement, and (c) determine whether mental reinstatement is equally
              effective with different types of context information.  The second popular
              hypothesis that attempts to explain the conflicting recognition results, the
              outshining hypothesis, is that item information is such a strong memory cue
              relative to the context information that it masks, or "outshines" any effects
              caused by changes in context information.  Preliminary development of the
              context model has produced predictions that are contradictory to the outshining
              hypothesis and preliminary studies support the context model.  Several
              experiments will provide a critical test of the two hypotheses.    In addition,
              other predictions from the context model will be tested, the model will be
              extended to cover different types of context information, a version of the
              model that is capable of making quantitative predictions will be constructed,
              and the model will be extended to account for a broader set of empirical data
              than covered by current models.  For example, the model predicts that the
              effects of changes in the relative strengths of context and item information on
              recognition differ depending on whether item or c ontext information is
              strengthened. Several studies will address how changes in each type of
              information affect recognition.    ***
