Title       : New Materials for Coupling Electron and Ion Transfer Across Model
               Archaebacterial Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9319099

Award Number: 9319099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9319099  Thompson  The development of optoelectronic switching and storage
              devices  based on planar bacteriorhodopsin films has been the focus of  intense
              international research efforts.  Utilization of these  devices is envisioned in
              a variety of pattern recognition systems  where rapid storage of high densities
              of optical information with  long storage lifetimes (> 1 ms) is required. 
              Although device  prototypes using bacteriorhopsin have been built that achieve
              this,  their design is limited by the stability, photophysical and  absorption
              characteristics of the multiple excited states, and poor  directional control
              of bacteriorhdopsin in planar arrays.  The  objective of the proposed research
              is to synthesize and  characterize a new class of materials that will couple 
              photochemically induced electron and ion transport reactions in  oriented, thin
              membrane films for application in optoelectronic  devices.  Immobilization of
              these materials onto optically  transparent electrode surfaces will provide a
              degree of  photochemical and electrochemical tunability in these materials 
              that is currently lacking in the bacteriorhopsin-based devices.  %%% 
              Gramicidin A-porphyrin-quinone (GAPQ triads, patterned in concept  after the
              membrane-bound reaction centers of photosynthetic  bacteria and plants, will be
              synthesized and incorporated into  vesicles composed of model archaebacterial
              bipolar membrane lipids  (bolalipids).  These materials will complement each
              other in a  composite triad/bolalipid photochemical system by: 1) vectorially 
              orienting the porphyrin and quinone within the membrane to produce  an
              asymmetric membrane structure having both oxidizing and reducing  surfaces, 2)
              inhibiting self-annihilation of the initially charge-  separated pair by
              placing terminal donor and acceptor moieties at  opposing membrane interfaces,
              3) increasing the rate of  transmembrane electron transfer by reducing the
              donor-acceptor  separation distance, and 4) compensating for membrane
              polarization  resulting fro m transmembrane electron transfer by incorporating
              a  monovalent ion channel to dissipate the buildup of potential  gradients. 
              This proposal describes preparative chemistry,  structural and photochemical
              characterization, and sodium ion  conductance measurements aimed at optimizing
              vectorial electron and  ion transfer rates across bipolar lipid membranes.  The
              materials  aspects of the proposal are focused on developing modular bolalipid 
              and GAPQ synthetic pathways such that facile system integration  with respect
              to interfacial reactivity, efficient transmembrane  charge separation, and
              immobilization on solid support materials  can be achieved.  Experiments
              designed to probe the triad  orientation, ion channel properties, photochemical
              kinetics, and  electron/ion coupling in various GAPQ/bolalipid composite
              membrane  configurations using laser flash photolysis, differential scanning 
              calorimetry, nuclear magnetic resonance, and electron microscopy  techniques
              are also proposed.  The results of these investigations  will then be used to
              devise a suitable system for testing on  microporous and ITO supports.  ***
