Title       : Status, Solidarity and Non-Verbal Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9319897

Award Number: 9319897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne Lafrance   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319897  LaFrance                              ABSTRACT      The human smile is
              an ubiquitous yet indeterminate facial  gesture.  People smile at each other
              when the situation is  pleasurable, but they also smile when the context is
              painful,  tense, or even antagonistic.  Smiles appear to possess a number  of
              meanings and seem designed to effect a variety of social  purposes, such as
              showing good will, affirming social  connections, conveying concession or
              apology, or enacting social  position.  This research employs multiple
              methodologies to  determine how the diverse meanings of smiles are achieved, 
              including meta-analysis, experimental studies, and content  analysis of
              existing verbal records.  Two processes are proposed  to be involved in
              differentiating smiles: their physical  qualities and the interaction context
              in which they occur.         The research will investigate particular facial
              features, in  addition to upward turning of the corners of the mouth area, that
               may differentiate smiling expressions associated with affiliation  from those
              associated with appeasement. It will also investigate  temporal qualities of
              smiles, such as time to onset, duration,  and offset, that may differentiate
              smiling expressions associated  with affiliation from those associated with
              deference or  dissension.  Finally, it will determine whether the 
              differentiation among smiles is also a function of the degree of  reciprocity
              of smiling between people who are interacting with  one another.      Prior
              research on smiling has focused primarily on its   relationship to experienced
              emotion, neglecting the social  functions of a smile. Yet, this apparently
              small social gesture  contributes to and alters the nature of many social
              interactions.  This research will make an important contribution to our 
              understanding of these effects and thus to our ability to improve 
              interpersonal communication in situations where smiles may be  misread. A prime
              example is the examination of gender differences  in smiling in  the present
              research, which will test the  generality of the observation that women smile
              more than men as  well as various explanations for this difference, including 
              women's higher affiliation motives or lower social power.  ***
