Title       : The Experience of Regret: What, When, and Why
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9319558

Award Number: 9319558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Gilovich tdg1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319558  GILOVICH                                ABSTRACT    Previous research
              indicates that people experience more regret  over negative outcomes that stem
              from actions taken than over  identical outcomes that stem from actions
              foregone.  For example,  someone who loses money by selling stocks to buy
              another one is  believed to regret the loss more than someone who thinks about 
              switching but hangs onto his or her current stock. As compelling  as this might
              seem, it conflicts with an observation from  everyday life: when people
              describe what they regret most, their  regrets often center around things they
              failed to do. The purpose  of this research is to further our understanding of
              regret by  reconciling everyday observation with the results of previous 
              research.  The research has three objectives. The first is to  verify everyday
              observation. Do omissions in fact predominate in  the biggest regrets of
              people's lives? A series of structured  interviews will ascertain the most
              common regrets in people's  lives. The second objective follows from the first.
              If people's  biggest regrets involve things they failed to do in their lives, 
              how can we account for previous research that demonstrates the  opposite
              result?  This research will explore whether there is a  systematic time course
              to the experience of regret: people regret  their unfortunate actions more in
              the short term (as current  research suggests), but their unfortunate inactions
              more in the  long run (as everyday experience suggests). An experimental test 
              of this proposed temporal pattern will be conducted. The third  objective is to
              understand why this temporal pattern might exist.  In particular, a series of
              laboratory experiments will examine:  1) why regret over action tends to
              diminish with time, 2) why  regret over inaction tends to intensify with time,
              and 3) why our  regrettable inactions remain more cognitively available to us
              in  the long run.  By furthering our understanding of the regret,  this
              research promises to improv e everyday judgement and decision  making.  In
              addition, the examination of underlying mechanisms  should expand our knowledge
              of basic social psychological  phenomena such as post-decision dissonance
              reduction, subjective  confidence, and counterfactual thinking.
