Title       : The Dynamics of Propagating Polymerization Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9319175

Award Number: 9319175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127760             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Pojman john.pojman@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Pojman - 9319175      An exothermic reaction can sometimes support a
              propagating front of reaction in an unstirred medium.  Polymerization reactions
              are very exothermic, and addition polymerizations can be initiated with free
              radicals produced from the thermal decomposition of an unstable compound such
              as a peroxide.  Thus, the heat produced by the polymerization can diffuse and
              cause the initiation of polymerization in a neighboring region, resulting in a
              propagating front.  Performing polymerization in the frontal regime has, for
              example, potential for materials synthesis for two reasons: (1) If the
              polymerization were performed in a flow reactor such that the input flow
              velocity would equal the front propagation velocity, then it would be possible
              to maintain the high temperature, strongly oxidizing reaction zone away from
              the walls.  If the oxidizing region is in contact with the metal walls, as in a
              standard Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR), then oxidized impurities will
              necessarily contaminate the product.  However, in the frontal regime, the
              reaction zone is not in contact with metal and thus, no contamination occurs. 
              It has been possible to produce ultra-pure polystyrene and poly(methyl
              methacrylate) in a commercial plant using this approach.  (2) If the front is
              carried out in a static medium, then novel materials may be formed because of
              the self-organizing character of the front.  But, instabilities in the fronts
              can interfere with these approaches.       The PI is therefore planning to look
              at the dynamic behavior of propagating polymerization fronts for four reasons:
              (1) polymerization fronts offer readily accessible experimental systems to test
              theories of thermal instabilities in reaction-diffusion systems, including
              oscillations, spinning modes, period-doubling and chaos; (2) polymerization
              fronts exhibit interesting convective instabilities, that are poorly
              understood; (3) polymerization fronts hold promise as a means of materials
              production but instabilities c an interfere (understanding the conditions that
              lead to instabilities could allow the design of experimental conditions that
              eliminate the instabilities or exploit them); and (4) developing complete
              models of frontal polymerization could provide fundamental understanding of
              non-steady state polymerization kinetics.
