Title       : In vivo Mechanisms of Keratin Filament Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9319560

Award Number: 9319560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre A. Coulombe pacoulom@mail.jhmi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9319560  Coulombe     Keratin filament assembly begins with the formation of an
              heterodimer of type I and type II keratins through coiled-coil interactions
              along their 46 nm long alpha-helical domain.  Two rod-shaped dimer molecules
              then interact laterally with an antiparallel orientation to form a tetramer,
              which is the only keratin assembly intermediate that can be isolated in high
              yields.  Although epithelial cells either actively synthesize or contain
              multiple keratins, we do not yet understand the principles and mechanisms
              controlling the pairing of type I and type II keratins in vivo.  The aim of
              this project is to characterize this, by focusing on two natural type I - type
              II keratin "pairs" which under certain conditions co-exist in epidermal cells: 
              K5-K14 and K6-K16/K17.  The keratin composition of populations of native
              filaments isolated from epidermal and tongue epithelial keratinocytes cultured
              under various conditions will be determined, using ultrastructural
              immunocytochemistry combined with a classical biochemical and immunochemical
              approach. A combination of chromatography, chemical cross-linking and
              immunochemistry will be used to determine the keratin composition of tetramer
              and dimer subunits derived from native keratin filaments.  In addition, the
              composition of the heterotypic complexes that form when multiple type I and
              type II keratins are co-translated in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate will be
              determined.  The combination of the two sets of data, i.e., the keratin
              composition of native filament subunits vs. that of filament subunits generated
              by co-translation of the same keratin mRNAs in a cell-free extract, will reveal
              whether pairing between keratins in vivo is dictated by the natural affinities
              between type I and type II keratins, or alternatively, is an assisted and thus
              regulated process.  In addition, chimeric proteins (e.g. K14-K16 hybrids) will
              be generated, followed by site-specific mutagenesis, in order to address which
              sequence element(s) are responsible for th e pairing preferences between type I
              and type II keratins.  These experiments will establish the type I - type II
              pairing preferences among two major keratin pairs and will provide insights
              into the sequence motifs and mechanisms controlling coiled-coil dimer formation
              in vivo.  %%%  Keratins are the epithelial-specific intermediate filament (IF)
              proteins.  They assemble into cytoskeletal filaments of 10 nm diameter that are
              organized inside cells into a supramolecular network.  The more than thirty
              keratin genes in humans have been subdivided into two distinct types (I and II)
              based on sequence homology, and their expression in epithelia is regulated in a
              tissue-type and differentiation-specific manner.  Since keratin filaments are
              obligate heteropolymers constructed from type I and type II monomers in a 1:1
              molar ration, epithelial cells express at least one member of each sequence
              subtype.   Many of the keratins are coordinately expressed as natural type I
              -type II "pairs" that are associated with a well-defined epithelial context in
              mammals. Other keratins lack a "natural" partner and a predictable pattern of
              expression.  In spite of these remarkable features, there is very little data
              pertaining to the functional relevance of keratin sequence diversity, and its
              impact on the structure and function of epithelial cells and tissues.  The
              concept of "natural keratin pairs" stemmed from the notion that some type I and
              type II keratin genes are co-regulated at the transcriptional level.  However,
              that does not imply exclusive co-polymerization of the corresponding proteins
              into 10 nm filaments in vivo.  In fact, this possibility has never been
              thoroughly addressed, even though there are many natural instances in which an
              epithelial cell features a multiplicity of type I and type II keratins .  The
              potential for such "mixing" at the 10 nm filament level is strengthened by
              recent studies indicating that keratin filaments are dynamic in vivo, with
              exchange between a soluble pool of subunits and the  polymer (filament) pool. 
              The mechanisms controlling the pairing of type I and II keratins as they are
              translated, as well as in a post-translational context that is dynamic, have
              yet to be investigated.  The aim of this project is to fill this knowledge gap.
               In addition to the obvious importance of this kind of information for the
              understanding of how the intermediate filament networks of cells are assembled,
              this knowledge will be useful for exploiting such self-assembling nanoscale
              biological materials either directly or biomimetically for a variety of
              practical applications.  ***
