Title       : Genetic Analysis of Morphologic Differentiation in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9319028

Award Number: 9319028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Myers  9319028  This project is investigating the molecular mechanisms
              controlling morphologic development.  Multicellular eucaryotes contain many
              types of genetically identical yet morphologically distinct cells, indicating
              morphologic differentiation is an integral aspect of development.  Little
              information is available regarding the molecular mechanisms by which
              morphologic differentiation is regulated.  This question will be addressed
              through the identification of gene loci that influence a defined morphologic
              differentiation pathway in the ascomycete Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  A screen
              is being used to recognize genes within this group likely to code for
              regulatory components of the differentiation response.  The genes will be
              characterize by molecular cloning methods, and their sites of action will be
              ordered in a presumed hierarchy of events that determine the differentiation
              state.  The first specific objective of this project is to identify additional
              loci in the S. cerevisiae genome required for normal control  of cellular
              dimorphism.  Genetic analysis using visual characterization of cell and colony
              morphology as a scorable phenotype will accomplish this goal.  The second
              objective is to isolate selected genes by molecular cloning, and to determine
              the primary structure of the corresponding protein products by nucleotide
              sequence analysis.  This goal will be met by selecting plasmids from a genomic
              library based on their ability to restore yeast-like growth to a specific
              pseudohyphal mutant.  The role of each cloned gene in determination of
              morphologic differentiation will be confirmed by site-specific mutagenesis and
              gene replacement methods.  The third objective is to determine whether the
              genes act in a linear pathway controlling the differentiation response and, if
              so, to determine their relative sites of action.  This goal will be
              accomplished by determining epistasis relationships between genetic elements
              that either stimulate or repress pseudohyphal growth.  %%%  Accomplishing 
              these objectives will provide significant new insights into the molecular
              mechanisms that control development of cell shape.  Specific proteins will be
              identified that control morphologic differentiation, and their primary
              structures most likely will suggest biochemical activities by which this
              regulation is accomplished.   Information regarding the relative sites of
              action of these molecules in a differentiation pathway will suggest the
              function of specific factors.  Future investigations could then utilize this
              information to characterize control of morphologic development at the
              biochemical level, and to examine whether similar mechanisms are broadly
              conserved in evolution.  ***
