Title       : Phonological Encoding in Language Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9319368

Award Number: 9319368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Dell gdell@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9319368  Dell    ABSTRACT    Of all the skills that people possess, speaking is
              the most intricate, the most well developed, and above all the most uniquely
              human.  The present project investigates speech production focussing on a
              simple, but critical, component-the phonological encoding of single words. 
              Phonological encoding is a step in the sequence of cognitive processes that map
              from meaning to articulation, in particular the processes involved in
              retrieving and ordering speech sounds.  Current theories of phonological
              encoding propose that these sounds are encoded by a frame-and-slot mechanism. 
              Individual sounds (phonological segments) are retrieved and then inserted into
              slots in a separate phonological frame.  The frame dictates the order of the
              sounds and specifies their structure, including how the how the sounds are
              grouped into syllables and other constituents.  Support for the frame-and-slot
              idea comes from studies of everyday speech errors.  In general, this support
              takes the from of demonstrations that speakers' errors are sensitive to the
              kind of information that is provided by the phonological frame.  For example,
              speakers will (almost) never mispronounce a word so badly as to violate the
              basic phonological patterns, or rules, of the language being spoken.  These
              patterns are assumed to reside, for the most part, in the frame.    The
              research contrasts two explicit computational models of phonological encoding,
              a spreading activation model that directly embodies the frame-and-slot idea,
              and a controversial alternative, a parallel-distributed processing (PDP) model
              that attempts to account for the data without using explicit phonological
              frames.  According to the PDP model, frame-like effects result from
              superimposing the representation of lexical items on to the same network
              connections.  The models offer predictions about how easily certain sequences
              of syllables can be produced and the proposed experiments test these
              predictions.  The studies employ two methods, a speeded rep etition technique
              in which subjects attempt to say sequences of 2-4 syllables as many times as
              possible in a fixed interval, and a rule-learning paradigm in which subjects
              produce syllables that derive from "local" phonological rules.  The studies are
              aimed at two questions:  (1) Are separate representations of structure (frames)
              required to account for the speaker's sensitivity to the phonological patterns
              of her language during phonological encoding?  (2) To what extent can the
              production system's sensitivity to these patterns be altered by recent
              experience?  More generally, the experiments address the an issue that lies at
              the heart of modern psycholinguistics.  How are linguistic
              generalizations-rules, structural frames, and the like-represented and used
              during language production and comprehension?
