Title       : Dissertation Research: The Prehistory of the Miskito Coast of Honduras:
               Interaction and the Rise of Complexity in a Frontier Area
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1993    
File        : a9319784

Award Number: 9319784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Buikstra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319784  Buikstra    Under the direction of Dr. Jane Buikstra, Mr. Christopher
              Begley  will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct 
              archaeological fieldwork in the Miskito Coast region of Honduras.  In a three
              stage process, he will carry out a 100% surface survey  of a well delimited
              river valley region. In the second phase he  will conduct trial excavation in
              an attempt to locate buried sites  which are not marked by surface architecture
              and in the final stage  undertake broad scale excavation in selected areas. He
              will analyze  the ceramics and other cultural material collected and through 
              radiocarbon and obsidian hydration dating construct a chronological  sequence
              for the region. At the conclusion of the project he hopes  to be able to trace
              the settlement history of the area and  determine how cultural complexity
              developed.    For over a millennia the Mayan peoples dominated major lowland 
              areas of Middle America. Eastern Honduras, where Mr. Begley will  work has,
              until recently, appeared to lie outside the Mayan sphere  of influence and
              relate more closely to prehistoric cultures of  South America. However recent
              work by Mr. Begley and others  suggests that such may not be the case. At ca.
              1,000 AD a number of  Mayan traits such as monumental architecture appear in
              the region.  What is particularly interesting is that by this period Mayan 
              culture was in its decline and Mr. Begley wishes to compare and  relate events
              in the Eastern Honduras to the Mayan heartland. Many  archaeologists and
              historians have postulated how core and  periphery areas interact with each
              other and models proposed vary  widely. Mr. Begley's research will provide data
              to examine several  of them.    This research is important for several reasons.
              It will provide  archaeological data from an important and almost unknown
              region.  and this will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work will 
              also increase our understanding of how cultural complexity develops  and assist
              in the training of a  promising young scientist.  ***
