Title       : CRB: Collaborative Research: Consequences of European Honey Bee Removal on
               Populations of Native Plants and their Pollinators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1993 
File        : a9319489

Award Number: 9319489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robbin W. Thorp RWTHORP@UCDAVIS.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
              9319489   Thorp  A major goal of conservation biologist is to quantify the
              impact that exotic species have had on the abundance and diversity of native
              plant and animal species.  An impediment to solving this problem has been the
              difficulty of completely removing an exotic species from an area circumscribed
              with definite borders that is large enough to display ecosystem dynamics.  This
              is particularly difficult in the case of a highly mobile forager such as the
              honey bee.  The response o native pollinator and plant species to the
              extinction of a well-entrenched exotic pollinator has not been investigated by
              experimental manipulations on an ecosystem level.  %%% This study examines the
              consequences of removing all of the feral honey bees from a 25,000 hectare (96
              square mile) island in step-wise manipulations.  The effect of an important
              exotic species on pollinators and plants in the ecosystem will be
              quantitatively described.  With the use of proven bee hunting techniques,
              biogeographical data on density, distributions in relation to resources, and
              rates of dispersal are being compiled for all colonies on the island.  Apis
              foraging patterns are being determined to a high resolution by a combination of
              tested and new methods in order to reveal the extent of their impact.  The
              recovery of native fauna is being monitored as release from competition occurs.
              Removal is being dome in concert with studies aimed at answering additional
              questions important to conservation theory, particularly with respect to native
              bees and their pollination of  native plants.  Changes in seed set, vegetative
              growth, pollinator efficiency, and  seed quality of both exotic and native
              plants will be studied.  %%%  The results of this set of experiments will
              provide new insight into the ecology of plants and pollinators and the recovery
              of an  ecosystem from exotic species effects.  acuse U    f   P   EUGENsec~   f
                4  X @  W f   , O Molecular Evolution of a Duplication Containing Region of
              the Drosphilia Genome    f   ,   P    f   ,     f   ,     f   ,     f   ,     f
                ,     f   ,     f   , ~   f   ,   H@    f   ,     f   B     f   =     f   =  
                f   =     f   =                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                /   4        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             !         !         !         ! 
                          F                             _             _                      
                        (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                              
                "             h      z   z            (   Y         -        Gayle Edmonds
              Gayle Edmonds                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
