Title       : Prejudice and the Organization of Young Children's Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9319796

Award Number: 9319796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Hirschfeld lhirsch@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     9319796  Hirschfeld         This research investigates two basic
              questions in cognition  and social concept formation: (1) What principles do
              young  children use to organize knowledge of the social world, and (2)  What
              shapes young children's social stereotypes?  Very young  children show a
              spontaneous curiosity about the social world, and  appear to reason about it
              more deeply than previous researchers  suggest. They also develop enduring
              prejudices about members of  some social groups.  While some children utilize a
              social  reasoning strategy that focuses on behavioral regularities among 
              people, others emphasize nonobvious and 'essentialist'  commonalities in a
              manner that parallels children's expectations  about natural kinds.  This
              research examines an important but  unexplored issue:  how young children
              enlist theory-like  appreciation of the natural world to extend their
              understanding  of the social world.  The research examines whether levels of 
              prejudice vary as a function of how extensively children's  expectations about
              social differences are shaped by natural kind  reasoning and the role played by
              natural kind categories in  helping children go beyond similarities in
              appearance in their  social understanding. Race and racism are linked to almost
              every  major social problem facing American society.  They are  implicated in
              issues ranging from the reproduction of poverty, to  underachievement in
              schools, to differential rates of illness.   Most previous accounts see the
              child playing a passive role in  learning prejudice; children acquire racism by
              virtue of  encountering racist messages.  This research challenges this 
              assumed learning process, investigating whether children play a  more active
              role in constructing the knowledge they acquire. As  such, it likens the
              learning of prejudice more to language  learning than to algebra learning. 
              Like language, prejudice may  be easy to learn and difficult to forget. By
              increasing our  understanding of the nature of prejudice and th e psychological
               processes underlying it, the present research will place us in a  better
              position to reduce it.  ***
