Title       : Functional Interrelationships among Landscape Position, Lithology, and Water
               Flow in Bisequal Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9319967

Award Number: 9319967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. Schaetzl schaetzl@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319967  SCHAETZL       Considerable attention has been given by physical 
              geographers, soil scientists, and other scientists to studies of  the processes
              through which soils have been formed.  In regions  that have undergone
              relatively recent glacial deposition, such as  large parts of the Midwestern
              states, analyses of soil morphology  are complicated by the need to
              differentiate between glacial  processes that deposited different types of
              materials and the  more localized processes that later altered the structure
              and  composition of materials.  A set of soils for which these roles  of these
              two general forces are poorly understood are bisequal  soils, having two sets
              of lower horizons.  This project will  examine two broadly distributed bisequal
              soils in Michigan,  evaluating how water flows through these soils and
              interacts with  parent materials.  Water flow within the upper two meters of 
              loamy and sandy materials in various parts of drumlins and  moraines will be
              measured and analyzed.  Soil properties like  lithology, mineralogy, and
              texture will be examined to determine  whether the two different sets of
              horizons are the product of the  same morphological processes operating of
              different parent  materials.       The results of this research project will
              provide valuable  new insights regarding the processes through which water and 
              other forces create and alter soils.  The types of soils to be  examined in
              this project are similar to bisequal soils that are  found in large parts of
              the Midwest and in other locales.  The  study also will contribute additional
              data on stratigraphy and  lithology of soils in lower Michigan, providing a
              foundation for  additional research on soil morphology in recently glaciated 
              regions.  ***
