Title       : Sociolinguistic Significance of Quasi-Isolated Island Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9319577

Award Number: 9319577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Wolfram wolfram@social.chass.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319577  WOLFRAM                                ABSTRACT         This project
              examines the sociolinguistic significance of a  set of Southeastern seaboard
              island communities located on the  Outer Banks of North Carolina. Four primary
              research sites and  several different secondary sites are being studied.
              Ocracoke, an  Outer Banks island community settled in the early 1700s and still
               inaccessible by automobile, was selected for detailed  sociolinguistic and
              ethnographic study. This variety is compared  with the speech of two other
              Outer Banks communities which are  now accessible by automobile, Harkers Island
              and Hatteras, as  well as a contiguous mainland costal community, Beaufort,
              North  Carolina. Data from these sites are, in turn, compared with  previously
              collected data from other types of historically-  isolated areas, including the
              Appalachian and Ozark mountains,  and the Eastern Shore dialect area of Smith
              Island off the coast  of Maryland. Data sources consist of a set of
              cross-generational  sociolinguistic interviews being conducted in the four
              primary  dialect areas, a set of previously collected oral history  interviews
              providing for time-depth studies, a set of interviews  conducted in connection
              with sociolinguistic studies in other  historically-isolated situations, and a
              limited set of earlier  written historical records reflecting Outer Banks
              varieties of  the 1700 and 1800s.        The particular set of socio-historical
              circumstances that  combined to create the prototypical quasi-isolated island 
              community makes it ideal for the empirically-based examination of  general
              sociolinguistic principles relating to dialect contact,  assimilation, and
              change. This study also provides an important  basis for examining assumptions
              related to the apparent time  construct and the critical intersection of social
              and linguistic  structures in the description and explanation of language 
              variation and change.  ***
