Title       : Isotope Exchange Probes of Regulatory Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9319035

Award Number: 9319035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Wedler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wedler  9319035  Aspartate transcarbamylase (ATCase) of E. coli, a classical 
              allosteric enzyme, catalyzes the first step of pyrimidine  biosynthesis. 
              Inhibitors (CTP & UTP) and activator (ATP) bind at  r-chain sites and transmit
              conformational signals to separate   c-chain catalytic sites over 60A away.  In
              the past decade, high  resolution x-ray structures of T- and R-state enzyme
              have vastly  enhanced our ability to address complex structure-function 
              questions with this complex system.  Site-specific mutation of  potentially
              important residues has yielded over 50 different  species.  With careful
              selection of mutants for certain types of  intriguing changes in kinetic
              properties, one can address specific  mechanistic questions and test current
              hypotheses for ATCase  regulation.  Dynamic behavior of ATCase will be
              investigated  primarily by isotopic exchange kinetics at chemical equilibrium 
              (EIEK), proven to be powerful and insightful for defining changes  in specific
              rate constants caused by bound modifiers or site-  specific mutations.  Two new
              methods have been developed recently  that permit rapid, in-depth kinetic
              screening of a variety of  ATCase mutants: (a) a faster, more user-friendly
              version of the  ISOBI methods, and (b) a faster, more facile exchange reaction,
               {14C}CP-CAsp, used in place of the laborious {32P}-CP - P, method.   To
              cross-check and validate EIEK data with this complex system,  results from
              other kinetic methods will be used, including stopped-  flow kinetics (with
              K.A. Johnson) to determine specific rate  constants, and kinetic isotope
              effects (in collaboration with M.H.  O'Leary).  %%%  Enzymes are biological
              catalysts that regulate the biosynthesis and  degradation of all biomolecules. 
              A detailed knowledge of the  structure-function of key regulatory enzymes is
              essential for  understanding disease states and in designing rational
              therapies.   One means of stressing such enzymes is the introduction of site 
              specific mutations at selected amino acid residues.  O nce this is  done, the
              mutant enzymes must be characterized in-depth by kinetic  methods.  The kinetic
              approach in which this laboratory specializes  is isotope exchange at chemical
              equilibrium.  Due to its ability to  observe the fast and slow steps in both
              directions simultaneously,  this method is uniquely suited for defining exactly
              which kinetic  steps are altered by a mutation.  Data fitting is accomplished
              by  new, user-friendly computer simulation programs.  Ultimately, the  dynamic
              changes must be correlated with structural data derived  from x-ray crystal
              studies and molecular modeling of protein  conformational changes.
