Title       : Information Processing in the Diencephalon of Gymnotiform Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9319199

Award Number: 9319199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore H. Bullock   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter F. Heiligenberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                A key question in neuroscience is how sensory information is processed to
              control adaptive behavioral responses.  An excellent system in which to study
              this issue is found in fish called weakly electric fish.  These fish have an
              electric organ like that in the electric eel, but much weaker, and produce
              periodic discharges of particular waveforms.  These fish also have
              electrosensory systems that detect the electric field produced by the fish
              itself or by other nearby electric fish.  The electrosensory system is used for
              orientation and the pattern of signals is used for communication.  The brain of
              these animals is now known to process the signals using certain kinds of
              spatial maps, comparable to those in the visual system, and using certain kinds
              of temporal analysis, comparable to processes in the auditory system.  This
              project has its focus on a particular group of nerve cells, or nuclei, in the
              brain, located at an interface between the spatial representation of the
              midbrain, and the nuclei that produce the electric signalling behavior such as
              the prepacemaker nucleus, which modulate the discharge pattern of the electric
              organ.  Anatomical and physiological techniques are used to label
              physiologically identified nerve cells to trace their functional connections in
              this circuit.  Behaviorally relevant stimulus paradigms will be used to test
              the response properties of individual neurons along pathways involved in
              control of specific behavioral responses.  Clarification of this circuitry for
              integrating complex sensory input into a discrete behavioral output in this
              model system will provide major advances for neuroscience, with importance to
              sensory systems, motor systems, integration, and behavior.
