Title       : Dissertation Research: Paleolithic Mobility, Movement, and Range: A Lithic
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1993    
File        : a9319118

Award Number: 9319118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11150              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Stoltman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319118  Stoltman    Under the direction of Dr. James Stoltman, Mr. Jeffrey
              Shokler will  collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will focus on
              lithic  materials - stone tools - excavated from a large number of sites in 
              the Estremadura region of Portugal and use both macroscopic  examination and
              chemical sourcing to determine the source of raw  material origin. To
              accomplish this he will continue his ongoing  surveys of flint source areas
              which are abundant in the region.  Preliminary work suggests that, although in
              the same general  region, different sources are distinct enough to allow
              attribution  of tools recovered in archaeological sites material to source of 
              geological origin. With such data Mr. Shokler should then be able  to address a
              number of anthropologically significant questions  which concern how
              prehistoric hunters and gatherers moved over the  landscape and how they
              related to each other. He will examine how  observed patterns changed over the
              course of the last ca. 40,000  years and how a developing lithic production
              technology affected  raw material selection.    About 40,000 years ago cultural
              traits such as art and religion  first appeared in Europe. Over this part of
              the last Ice Age  archaeologists can trace their intensification and further 
              development. What is harder to discern however is the underlying  social
              context in which these traits developed and Mr. Shokler's  research is directed
              towards this goal. Based on evidence in  Southern France and Northern Spain, it
              has been postulated that  population increased over time and that groups
              adapted a yearly  cycle which involved dispersal into smaller units and then 
              aggregation into larger multiband groups. Aggregation requires  social
              mechanisms which allow peaceful and organized interaction  and this need served
              as incentive for change. Lithics provide a  window which will allow Mr. Shokler
              to examine such questions.     This research is important for several reasons.
              In recent years  much archaeological data  has been collected in Portugal with
              NSF  support. Relatively little analysis has been done and the results  of Mr.
              Shokler's research will be of interest to many  archaeologists. The work
              examines the mechanisms by which modern  cultural traits develop and will
              support the training of a  promising young scientist.  ***
