Title       : Biophysical Uses of Light of Fluorescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1993    
File        : a9319032

Award Number: 9319032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Lakowicz lakowicz@cfs.umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ignacy Gryczynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9319032  Lakowicz  Stationary and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy are 
              widely used in Biochemistry and Biophysics.  The  information content  of the
              data is determined by the many  lifetime of  the excited state, which
              determines the time  available for dynamic processes to affect the emission 
              spectral parameters.  We propose to evaluate the use of  "light quenching" upon
              illumination of the samples with  long-wavelength non-absorbed light, to alter
              the decay  times and photoselected orientation of the excited state 
              population.   In this exploratory project we will evaluate  the prospects for
              light quenching using modern laser  sources, as applied to steady-state,
              time-domain and  frequency-domain measurements.  We propose the following 
              goals:    1. Determine the extent of  light quenching obtainable with 
              fluorophores commonly present in proteins, membranes and  nucleic acids.    2.
              Evaluate the use of light quenching and steady-state  fluorescence measurements
              based on the principle of  "lifetime-resolved" emission spectra and anisotropy
              decays.    3. Evaluate the use of light quenching to modify the  orientation of
              the photoselected population, with emphasis  on optical geometries which can
              generate oriented (non-  symmetric) excited state populations.    4. Develop
              the appropriate theoretical expressions and  software for light quenching for
              one - and two - beam  populations.    5. Examine light quenching of sensing
              probes, such as those  used for Ca2+, pH and CI-, to determine the prospect for
               lifetime-resolved imaging in fluorescence microscopy, via  light quenching.   
              Light quenching offers a non-perturbing means of  controlling the excited state
              population and orientation  without the addition of chemical quenchers.  Also,
              light  quenching is rapidly reversible.  This phenomena may have  many
              unforeseen future applications, not only in steady-  state and time-resolved
              fluorescence spectroscopy, but also  in fluorescence microscopy and imaging.
