Title       : Cognitive Foundations of Biological Reasoning: Categorization & Inference Among
               American Folk & Itza Maya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9319798

Award Number: 9319798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Atran satran@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Medin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Hirschfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319798  ATRAN    This research will explore how people categorize animals and 
              plants and reason about them.  The focus is on how the structure  of
              categories, such as the set of taxonomic relations that hold  between DEER and
              MAMMAL or OAK and TREE, constrain inferences  about the distribution of
              biological properties among the  categories.  For example, when people discover
              that both deer and  cows have multi-chambered stomachs or hoof-and-mouth
              disease, to  what extent do people then predict that other animals also have 
              multi-chambered stomachs or hoof-and-mouth disease?  More  generally, to what
              extent does this categorical structure  constrain inferences that causally
              relate biological taxa to one  another, and to what extent are
              culturally-specific belief  systems, or "theories," able to modify that
              structure and hence  change the nature of biological reasoning?  These
              interrelated  issues of category formation and induction are central to a 
              broader understanding of conceptual development both in everyday  thinking and
              in science.    This research will compare biological categorization and 
              reasoning among groups of American folk and Itza, the last Maya  native to
              Guatemala's rainforest.  This comparison also will  involve looking into the
              influences of science on American  folkbiology as well as the effects of
              cultural expertise on Itza  folkbiology.  In particular, the studies will
              address three  questions:  1) To what extent is there a universal
              folkbiological  taxonomy?  2) How is this taxonomy used in reasoning?  3)
              Where,  and how, do differences in theories and cultural belief systems  affect
              folkbiological categorization and reasoning?  The project  will build on
              previous fieldwork and laboratory studies, bringing  together recent
              theoretical and methodological innovations in  anthropology and psychology to
              promote an interdisciplinary  cognitive science.  It will provide a way to
              measure levels of  consensus in categorization and reasoning among individuals 
              within cultures, be tween cultures, and between the folktaxonomies  of
              different cultures and scientific taxonomies.  Biological  inventories of local
              flora and fauna provide crucial comparative  data.  The work will employ
              multidisciplinary techniques across  cultures to analyze theoretically the
              relationship between  category formation and category-based reasoning for a
              cognitive  domain, biology, which is at the center of human knowledge and 
              understanding of the natural world.  Although this project is  specifically
              designed to address issues in basic cognition, tasks  involving categorization
              of living kinds and reasoning about  biological properties and diseases can
              inform our broader  understanding of environment, health, and science
              education.    ***
