Title       : Biomechanics of Vertebrate Hair Cells: Experimental and Computational Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9319630

Award Number: 9319630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellengene H. Peterson peterson@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Wallace Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Hair cells are a class of mechanosensory receptor cells in all vertebrates,
              which are used to detect sound, head movement, vibration, and gravity.  The
              first step in the process converting the mechanical stimulus to a nerve signal
              is the deflection of the microscopic bundle, called a ciliary bundle, that is a
              tuft of hairlike processes on the top of the cell.  This project is a
              collaborative bioengineering effort between a neurobiologist and a bioengineer,
              using a novel methodology to explore the micromechanics of these bundles. 
              Microscopic anatomical techniques are used to quantify the detailed structures
              of the ciliary bundles, and these data will be used in a computational model
              incorporating the contribution of different structural elements to bundle
              mechanics, and to predict the performance of bundles having different shapes
              and sizes.  A novel fiber-optics system technology is being developed to
              measure bundle stiffness by direct experiments on an isolated preparation of
              tissue, to test the model predictions.     These studies will provide important
              fundamental and novel information on mechanosensory mechanisms at the
              subcellular level, with impact on auditory and other mechanosensory systems,
              and the technology developed may have important applications in micromechanics
              in bioengineering and biomedical applications, and in industry.
