Title       : A Theoretical Analysis of Crossed Social Categorization Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9319752

Award Number: 9319752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Miller nmiller@rcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9319752  MILLER                                ABSTRACT    In culturally
              plural societies such as the U.S., individuals  typically belong to several
              groups, (e.g. race, religion,  occupation, place of residence, hobby or
              interest groups, etc.)  When the social category memberships of an actor and
              another  individual provide convergent evidence of their respective  ingroup
              and outgroup identities, category distinctiveness is high  and prejudice or
              bias is likely because there is no competing  loyalties. By contrast, when an
              actor and a target person belong  to different social categories on one
              dimension but are members  of the same category on a second dimension, such
              crossed clues  for ingroup/outgroup identity sometimes reduce intergroup bias
              in  comparison to that found with convergent cues for outgroup  membership. Six
              specific patterns regarding the relative bias  toward double ingroup, crossed,
              and double outgroup targets have  emerged in prior research. This research
              invokes principles  related to affective arousal, cognitive sources of
              variation in  category salience, and the structure of the setting, to explain 
              when each pattern will be found. The current studies assess these  theoretical
              principles in the context of impression formation  tasks, and in ingroup
              interaction settings. Key measures include  self-reports of liking, perceived
              similarity, and reward  allocations toward ingroup, crossed, and outgroup
              targets, as  well behavioral preferences for interacting with different types 
              of targets. Electromyographic measures (EMG) of non-visible  movement in facial
              muscles that control the smile and the frown  (furrowing of the brow) will
              assess non-voluntary positive and  negative affect respectively. This is
              important in studies that  use targets who are members of racial-ethnic groups
              because  current norms for our college age subjects invoke a masking of 
              expression of negative attitudes toward ethnic minority groups on  the paper
              and pencil measures typically used in laboratory   research. Results from the
              proposed research will be useful for  structuring more effective intergroup
              contact interventions and  for reducing intergroup conflict. Intergroup
              hostility and  conflict across racial-ethnic gender, and other important 
              dimensions of social category differentiation (e.g. age) can be a  source of
              misplaced energy in the work setting, contributing to  lowered productivity.
              The outcomes of the proposed research can  add to the development of a set of
              rules for structuring work  settings so as to minimize this source of
              diminished  productivity.
