Title       : Structure and Functions of Complement Proteins from Different Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9319111

Award Number: 9319111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Lambris lambris@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9319111  Lambris    The complement system is a complex group of proteins and
              glycoproteins which together play  a very important role in immune surveillance
              and immune response pathways.  The elucidation  of the molecular features
              related to the functions of the different complement proteins require  further
              analysis of their structure.  Preliminary experiments strongly suggest that it
              is possible  to identify the structural features of complement proteins that
              are important for their functions  by comparing the primary structure of these
              proteins from different species, "natural analogs",  and correlating this
              information with the ability of these proteins to cross react with proteins
              from  other species.  Except for the third complement component, C3, very
              little is known about the  presence and nature of other complement proteins in
              species other than mammals.  This  laboratory has cloned trout (Tr), Xenopus
              (Xe), and chicken (Ch) C3 and provided preliminary  data that trout and Xenopus
              have proteins with factor I, B, H, and D like activities.  The goal of  this
              project is to analyze the structure and functions of the alternative forms of
              C3 from trout and  Xenopus and characterize the trout alternative pathway
              complement proteins, factor H and B.   At the protein level, the objectives
              will be to purify the different forms of C3 from Xenopus and  trout plasma and
              test their ability to react with human complement proteins CR1, CR2, H, B, I, 
              C5 and P as well as with autologous H and B.  Factor H and B will also be
              isolated from trout  plasma and their function tested in the alternative
              complement pathway.  A previously established  purification procedure for
              mammalian complement proteins including PEG precipitation, Mono  Q anion
              exchange, Mono S and gel filtration chromatography will be used to purify Xe,
              and Tr  C3 and trout factors H and B.  The binding of C3-binding proteins to
              trout C3 will be analyzed  by direct binding ELISA, by binding inhibition
              assays.  The functions of factor H will  be  analyzed by testing its ability to
              inhibit the C3bBb convertase, the binding of Factor B to C3b,  and to exert
              cofactor activity in the cleavage of C3b by factor I.  The function(s) of
              factor B will  be investigated by testing its ability to bind C3b and cobra
              venom factor (CVF) and to form the  C3bBb/CVFBb convertase.  Amino acid
              sequence information for factors H and B will be  obtained by sequencing their
              proteolytic fragments (HPLC purified or electroblotted to PVDF  membranes). 
              Oligonucleotide probes constructed from the obtained amino acid sequences, cDNA
               probes or affinity purified anti-C3 antibodies will be used to screen cDNA
              liver libraries to  obtain complete primary structure for the alternative forms
              of C3 and that of factor H and B.   cDNA liver libraries from both species have
              been prepared and partial cDNA clones for the  alternative forms of Xe and Tr
              C3 have been isolated.  The obtained sequences will be compared  and correlated
              to functional data.  Of special interest are the protein segments known to
              mediate  the binding with other complement proteins.  The proposed studies, in
              addition to the  phylogenetic data on the alternative pathway of the complement
              system will provide basic  information on the structural features of C3 and its
              binding proteins as they relate to their  functions.   %%%  The complement
              system is a complex group of proteins found in the blood of vertebrate animals.
                These group of proteins together play a very important role in immune
              surveillance and immune  response pathways.  Understanding of how the molecular
              features of these proteins relate to their  functions requires further analysis
              of their structure.  One effective approach to identifying the  structural
              features of complement proteins that are important for their functions is to
              compare the  primary structure of these proteins from different species of
              animal and relating this information  to the ability of these proteins to act
              in conjunction with proteins from other species.  In add ition  to contributing
              to the understanding of the relationship of complement proteins to their
              function,  the results of this research will provide important new information
              on the immune defense  systems of fish and amphibians.  ***
