Title       : Mechanisms and Integration of Signal Pathways: A Role for Calpains?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9319602

Award Number: 9319602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy E. Croall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9319602  Croall  Cells receive environmental signals which determine their 
              development, growth and differentiation.  How external signals  transmit
              information to the nucleus to regulate these processes is  a fundamental
              question of cell biology.  The long range goal of  this research is to
              understand the biochemical mechanisms that  mediate cellular responses to these
              signals.  This project focuses  on the two calcium-dependent proteolytic
              enzymes, micro- and milli-  calpain (EC 3.4.22.17), and a protein inhibitor
              that specifically  inhibits them, calpastatin.  These enzymes may play a direct
              role  in calcium-linked signal pathways and also may mediate integration 
              (cross-talk) between signalling pathways.  The proteins susceptible  to calpain
              represent each phase of signal transduction including  receptors, kinases,
              phosphatases and transcription factors.  It is  not known whether these
              signalling components share common features  that are recognized by calpain. 
              These studies will characterize  the substrate recognition determinants for
              calpains by 1)  identifying the calpastatin binding site within calpain; 2)
              testing  the hypothesis that either calmodulin-binding domains, PEST-  regions,
              or both, mediate substrate recognition; and 3) analyzing  the amino acid
              sequences surrounding calpain-cleavage sites within  potentially,
              physiologically significant protein targets.  Results  of these studies will
              provide new approaches for experimental  manipulation of calcium-linked signal
              pathways.  Another objective  is to discover how calcium regulates calpain
              activity.  It is   hypothesized that the regulation of calpain by calcium is
              analogous  to calmodulin regulation of its target enzymes.  A first step 
              toward testing this hypothesis will be to examine the effects of  calmodulin
              antagonists on calpain. Further tests of the hypothesis  are envisioned, but
              are beyond the scope of this project.  The  results of these experiments should
              provide important insights  towards a general understanding of  how calcium
              regulates the  functions of the proteins and enzymes that can bind calcium ion 
              directly.  %%%  Cells receive environmental signals which determine their 
              development, growth and differentiation.  How external signals  transmit
              information to the cell nucleus to regulate these  processes is a fundamental
              question of cell biology.  One major  internal messenger in signaling is
              calcium.  Intracellular calcium  levels have been found to go up in response to
              a variety of signals  in many types of cells, but the mechanisms by which
              calcium acts in  various signaling pathways are not yet understood despite much
               research.  This project focuses on two calcium-dependent enzymes  that break
              down specific proteins, and an inhibitor that  specifically inhibits them. 
              These enzymes may play direct roles in  calcium-linked signal pathways and also
              may mediate cross-talk  between different signalling pathways. A primary goal
              of this  research is to characterize the mechanisms by which the calcium- 
              dependent enzymes recognize and act on other proteins in the   signaling
              pathways.  The results will be an important contribution  to our understanding
              of the role of calcium in cellular signal  transduction mechanisms.***
