Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research-Nonlinear Demographic Dynamics: Mathematical Models,
               Biological Experiments, Data Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9319073

Award Number: 9319073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              9319073  Desharnais       The investigator and his colleagues conduct an 
              interdisciplinary research program to test nonlinear population  theory: they
              construct and analyze mathematical models, design and  implement biological
              experiments, develop and apply statistical  techniques for the analysis of
              data.  For the biological  experiments an organism is used that is easy to
              culture, has a  short generation time (i.e. yields long time series data) and 
              allows an accurate census of animal numbers: flour beetles of the  genus
              Tribolium.  In the first part of the study the objectives are  model
              identification and parameter estimation.  In the second part,  the concern is
              to document transitions in the qualitative behavior  of the demographic
              dynamics.  Rates of reproduction and adult  mortality are manipulated in order
              to cross boundaries in  parameter space from stable equilibria, to periodic
              cycles, to  chaos.  In phase three the objectives are to test hypotheses 
              concerning the existence of these unusual demographic dynamics and  develop
              methods for identifying these phenomena in experimental  data.  A major
              contribution of this project is an unequivocal  example of experimentally
              manipulated transitions between  qualitatively different dynamical behaviors of
              a biological  population as predicted by a mathematical model.       In the
              last ten years or so, the recognition that simple  equations can generate
              complex dynamics has led to an outpouring  of fascinating theoretical
              possibilities for the explanation of  population time series data. 
              Understanding the observed  fluctuations in animal population numbers is a
              central question in  population biology; it has far-reaching applications in
              areas  ranging from food production and pest control, to the management  of
              renewable resources, to the conservation of species diversity.  The hypothesis
              that fluctuations are the result of nonlinear  dynamic forces has proved to be
              elusive to test due to the  difficulties of gathering adequate ecological da
              ta, of  experimentally manipulating ecological systems, and of evaluating 
              complex mathematical models with ecological data.  In this research  project
              the investigators' approach to testing nonlinear  population theory is to
              connect mathematical models rigorously  with experimental biological data by
              means of newly developed  statistical methods for nonlinear time series.  The
              project is  unique in its interdisciplinary approach because it involves both 
              theory and experimentation and utilizes the talents of the  biologist,
              statistician, and mathematician.  It is unusual in the  field of population
              biology to have an interdisciplinary effort in  which investigators from all of
              these disciplines are involved in  all aspects of the project, from
              experimental design and  implementation, through theoretical modeling and
              analysis, to  statistical testing and verification.  The ultimate goal is to 
              demonstrate the usefulness and importance of nonlinear mathematics  in gaining
              a rigorous understanding of the dynamics of animal  populations and in
              particular of fluctuations in population  numbers, be these fluctations regular
              or "chaotic."
