Title       : Unintended Social Inferences in Encoding Social Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9319611

Award Number: 9319611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allan Kornberg                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284135             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Uleman ULEMAN@ACFCLUSTER.NYU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      9319611  ULEMAN                                ABSTRACT    People often
              make "snap judgements" of others, and these may be  hard to ignore. Recent
              research shows that people sometimes make  these judgements without even
              realizing it, and despite their best  intentions to avoid them. These
              "spontaneous trait inferences"  (STIs) can affect subsequent judgements,
              without the judge's  knowledge. Reaction time methods, and word-stem completion
               measures, allow us to detect and study these unconscious STIs.  STIs can be
              abstract or concrete (e.g., "good" vs. "charitable").  What determines their
              level of abstraction? The researcher will  investigate their abstractness, and
              the possibility that prior  evaluations of the person affect STI's generality.
              For example, if  someone acts generously, that might be spontaneously
              interpreted as  "good" if you already feel positively about the person, but
              merely  as "charitable" (a less general influence) if you feel negatively. 
              Previous demonstrations of STIs have all been based on the target  person's
              behaviors. But we also form impressions from how others  act toward the target
              person. A second set of experiments will  investigate whether we do this
              spontaneously. Just as traits can be  spontaneously inferred, perhaps goals
              and/or behaviors are also  spontaneously inferred. The third set of experiments
              will explore  this possibility. In addition, all these experiments seek 
              personality differences between those who readily make STIs and  those who do
              not.  This basic research on impression formation has  potential applications
              to personnel assessments and diagnoses of  psychopathology, as well as to
              understanding stereotyping, daily  social interaction patterns, and long-term
              social relationships.
