Title       : Global Seismograph Network Improvements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1996  
File        : a9319923

Award Number: 9319923
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2118500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Hutt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey-N M
	      
	      Albuquerque, NM  87115    /   -

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1576,1577,1578,
Abstract    :
              9319923    Hutt         The Earth's deep interior remains a major scientific
              frontier  that holds the key to understanding the origin of the planet, its  
              evolution through geologic time to the present structure, and the  internal
              causes of plate dynamics, earthquakes, volcanism, and the  geomagnetic field.
              Inaccessible to direct observation below a few  kilometers (the limit of
              drilling and exposure by erosion) the    Earth's crust, mantle, and core are
              primarily studied through their  interaction with seismic waves. Recent
              developments in seismic    sensor design, digital data acquisition,
              transmission, and storage  techniques make possible dramatic improvements in
              the resolving   power of seismic imaging methods.           The Incorporated
              Research Institutions for Seismology, or the  IRIS Consortium, is composed of
              85 U.S. universities with research  and teaching programs in seismology. It
              serves as a national   facility for the development, deployment, and support of
              modern   digital seismic instrumentation, and its mission is organized into 
              three major program elements: (1) The Global Seismographic Network  (GSN)
              program provides the U.S. contribution to an international  network of 128
              permanent, standardized, very-broad-band (VBB), wide  dynamic range digital
              seismic stations at a spacing of   approximately 2000 km around the globe. (2)
              The Program for Array   Seismic Studies of the Continental Lithosphere
              (PASSCAL) aims to  establish a U.S. national resource of 600 portable
              seismometer   systems available for field deployment in specific regional
              seismic  imaging experiments and for rapid response to earthquake studies.  (3)
              The IRIS Data Management System (DMS) aims to provide the  national and
              international seismic research community with timely  access to data from the
              GSN and PASSCAL programs. It archives and  distributes the data from these
              programs and facilitates the  standardization and exchange of data.         
              The IRIS Consortium so far has accomplished the following   speci fic tasks:
              (1) It developed the IRIS-1 and IRIS-2 lines of   standardized permanent
              station instrumentation employing VBB sensor  technology for the GSN. Two IRIS
              operations and maintenance   facilities for the GSN were installed at the U.S.
              Geological   Survey's Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory and at the
              University  of California, San Diego. Currently, 48 GSN VBB stations have been 
              installed world- wide and are returning data. (2) The PASSCAL   program has
              developed two instrument centers to store, repair, and  deploy its standardized
              portable seismographic instrument packages.  The PASSCAL instrument pool now
              has an inventory of over 200 units  housed at PASSCAL instrument centers
              located at Lamont-Doherty  Earth Observatory in Palisades, New York and at
              Stanford  University, California. PASSCAL instruments have been used in a 
              large number of planned field experiments, and were also rapidly  deployed for
              aftershock studies of the Armenia (1987), Loma Prieta  (1989), and Landers/Big
              Bear (1992) major earthquakes. (3) The DMS  has established GSN data collection
              nodes at the Albuquerque  Seismological Laboratory and at the University   of
              California, San Diego. An IRIS central data archive and   distribution center
              is now installed in Seattle, Washington,   operated by the University of
              Washington. Through Internet, U.S.  users (and European users via the ORFEUS
              data center in the   Netherlands) have access to the continuous data streams
              from most  of the existing GSN stations, to major-event waveform data in  
              near-real time, and to special datasets from important earthquakes,  as well as
              from PASSCAL field experiments.         This award provides FY-1993 funding for
              the participation of  the U.S. Geological Survey's Albuquerque Seismological
              Laboratory  in establishing the IRIS Global Seismographic Network and for  
              related data management activities.    ***
