Title       : Assembly of Cytoskeletal Proteins into the Cleavage Furrow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9319041

Award Number: 9319041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Sanger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9319041  Sanger     Cytokinesis is a fundamental cellular process whose 
              corrrect execution is essential for the normal development  of muticellular
              organisms.  It requires the transitory  assembly of an actin/myosin contractile
              system, the cleavage  furrow, that shares some of the properties of myofibrils
              in  muscle cells and of stress fibers in non-muscle cells.  Each  of these
              assemblages is formed by the recruitment of actin,  myosin and associated
              proteins to sites on the cell membrane  where they become organized into
              contractile units that form  attachments to the membrane.  In each system,
              contraction  requires ATP, and in muscle, at least, contraction is  mediated by
              factors such as calcium ions.  Each of the three  contractile systems is
              dynamic and capable of reversible  assembly and disassembly in response to a
              variety of  signals, but the cleavage furrow is unique in the close  coupling
              of its contractility and disassembly.  The long  term goals of the proposed
              research are to understand the  factors responsible for the site-specific
              assembly and  functioning of the cleavage furrow.  The specific aims of  this
              proposal are: 1, to test the hypothesis that the actin  filaments in the
              cleavage furrow are attached to the  membrane by a mechanism similar to that
              used by the cell for  its interphase actin-myosin structures; 2, to examine the
               role of myosin phosphorylation in recruitment of myosin to  the forrow and
              test the hypotehsis that actin and myosin can  be recruited independently of
              one another; 3, to examine the  sites of incorporation of actin in cleaving
              cells; and 4, to  determine if fluctuations in calcium levels are evident 
              during the assembly and contraction of the cleavage ring in  dividing tissue
              culture cells and cardiomyocytes.  A number  of microscopic imaging methods
              will be used with living  cells that have been microinjected with various
              probes to  analyze the distribution of the major component molecules of  the
              cleavage ring.  All of the proposed experiments are   designed to define some
              of the parameters responsible for  the proper functioning of one of the most
              basic processes in  cells: cytokinesis.  %%%  This project focuses on the
              mechanisms by which a single  cell literally divides itself into two.  In
              animal cells, we  already know that this process involves the assembly of a 
              ring of cytoskeletal filaments at the equator of the cell  (or, if not
              equatorial, then at a position which defines the  plane of cell division). 
              These filaments are attached to  the cell membrane.  A mechanical contraction
              of that ring  then occurs, which results in a constriction of the cell 
              membrane at that plane.  As the contraction of the ring  continues, the
              constriction becomes greater and greater  until the cell pinches itself off
              into two daughter cells.  This project aims to learn in detail the mechanism by
              which  the contractile filaments are attached to the membrane, the  mechanism
              by which the protein building blocks of the ring  are recruited to the site of
              the ring, and the biochemical  mechanism whereby the cell regulates this
              process.  This  work is significant for many reasons.  First, cell division  is
              one of the most fundamental processes of life, and a  better understanding of
              the mechanism would permit the  development of in vitro and in vivo  methods
              for  manipulating the process for various biotechnological ends,  both
              biomedical and non-medical.   Second, the process is an  excellent example of
              highly regulated, specific  biomacromolecular polymer assembly/disassembly  and
               chemomechanical energy transduction.  A better understanding  of this process
              would permit its exploitation by engineers  and materials scientists, either
              directly as a biomolecular  "smart" material or indirectly through biomimetic 
              nanofabrication engineering.  ***
