Title       : Social Influence Factors in Group Brainstorming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9319999

Award Number: 9319999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Paulus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319999  PAULUS                                ABSTRACT    Groups in
              organizations and industry often meet to generate ideas  about important
              problems or issues. Sometimes such groups use  brainstorming procedures in
              which they try to generate as many  ideas as possible without concern for
              quality in a noncritical  atmosphere. It is presumed that such an approach will
              yield both  large numbers of ideas and a number of high quality ones. However, 
              research has demonstrated that brainstorming groups generate fewer  ideas and
              fewer high quality ideas than a comparable number of  individuals brainstorming
              alone.  Recent studies by the  investigator have provided evidence that social
              influence factors  may play a critical role in the performance of interactive
              groups.  There is a tendency for individuals in interactive groups to match 
              each others' performance. In laboratory groups with previously  unacquainted
              members, there also appears to be a tendency for the  low performing members to
              have a greater impact than high  performing ones. The social influence model
              suggests that the poor  performance of brainstorming groups results in part
              from their  tendency to develop low performance norms or standards. On the 
              other hand, the presence of productive group members may stimulate  the other
              group members to be more productive. In several  experiments using
              brainstorming groups of four individuals, the  ability of two of the
              participants to generate ideas will be  varied. In some conditions these two
              participants will be able to  generate many ideas, and in other conditions they
              will be able to  generate only a few ideas. It is expected that the variation
              in  rate of co-worker activity will influence the activity level of the  other
              participants during the brainstorming session as well as in  a subsequent
              session with new participants. This series of studies  will increase our
              understanding of the processes involved in group  brainstorming and group task
              performance in general. It is likely  that the  social processes observed in
              group brainstorming will  occur whenever group members combine their
              intellectual resources  with those of others in an attempt to achieve some
              product or goal.  Since much idea generation in science and industry involves
              group  interaction, this series of studies will provide important  information
              about the factors that influence both the productivity  and creativity of such
              groups. The results of this research may  suggest ways to enhance the
              effectiveness of groups on such tasks.
