Title       : Acquisition of a Multiple Peptide Synthesizer and Laser Desorption Mass
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1994       
File        : a9319358

Award Number: 9319358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Williams kenneth.williams@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The W.M. Keck Foundation Biotechnology Resource Laboratory  at Yale University
              provides a full range of protein and  nucleic acid analytical and synthetic
              services to nearly 600  principal investigators at Yale University, Cornell 
              University, Columbia University, Harvard Medical School,  Johns Hopkins Medical
              School, Mt. Sinai School of Medicine,  Rockefeller University, Sloan-Kettering
              Cancer Center, Texas  A&M University, and the universities of California, 
              Illinois, Michigan, Texas and Virginia as well as at another  123 institutions.
               Each year this facility completes more  than 10,000 services including the
              sequencing of  ~750  proteins and peptides.  The vast majority of the latter 
              samples are HPLC-purified peptides that have either been  eluted from MHC
              molecules or that have been isolated from  tryptic digests carried out by the
              Keck Facility on SDS PAGE-  separated proteins.  Although all these peptides
              gave  symmetrical absorbance peaks upon HPLC, amino acid  sequencing
              demonstrated that nearly one-third of these  samples were, in fact, either
              mixtures of peptides, artifact  peaks resulting from Coomassie Blue and other
              reagents or,  were lost prior to sequencing due to adsorption onto plastic 
              surfaces.  The ability of the requested laser desorption  mass spectrometer
              (LDMS) to routinely determine masses on 50-  500 femtomole amounts of peptide
              will, in most instances,  enable the prior identification of those two-thirds
              of the  samples which contain only a single species in the expected  mass range
              (for a 10-40 residue peptide) and which are  therefore suitable for amino acid
              sequencing.  In addition  to preventing the needless sequencing of unsuitable
              samples,  the resulting masses will confirm residues which would have  been
              only tentatively assigned by Edman degradation and will  establish the length
              of these peptides, which is of  particular concern in characterizing MHC bound
              peptides.  Other applications envisioned for LDMS are in characterizing 
              posttranslational modificati ons of proteins and, possibly,  as a quality
              control monitor of oligonucleotide synthesis.  The other instrument that is
              requested, a multiple peptide  synthesizer capable of the simultaneous
              synthesis and  automated cleavage of 96 peptides, will need the increasing 
              demand for large numbers of economically priced, high  quality synthetic
              peptides.  Currently, several laboratories  at Yale are synthesizing as many as
              100 peptides/year using  a manual system of multiple peptide synthesis. 
              Obviously,  acquisition of a multiple peptide synthesizer would  significantly
              increase research productivity in these  laboratories and would bring the cost
              of these essential  oligomers within reach of many more investigators.    If
              funds are provided, these two instruments will  immediately be brought to bear
              on a large number of  important research projects that range from
              characterizing  peptides bound to MHC molecules in T cell responses to 
              increasing our understanding of the biochemical basis of  autoimmunity, protein
              folding,  posttranslational processing  of a parathyroid-like hormone related
              protein, isotype  switch recombination in activated B lymphocytes to 
              biological applications of peptide nucleic acids.  The high  level of technical
              expertise in the Keck Facility virtually  guarantees that these instruments
              would be expertly  maintained and the extremely large number of Yale and non- 
              Yale investigators served by this facility ensures that the  positive impact of
              this equipment on biochemical research  would be large and would extend well
              beyond Yale University.
