Title       : The Commons: Institutions, Heterogeneities, Time Dependencies, and Local/Global
               Nesting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9319835

Award Number: 9319835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy J. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,9278,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9319835  Ostrom    Common Pool Resources (CPRs) have been the focus of extensive
               research in the social sciences.  In particular, there has been  an
              ever-growing policy debate regarding the ability of diverse  institutions to
              cope with the allocation issues that surround  CPRs.  Individuals jointly using
              a CPR are assumed to face a  social dilemma - - often called the tragedy of the
              commons - - in  which individually rational resource users ignore the external 
              harm they impose on other users, leading to outcomes that are not  rational
              from the perspective of the group.    Using a theoretical and empirical
              approach with foundations in  game theory, field studies, and experimental
              methods, the  authors' previous research addressed numerous questions related 
              to the allocation issues that surround CPRs.  The current  investigation
              extends this previous work by examining behavioral  regularities in more
              complex (more realistic) laboratory and  field environments.  In particular,
              the proposed research begins  the process of examining behavior in environments
              with the  following attributes:  time dependencies; multiple equilibria; 
              heterogeneities; and, local/global nesting.  Each of these  attributes will be
              investigated with a specific focus on how the  institutional setting interacts
              with individual and group  behavior.    In the laboratory, time-dependent
              settings will be investigated  in which subjects' current decisions have
              significant  consequences on the characteristics of the decision setting they 
              face in future plays of the game.  Settings will be investigated  where
              subjects make decisions facing exogenously imposed "rules  of the game: and
              settings where subjects have flexibility in  choosing the rules.  A principle
              focus will be the potential  conflict that arises due to heterogeneities in
              input endowments,  costs, technology, and information.    In the field, the
              focus will also address issues of time  dependency and appropriator
              heterogeneity in relation to  variations in physical a nd institutional
              conditions.  The filed  research will focus principally on forestry resources. 
              As part  of prior NSF funding, the authors developed and pretested a  series of
              data collection instruments that can be used to record  systematic data about
              forests and forest institutions on a  repeated basis over time.  This current
              project is crucial for  extensive scientific analyses of this evolving
              database.  ***
