Title       : Response Properties of Central Olfactory Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9319406

Award Number: 9319406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deforest Mellon dm6d@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mellon  9319406    Of the five major senses, olfaction has the least understood 
              central integrative mechanisms for analyzing olfactory stimuli.   Recent
              advances in understanding peripheral olfactory coding have  come from
              crustaceans, where the antenna of lobsters, crayfish and  crabs have proven
              valuable simple preparations.  This project  examines central coding, using
              electrophysiological recording in  the crayfish olfactory system to determine
              the stimulus/response  characteristics of individual nerve cells.  Central
              cells called  interneurons will be studied in a part of the brain called the 
              protocerebrum, which shows a sophisticated anatomical structuring  very like
              that in part of the mammalian olfactory system.   Responses of these
              interneurons will be compared to responses from  the peripheral primary neurons
              that converge on the interneurons,  using stimuli of single amino acid
              compounds and of particular  mixtures with systematically quantified
              differences.  These studies  will give information on how coded olfactory
              information is  handled, and which stimulus features are attended to by neurons
              at  this higher level in the olfactory system.  The effects of temporal 
              changes in stimulus delivery will be looked at to determine what  role
              pulsatile stimuli and adaptation may play in reception.   Responses during the
              antennular flicking behavior, which may be  analogous to sniffing, will be
              quantified to see whether flicking  modifies the neuronal sensitivity.  Results
              from this work on this  model system will have an impact on chemosensory
              neuroscience in  general, will increase our understanding of neural coding in 
              sensory systems, and may also be important for understanding  chemically-cued
              feeding and mating behavior of marine and aquatic  crustaceans with potential
              commercial impact.  ***
