Title       : Is Incoherent Scatter Feasible Using the UTR-2 Antenna and the SURA Transmitter?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1993    
File        : a9319919

Award Number: 9319919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Kelley mikek@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9319919  Kelley  The purpose of this Small Grant for Exploratory research (SGER)
              is  to plan and carry out a key component to the first incoherent  scatter
              observations in the frequency range 20-25 MHz by using a  huge Radio Telescope
              located near Kharkov, Ukraine.  The work is  closely coupled to the joint
              proposal from Tulsa University and te  Radiophysical Research institute (NIRFI)
              in Nizhny Novgorod.  Under  the latter proposal an antenna field will be
              constructed at  Vasil"sursk in Russia.  Upon completion of one-third of the 
              projected antenna field, a joint experiment will be carried outto  test the
              notion that incoherent scatter can be carried out in the  bi-static mode
              described here.  The results of the project will be  crucial in assessing the
              performance of the full system which will  have three times the power and three
              times the antenna size.  In  turn these data will allow the NSF to gauge the
              importance of  taking the next steps in a possible International facility for 
              probing the inner magnetosphere with incoherent scatter and the  source of the
              aurora with coherent scatter.  The proposal is appropriate for a SGER grant
              since it is clearly  exploratory and high risk.  There has never been an
              incoherent  scatter radar measurement at this frequency nor has there been a 
              way to determine the location of the outer boundary of the  plasmasphere by
              radar methods.  This experiment will allow a clear  assessment of the ability
              of a ground based system to track this  important boundary.  In addition the
              very difficult present  situation for scientists  in the Ukraine makes such a
              cooperative  effort very important in the nearest future.  Among other things, 
              immediate support is needed for the large UTR-2 antenna array  (radio
              telescope) whose value for the world radio-scientific  community is unique and
              which is critically important for the  project described here.  ***
