Title       : Strontium Markers of Reproduction in Maternal Bone of Macaca Nemestrina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9319278

Award Number: 9319278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Newell-Morris lnm@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Dunnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    P.I.  Laura Newell   SBR- 9319278    Probably the most
              important innovation to affect archaeological interpretation in the last two
              decades has been the appreciation that human bone often carries chemical and
              physical traces of the health and dietary conditions encountered by an
              individual during life.  This appreciation is linked to the development of
              instrumentation that permits these often minute traces to be quantified.  But
              this potential has been slow to be realized, as basic research into the
              relationship of bone composition and structure to specific conditions under
              which individuals live has been sparse.  This research is one instance of the
              sort of necessary basic research that has been lacking.    Strontium (Sr), like
              calcium (Ca), is ingested and absorbed from plant and animal matter in the
              diet.  Archaeological populations show marked differences frequently in the
              ratio of Sr/Ca between male and female skeletal materials.  Two different
              explanations for the sexually dimorphic ratios have been offered - either they
              are the result of gender-linked dietary differences, or of physiological
              responses to the demands of reproduction in women.  Both hypotheses are
              interesting, but not verified or elaborated.  While the reproductive link has
              been established in rats, preliminary studies of modern human populations do
              not show this effect, thus rendering the archaeological physiological inference
              suspect.      This proposal will address the possibility of physiological
              alteration of Sr/Ca ratios during pregnancy and lactation.  An NIH grant to the
              P.I. is generating macaque bone samples with vital  markers placed in early
              pregnancy and immediately post-weaning in approximately 100 reproducing
              females.  Examination of thin sections from these samples by electron
              microprobe WDS analysis will determine Sr/Ca ratios before, during, and after
              reproduction in a nonhuman primate species appropriate for the evaluation of
              the physiological model.    ***  P\anthro\jfried\9319278.abs                   
                                                                                             
                                                                   o                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   ^   `   -   /   I   K   P   m   o         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            !
                      !         !         !              D                                   
                                       o         o     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  &
              Arial                             F   "             h      E e E e             
                        =        Jonathan Friedlaender Jonathan Friedlaender                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
