Title       : New Nanocomposite Materials With Novel Dielectric Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9319809

Award Number: 9319809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sridhar Komarneni komarneni@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9319809 Komarneni  Research will be carried out to develop a  fundamental
              understanding of  new nanocomposite materials having  novel dielectric
              properties.  We will employ a compositional  nanocomposite strategy using two
              or more sols of the barium,  strontium, lead titanates, as well as lithium and
              lead niobates to  radically change the sintering behavior and properties
              compared to  materials made from single phase gels derived from alkoxides, and 
              traditional oxide mixes.  In addition to these processing  innovations, we
              propose to make new materials with potentially  different properties focusing
              on three classes of applications:   relaxor ferroelectrics with high
              permittivity and electrostrictive  coefficients; nanocomposites with conducting
              grains and insulating  boundaries; and product-property nanocomposites. 
              Encapsulation of  nanoparticles in a second solution before hydrolysis will be
              used  to make composites, and sol-gel spin coating will be used to make 
              superlattice structures with different ferroelectric materials.    %%%
              Electroceramic materials will be prepared using a new  processing approach
              which involves very fine particles that react  to form the desired material
              faster and at considerably lower  temperature than with other processing
              methods.  New materials with  novel properties will be  made by designing
              mixtures on a very  small scale.  This strategy of making ferroelectric
              materials is  expected to result in enhanced densification at lower sintering 
              temperatures which can lead to considerable energy savings for the  capacitor
              industry.  New materials with novel properties that are  expected to result
              from this research may lead to new applications.   An important feature of the
              program is the training of graduate and  undergraduate students in a
              fundamentally and technologically  significant area of materials and processing
              research.   ***
