Title       : Relationship Between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on Seasonal and Interannual
               Time Scales Over the Western Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9319483

Award Number: 9319483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine H. Gautier gautier@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  ATM 9319483  Gautier, Catherine  University of California, Santa Cruz 
              Title: Relationship between Clouds, SST and Surface Fluxes on  Seasonal and
              Interannual Time Scales Over the Western Pacific    The goal of this proposal
              is to contribute to the clarification of  the role of clouds on the surface
              radiation and latent heat flux in  the western Pacific over climatologically
              significant space and  time scales.  The data available until recently have not
              allowed us  to estimate unambiguously the magnitude and variability of the 
              dominant mechanisms at work in air-sea interactions in the tropical  regions. 
              There are, for instance, competing theories regarding the  mechanism
              responsible for the maintenance of tropical sea surface  temperatures at their
              observed temperature in the western Pacific.    Our proposal has three
              objectives.  First, we will compute cloud  and surface (shortwave radiation and
              latent heat) fluxes from  satellite observations using techniques we have
              developed or  adapted from other investigators.  Second, we will intercompare
              our  satellite results with surface and aircraft observations to ensure  the
              quality of the satellite-derived surface fluxes.  Third, and  this is the heart
              of oup proposal, we will investigate the effect  of clouds on surface fluxes
              (including SST) over climatologically  significant space and time scales.   
              Our approach uses satellite data extensively to provide the large  scale
              framework, and it also builds upon the availability of TOGA-  COARE data to
              validate our satellite data and perform some process-  oriented studies.  The
              investigation will, however, extend the  results from the TOGA-COARE IOP to
              longer time periods in order to  explore seasonal and interannual variability. 
                Results from this research are expected to lead to a better  understanding of
              some of the mechanisms controlling air-sea  interactions and, thus, should help
              in the development of new  parameterizations for a hierarchy of numerical
              models aimed at  simulating  the coupled atmosphere-ocean system over seasonal
              to  interannual time scales in the tropical regions.
