Title       : Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research (SOAR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9319379

Award Number: 9319379
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5932266            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Blankenship blank@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award for a cooperative agreement supports the technical  foundation of an
              aerogeophysical facility that is required for  several projects within the
              Polar Earth Sciences and Polar  Glaciology Programs.  The facility is referred
              to as SOAR, the  Support Office for Aerogeophysical Research.  The function of
              SOAR  is to facilitate aerogeophysical research over continental  Antarctica
              toward an understanding of the dynamic behavior of the  ice sheet and the
              nature of the lithosphere beneath the ice sheet.   SOAR will support
              peer-reviewed research requiring high precision  laser altimetery, gravity,
              magnetics and navigational data sets.   Tasking for SOAR will be negotiated
              annually.  The first projects  to be supported are investigations in West
              Antarctica.  West  Antarctica is characterized by two kinds of the Earth s most
               dynamic systems, a continental rift (the West Antarctic Rift  System) and a
              marine based ice sheet, the West Antarctic Ice Sheet  (WAIS).  Active
              continental rift systems, caused by divergent plate  motions, result in thinned
              continental crust.  Associated with the  thin crust are fault-bounded
              sedimentary basins, active volcanism,  and elevated heat flow.   Marine  ice
              sheets are characterized by  rapidly moving streams of ice, penetrating and
              draining a slowly  moving ice reservoir.  Evidence left by past marine ice
              sheets  indicates that they may have a strongly non-linear response to 
              long-term climate change which results in massive and rapid  discharges of ice.
               Understanding the evolution of the ice stream  system and its interaction with
              the interior ice is the key to  understanding this non-linear response.  In
              addition to these  specific projects, SOAR will provide information essential
              to site  selection decisions for a West Antarctic ice core as well as  critical
              information for selection of locations of over-snow  seismic transects.  SOAR
              represents a unique experiment in research  support for the US Antarctic
              program.  It has the potential to  revolutionize  the conduct of Earth Science
              and Glaciology research  in Antarctica.
