Title       : STTR Phase II: Cold Gas Dynamic Spray Processing of Bioactive
               Nano-hydroxyapatite/Titanium Nanocomposite Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0110323

Award Number: 0110323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. McCandlish mccandlish@ceramare.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ceramare Corporation
	      12-D Jules Lane
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/937-8260

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II Project will develop a
              fully integrated process for applying a well-bonded, bioactive coating to the
              stem of an orthopedic hip implant by a novel Cold Gas Dynamic Spray (CGDS), or
              Hyperkinetic Deposition process. The new process is a potential major advance
              in the state-of-the-art for surface modification of medical implants. The
              medical community hitherto has relied primarily on plasma spraying to activate
              implant surfaces. Plasma spraying is a cost-effective means of applying the
              coating material but is far from ideal. In particular, the high temperatures
              experienced by the hydroxyapatite feed powder during plasma spraying can
              seriously degrade its compositional integrity and thus its bioactive
              properties. The cold spray process eliminates this problem, and enables, for
              the first time, high-surface-area nanostructured hydroxyapatite powder to be
              incorporated into the implant surface without
sacrificing its intrinsic
              bioactivity. As an added benefit the implant surface is left in a state of
              compression, which should extend the service life of the implant by eliminating
              the possibility of surface cracking caused by low-cycle fatigue.

The
              commercial applications for this project will be to improve the life of
              implants.

