Title       : FASEB 2001 Conference on the Biology & Chemistry of Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0110402

Award Number: 0110402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward N. Pugh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang Baehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract for Pugh (0110402)



	The biology and chemistry of the
              photoreceptor cells of the retina has been one of the most exciting and
              productive areas in basic and clinically relevant visual science. This field
              includes fundamental research on the structure and function of the molecules of
              biological photoreceptors cells and their G-protein cascade signaling,
              including the details of the generation and modulation of the electrical
              responses.  The binannual FASEB conference on this topic has been since its
              beginning in 1985 a premier meeting in which scientists with different
              approaches, different preparations (ranging from mouse to frog to fruit flies),
              and overlapping goals interact productively, sharing their most recent results
              in a highly congenial and interactive environment.  

	The 2001 FASEB meeting
              on the Biology and Chemistry of Vision well represents the best science in the
              field, including sessions on classic but nonetheless current topics
              (Phototransduction: Protein Structure and Function; Regulatory Proteins of
              Transduction; Phototransduction in Single Rods and Cones), topics that are very
              "hot" (The cone and rod retinoid cycles in health and disease), and topics of
              burning interest in the application of fundamental science to eye disease
              therapeutics (Animal Models and Gene Transfer to the Retina).  The meeting also
              is strongly catholic in its view of fundamental vision processes, incorporating
              for example, a session on Phototransduction in Invertebrates, and a session in
              which non-mammalian model systems (Xenopus; zebrafish) are
              featured.

National Science Foundation funding for the conference will be
              used to support travel fellowships to the meeting for young scientists,
              graduate students and post-doctoral fellows, who are making presentations at
              the meeting, and for some travel support for speakers.  NSF support has played
              an important role in developing the careers of the young scientists in this
              field, by providing them the opportunity to interact personally with the
              leaders in the field over a five day period in an informal setting.


