Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Actin-interacting Protein 1 During Myofibril
               Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0110464

Award Number: 0110464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shoichiro Ono sono@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Actin is a ubiquitous and conserved protein among eukaryotes, but the structure
              and function of the actin cytoskeleton is remarkably diverse among cell types. 
              This differentiation occurs by specific regulation of dynamic assembly and
              maintenance of actin filaments,  a process mediated by a number of
              actin-regulatory proteins.  Myofibrils in striated muscles are highly
              differentiated forms of actin cytoskeleton that are specialized for muscle
              contraction.  The mechanisms by which the actin cytoskeleton is reorganized and
              assembled into sarcomeric structures during muscle development are largely
              unknown.  The objective of this project is to understand the functional
              significance of regulators of actin polymerization and polymerization during
              myofibril assembly in body wall muscle of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. 
              This project will focus on the function of the unc-78 gene that encodes a
              homolog of actin-interacting protein 1 (AIP1).  AIP1 has been identified in a
              variety of eukaryotes and shown to be involved in dynamic reorganization of
              actin cytoskeleton.  However, its role in multicellular organisms has not been
              clear due to lack of an AIP1 mutation in genetic model systems.  Mutations
              recently isolated in unc-78 now make possible analysis of the role of AIP1 in
              muscle differentiation.  In C. elegans, mutations in unc-78 cause slow-moving
              nematodes that have large accumulations of actin filament in body wall muscle
              cells.  This phenotype suggests that the unc-78 gene is important for the
              regulation of actin filament dynamics in muscle cells.  Therefore, this system
              provides a unique opportunity to study the in vivo function of AIP1 during
              myofibril assembly.
	In this project, the function of the unc-78 gene will be
              analyzed by the following five approaches: (a) Phenotypic consequences of
              unc-78 mutations will be characterized with respect to motility and the
              organization of myofibrillar components.  (b) The expression pattern and
              subcellular localization of UNC-78 protein will be determined.  (c) 
              Biochemical interactions of wild-type or mutant UNC-78 proteins with actin and
              UNC-78 with unc-60 (the gene coding for ADF/cofilin) and other muscle genes
              will be tested.  (e) The second AIP1 isoform in C. elegans will be examined for
              functional redundancy and specificity.  These molecular genetic and biochemical
              analyses of the unc-78 gene and its related gene will potentially reveal an
              important aspect of actin filament dynamics in muscle cells and provide insight
              into the function of the evolutionarily conserved AIP1 family of proteins.  

