Title       : Mitochondrial/Nuclear Regulation of Respiration in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0110768

Award Number: 0110768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee McIntosh mcintos1@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianping Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondria have their own genomes, however, the majority of their proteins are
              nuclear-encoded and the expression and import of these proteins requires a
              highly regulated, two-way communication between organelles and the nucleus. To
              date, it has not been feasible to isolate the elements of mitochondrion-nucleus
              communication in plants.  The missing component has been an easily scorable
              trait for mitochondrial function, one responsive to environmental signals. 
              Plant mitochondria have a branched respiratory pathway with an alternative
              oxidase (AOX) not coupled to proton translocation and ATP synthesis.  Cold,
              wounding,  Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), and pathogen attack, among others,
              increase alternative oxidase activity and  Aox gene expression. AOX, in the
              laboratory, is also a dispensable activity in plants, thus its levels may be
              genetically modified and potential mutants lacking AOX activity recovered.  Our
              research is centered around the isolation of mutants in mitochondrion-nucleus
              signaling using AOX expression to score for mitochondrial function.  We have
              devised a visual screen for impaired AOX induction after challenge by oxidative
              stress. To complement this screen, we use microarray analysis to further
              characterize the mutants, and to identify genes and gene clusters involved in
              stress-induced AOX expression.  Preliminary microarray experiments on
              mitochondrial gene expression in Arabidopsis leaves establish that this
              approach can be successful.  [Initial data are available online: http://genome
              www4.stanford.edu/MicroArray/SMD under experimenter "McIntosh"] To ensure
              complete coverage of the genome we will use oligoarrays, cDNA arrays and
              directed "mitochondrial" arrays.  Mutants in conjunction with transgenic plants
              will be used to decipher mitochondrial involvement in oxidative stress
              signaling and cell death, and the role of AOX in the hypevirulence response. 
              AOX and ROS involvement in cell death will be studied through cytochrome c gene
              family (At-Cc) expression, cytochrome c levels in the mitochondrion and
              cytosol, and  cytochrome pathway activity.
