Title       : Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP): Alabama Louis Stokes
               Alliances for Minority Participation Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0110595

Award Number: 0110595
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2400097            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Dale ldale@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Braswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The underrepresentation of minorities in the science, mathematics, engineering,
              and technology
workforce is still a national problem, ten years after the
              National Science Foundation (NFS) initiated
the Louis Stokes Alliances for
              Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program. By all accounts great
progress has
              been made, but not enough to turn the problem around. As one of the six oldest
              National
Science Foundation (NSF) Alliances in the nation, Alabama has been in
              the forefront of efforts to
increase the quantity and the quality of
              underrepresented minorities receiving baccalaureate degrees in
science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields. Many of the Alabama
              Alliance's
programs have been replicated by other alliances. The Alabama Louis
              Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (ALSAMP) began in 1991 with a
              baseline of 431 minority SEM undergraduate degrees
and reached a peak of 979
              in 1999, a 127% increase. The baseline minority SEM enrollment for
ALSAMP is
              3,301. The minority SEM enrollment for the 1999-2000 academic year is 5,876, a
              78%
increase. These are indicators of success for ALSAMP Phase I and Phase
              II.

The ALSAMP Phase III proposal is designed to a) sustain the B.S. Degree
              production levels
and student retention rates specified as Phase II goals and
              b) define a baseline level of and commitment
to a significant increase in the
              number of previous, current, and future baccalaureate recipients
              entering
either a SMET graduate program or a graduate program in teacher
              education. Thus, the project
approach for LSAMP will involve sustaining and
              institutionalizing current LSAMP Phase II activities
and the implementation of
              new LSAMP Phase III activities as given below.

Programs to be Sustained and
              Institutionalized                                New LSAMP Phase III
              Programs
LSAMP Summer Bridge Program                                          
                         GRE Preparation for All Students
LSAMP Scholars Program            
                                                                  Undergraduate Research for
              All Students
Summer Research Internship Program                               
                          GRE Required for All LSAMP Students
LSAMP Graduate Bridge
              Program
SEM Student Mentoring Program                                         
                          Increase Number of SMET Students                                   
                                                                                             
                   Entering Graduate School through Tracking                                 
                                                                                       
              Effort
Drop-In Centers/Cooperative Learning                                   
                      Intensify Recruitment of Technology                                    
                                                                                             
                Students
Summer Research Conference                                         
                               Increase Collaboration with Other                             
                                                                                             
                           Programs
Publication of The National LSAMP Magazine              
                                  National LSAMP Publication in Phase III                    
                                                                                             
                          Budget

The major portion of the Phase III budget will support
              these new programs. Consequently, the
Phase II programs will be sustained by
              cost sharing from participating institutions, support from
private sources,
              and institutionalization. During the next five years, LSAMP will define a
              baseline
level of and commit to a significant increase in the number of
              baccalaureate degree recipients entering
either a SMET graduate program or a
              graduate program in teacher education. This effort will involve
preparing
              students for success in graduate school and placement in a graduate school of
              choice.
Students will be tracked through graduate school by means of the LSAMP
              Success Link Program
and a graduate student database will be maintained by the
              Alliance.

Collaboration with other NSF programs will be increased
              substantially, particularly with the
NSF Alliances for Graduate Education and
              the Professoriate Program and the NSF Urban Systemic
Program. Program
              activities will be disseminated through the publication of the National
              LSAMP
Magazine and a full-time program evaluator will be appointed to oversee
              assessment and evaluation
activities.
