Title       : Regulation of Light Directed Movement in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0110544

Award Number: 0110544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Devaki Bhaya   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Cyanobacteria can survive and flourish in a  broad range of environments,
              and often dominate in marine habitats as well as in microbial mats and
              biofilms. Their ubiquitous global distribution reflects, in part, their ability
              to cope with wide fluctuations in temperature, nutrient, and light levels. Dr.
              Bhaya is particularly interested in the ability of cyanobacteria to perceive
              and move towards or away from a light source and thereby optimize conditions
              for photosynthesis.  This project will help the scientific community understand
              the molecular basis of this critically important trait.

This phenomenon,
              termed phototaxis, is well-known but little understood. Recently Dr.Bhaya and
              her colleagues have demonstrated that phototaxis in Synechocystis is a
              surface-dependent phenomenon that requires type IV pili, surface appendages
              implicated in both twitching and social motility and the association of
              bacterial pathogens with their hosts. This investigator has taken advantage of
              the fact that the Synechocystis genome has been entirely sequenced to generate
              a library of tagged motility mutants.  She will focus her work on a class of
              mutants that map to chemotaxis-like (che) genes. While the role of chemotaxis
              proteins is fairly well-understood in enteric bacteria, it is not clear whether
               many of the paradigms that have been established extend to the operation of
              Che proteins in other systems. Synechocystis has at least three che loci, two
              of which are involved in motility responses. Furthermore, one of the mutants
              that the investigator has isolated has a lesion in a gene encoding a protein
              with a domain reminiscent of the chromophore-binding domain of phytochrome in
              vascular plants.  To elucidate the elements involved in generating and
              controlling motility, Dr.Bhaya  will use time-lapse video microscopy to record
              movement in real time in both wild type and mutant strains. This will allow her
              to observe, for the first time, movement of single cells and cell populations,
              and thus to ask fundamental questions about the parameters that govern
              motility. The second aspect of the  work is to use molecular and biochemical
              tools to tag and/or mutate specific proteins, such that the interactions among
              the proteins that regulate phototaxis can be better understood. 

