Title       : Developing a Comprehensive Physical Model of Lymph Flow in Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0110713

Award Number: 0110713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley S. Hillman hillmans@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Drewes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Hedrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to develop a comprehensive physical understanding
              of how lymph moves in anuran amphibians (frogs and toads) and investigate the
              anatomical and physiological control systems which lead to variations in the
              movement of lymph. Lymph is the fluid that filters from the capillaries of the
              circulatory system into the interstitial space as a consequence of the
              hydrostatic pressure generated by the heart. The principal role of the
              lymphatic system is to return this fluid back into the circulation. If this
              functional role of the lymphatic system is prevented, fluid is lost from the
              circulation much like a hemorrhage, and cardiovascular function declines
              eventually leading to circulatory shock. Anuran amphibians form lymph, at about
              ten times the rate of mammals. Hence the return of lymph to the circulatory
              system is an even more critical variable to their maintenance of blood volume.
              Amphibians, in relation to all vertebrate classes, have the most rapid
              compensatory ability to replace lost blood volume with lymph and this lymph
              mobilization capacity varies with a species' degree of terrestriality.
              Understanding how lymph moves is fundamental not only to our understanding of
              how amphibians function at an organ system level, but also aids our
              understanding of what adaptations are involved in the colonization of
              terrestrial environments. Consequently, amphibians represent an excellent
              evolutionary model system for studying comparative mechanisms involved in how
              lymph mobilization regulates blood volume. Current models of lymph movement are
              untenable from a physical perspective. The working hypothesis is that lymph
              moves in response to pressure differences created by two mechanisms,
              compartmentalization of lymph sacs creating sacs of different compliance and
              skeletal muscle contractions varying lymph sac compliance. Compliance is the
              relationship between lymph volume and pressure in a lymph sac. The primary
              function of many of these skeletal muscles may be solely tied to lymph movement
              and may represent the first vertebrate example of skeletal muscle fluid pumps.
              The pathways for lymph movement will be delineated using dye-labeled plasma,
              the pressures in these pathways will be monitored via implanted cannulae and
              skeletal muscle contraction monitored via EMGs recorded from implanted
              electrodes . How blood volume status influences the lymph sac pressures and
              skeletal muscle activities will also be investigated. Comparative anatomical
              data will then be collected to test what species' anatomical differences
              correlate with differences in lymph flow.   
