Title       : Morphological Differentiation in a Filamentous Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0110090

Award Number: 0110090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Losick losick@mcb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fascinating and dramatic examples of morphological
              differentiation among prokaryotes is the formation of an aerial mycelium by
              Streptomyces coelicolor and other streptomycetes. These filamentous bacteria
              grow by the formation of a mold-like, branching network of multinucleoid hyphae
              called the substrate mycelium. The aerial mycelium consists of hyphae that grow
              into the air away from the colony surface to form a luxuriant lawn of hair-like
              filaments that eventually metamorphose into chains of pigmented spores. The
              formation of the aerial mycelium depends on so-called bld (i.e., "bald") genes,
              mutants of which produce smooth, hairless colonies. A striking property of bld
              mutants is their capacity to regain the ability to form an aerial mycelium when
              grown near, but not in contact with, certain other bld mutants. This phenotypic
              rescue, which is called extracellular complementation, is characteristically
              unidirectional, with one mutant acting as a donor and the other as a recipient.
              The conversion of aerial hyphae into chains of pigmented spores depends on
              so-called whi ("white") genes, mutants of which produce an aerial mycelium that
              lacks the gray pigment characteristic of mature spores. Some bld and whi genes
              have been cloned and characterized, but it is not yet possible to assemble
              developmental genes into pathways or to construct an integrated picture for the
              control of morphological differentiation in this organism. The principal goal
              of this project is to carry out a genome wide screen for additional
              Streptomyces genes involved in aerial mycelium and spore formation by
              transposon tagging so that developmental genes can be conveniently cloned and
              characterized. A procedure for carrying out transposon-mediated mutagenesis in
              S. coelicolor was devised and applied to the discovery of seven developmental
              genes and gene clusters. One such cluster in which an insertion causes a whi
              mutant phenotype consists of three genes of unknown function. Each gene is a
              founding member of a large family of paralogous  genes located at widely
              scattered sites in the chromosome. Insertional inactivation of another newly
              discovered gene causes a profound switch in polyketide pigment production, from
              the synthesis of the blue pigment (actinhorodin) characteristic of the
              substrate mycelium to the mislocalized synthesis of the gray pigment
              characteristic of spores. Yet another insertional mutation in a previously
              uncharacterized gene causes a severe block in aerial mycelium formation. The
              regulation and function of these and other newly discovered genes will be
              investigated. Further, additional genes involved in morphological
              differentiation will be sought by carrying out insertional mutagenesis on a
              large scale. Also, as a complementary strategy, a transposon derivative will be
              created that generates fusions to the gene for the Green Fluorescent Protein.
              Such a fusion-generating transposon should make it possible to discover
              developmental genes on the basis of the timing and localization of their
              expression.
