Title       : RUI: Early Influences on the Outcome of Chemical Reactions - the Importance of
               Intermolecular Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0110668

Award Number: 0110668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen O. Leung   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this RUI project funded by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
              Division, Helen Leung of Mt. Holyoke College will pursue a program of research
              using Fourier transform microwave (FTMW) spectroscopic techniques to study
              intermolecular interactions in weakly bound complexes.  The high-resolution
              spectra obtained will be used to determine the structure, quadrupole coupling
              constants, effects of nuclear electric field gradients, and information about
              the potential energy surfaces of complexes involving imidazole or the hydroxyl
              radical.  The nitrogen quadrupole coupling constants will provide a measure of
              the pertubations to the electron distributions arising from intermolecular
              interactions in the complexes.

The distortion of electron clouds in weakly
              bound complexes, such as those examined in this project, may affect such
              diverse phenomena as regulatory processes in biochemical systems or the
              initiation of a chemical reaction.  The structures of the imidazole complexes
              being examined reflect an interplay of several forces, and they can provide a
              sensitive test of current computational methods.  The studies of the various OH
              complexes can have a large impact on understanding the reaction dynamics of the
              OH radical, and thus they can aid in understanding how to make combustion
              reactions more efficient.  Results from this project will also provide
              information useful in other areas, such as atmospheric science.

