Title       : SBIR Phase II: Information Extraction from Synthetic Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a0110478

Award Number: 0110478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul van Eikeren paul.van.eikeren@intellichem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IntelliChem
	      20310 Empire Avenue, Suite A-102
	      Bend, OR  97701    541/382-7043

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6856,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is directed at
              developing a collection of software tools for use in selective extraction of
              information from the running text of synthetic recipes.  Synthetic procedures
              are batch recipes used in the creation and discovery of new chemical entities
              for drug discovery.  The ultimate aim of the project is to automate information
              extraction and place the information in a computer-understandable data
              structure that fully captures the data and semantics of the synthetic recipe. 
              The Phase I program successfully demonstrated feasibility of the approach by
              constructing a prototype system and using it to solve a range of representative
              synthetic-recipe-related information extraction problems.  In Phase II, the
              objectives are to (1) refine and extend the features of the prototype system;
              (2) implement machine learning capability for extraction rule induction, (3)
              construct focused demonstration applications, and (4) test, evaluate and
              validate the software system in conjunction with pharmaceutical-company
              research-collaborators.  The ultimate goal of the program is to develop a
              commercial software toolkit that enables chemists to easily construct systems
              for information extraction from synthetic recipes.

Recipes for more than 19
              million unique compounds are contained in the public literature, and there are
              a comparable number in the archives of pharmaceutical companies.  The vast
              majority of these procedures are maintained as unstructured running text. 
              Intellichem, Inc. proffers tools for extraction of synthetic recipe information
              into computer-understandable data structures that will benefit the following:
              database construction and updating, summarization, chemical process discovery,
              knowledge reuse, improved productivity of the chemist, and chemistry-related
              e-commerce.


