Title       : Adenylosuccinate Lyase: A Study of the Novel Intersubunit Active Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0110878

Award Number: 0110878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta F. Colman rfcolman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Adenylosuccinate lyase catalyzes a critical step in purine biosynthesis by
              converting adenylosuccinate to AMP and fumarate.  High-resolution structures of
              two bacterial enzymes in the absence of substrate have been reported.  Three
              histidines, contributed by two different subunits, have been identified in the
              active site.  However, the structure of adenylosuccinate lyase suggests that in
              an enzyme tetramer, three subunits actually contribute to each of the four
              active sites. This project's goal is to understand the major chemical and
              structural contributions to catalysis by normal adenylosuccinate lyase and the
              molecular basis for decreased activity in patients with ASL deficiency.  The
              specific aims address three questions:  1.  Which additional amino acids of
              adenylosuccinate lyase contribute to catalysis and/or substrate binding?  This
              issue is approached by site-directed mutagenesis of amino acids postulated as
              at the active site of B. subtilis adenylosuccinate lyase.  Stable analogs of
              adenylosuccinate, inert to enzymatic cleavage, will be synthesized and used to
              prepare crystalline enzyme-inhibitor complexes; they will also be used to
              assess substrate binding by enzymes.  2.  How many subunits contribute to each
              active site of adenylosuccinate lyase?  Complementation experiments will be
              conducted in which pairs of different, inactive mutants are mixed and tested
              for restoration of activity in hybrid tetramers.  3.  What is the molecular
              basis for the structure-function relations in the adenylosuccinate lyase? B.
              subtilis adenylosuccinate lyase will be engineered with amino acid
              substitutions equivalent to those in some human variants with adenylosuccinate
              lyase deficiency.  These mutant enzymes will be models to elucidate further the
              structural/chemical basis of the enzyme function. (This project is supported
              jointly by the Molecular Biochemistry and Metabolic Biochemistry Programs.)
