Title       : Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0110925

Award Number: 0110925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Guarino   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Baculoviruses are unique among eukaryotic DNA viruses because the early genes
              are transcribed by the host RNA polymerase II, while late and very late genes
              are transcribed by a viral-encoded RNA polymerase. The viral RNA polymerase is
              a four subunit complex with intrinsic promoter recognition, mRNA capping,
              termination, and polyadenylation activities. The first goal of this project is
              to identity the cap methyltransferase that participates in the formation of 5'
              caps on viral RNAs. Two complementary approaches will be used; one is to purify
              cap methyltransferase from infected cells; the other is to test orf69 protein
              for cap methyltransferase activity. This protein, which is a homolog of the
              rRNA methyltransferase FtzJ, is the only viral protein with an
              S-adenosyl-methionine binding motif. The second aim of this project is to
              define the mechanisms that allow RNA polymerase to discriminate between late
              and very late templates. Again, two approaches to this problem will be used.
              First, a targeted analysis of the in vitro activity of VLF-1, which stimulates
              very late gene expression in vivo, will be conducted. Then, factors that alter
              the promoter specificity of RNA polymerase will be purified from infected
              cells. The third aim of this project is to characterize the baculovirus protein
              LEF-5, which has homology with transcription elongation factor TFIIS. To test
              whether LEF-5 functions as an elongation factor, experiments will be performed
              to determine whether LEF-5 binds RNApol and whether it stimulates the RNA
              cleavage activity of RNApol; these two activities are characteristic of TFIIS
              and are required for its function.

This project will elucidate the
              mechanisms that regulate temporal expression of baculovirus genes, and should
              also have practical impacts on biotechnology. The baculovirus expression system
              has been used to produce thousands of different proteins used for basic
              research and commercial projects.  The baculovirus RNA polymerase is central to
              this expression system, and an understanding of its unique properties will lead
              to improvements to this technology. 



