Title       : Proline-rich Sequences and Polyproline II Helix Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0110720

Award Number: 0110720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor P. Creamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The aim of this project is to determine how proline-rich left-handed
              polyproline II (PPII) helices form.  PPII helices are common in proteins and
              often play vital roles in critical processes including signal transduction,
              cell motility, transcription and immune response.  PPII helices are involved in
              both structural roles (e.g., as adopted by collagen) and molecular recognition
              (e.g., protein-protein interactions mediated by SH3 domains).  It is commonly
              assumed that many proline-rich regions of sequence (PRR's) adopt this
              confirmation.  The goal of this project is to determine the physical basis for
              PPII helices.  This will be achieved via systematic host-guest experiments
              using a poly(proline)-based host peptide known to form a PPII helix.  A
              combination of experimental and computational methods will be employed. 
              Circular dichroism will be used to measure average PPII helical content of
              host-guest peptides in order to determine contributions of both individual
              residues and pairs of residues to the formation of PPII helices.  High
              resolution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and molecular dynamics
              computer simulations will be used to examine the atomic-level interactions that
              lead to the favoring or disfavoring PPII helix formation.  The data obtained
              from all of these experiments will be combined to form a comprehensive
              atomic-level picture of PPII helix formation by PRR's.  The results of this
              project will be applicable to studies of a multitude of critical physiological
              processes ranging from signal transduction to transcription to cell motility. 
              This project lays essential groundwork for future studies of protein-protein
              interactions involving PPII helices formed by PRR's.
