Title       : SBIR Phase II: Interactive Tools for Active Learning (ITAL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0110363

Award Number: 0110363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov E. Cherner ycherner@ATeLearning.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ATeL
	      87 Stanley Road
	      Swampscott, MA  019071454    978/282-1119

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 7256,7355,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
 This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project,  ITAL-2
              (Interactive Tools for Active Learning) will develop comprehensive e-Learning
              solution for conventional academic Science, Mathematics, and Educational
              Technology (SMET) education and for corporate training.  The project product,
              'Active Learning Suites' (ALS), is a highly interactive online learning content
              delivery and management system.  It includes an Active Shell, Simulations and
              Virtual Experiments interactive lessons, a Problem Solving Tutor, a scriptable
              Instructor's Agent, an Assessment system, Authoring tools, and more.  ALS uses
              real-life objects and situations, such as those related to home,
              telecommunications and sports, as the context for science investigations. 
              Immersion in these contexts that are populated with appropriate sets of objects
              enables learners to discover the connections between the scientific theory and
              its practical applications in technology.  Authoring tools helps instructors to
              easily assemble a single e-learning environment from heterogeneous educational
              resources and the WWW.  ALS can facilitate both problem-based learning and more
              conventional learning strategies.  It can be used on a campus or in a school
              equipped with either stand-alone computers or a local network, at home
              (self-learning), in a corporate setting, or via distance learning over the
              Intranet and Internet. 
 
 Active Learning Suites (ALS) offer a wide variety
              of lessons that can be designed to address many different audiences:  (1)
              two-year college students enrolled in science, technology and engineering
              programs; (2) non-science majors; (3) high school students taking science and
              technology courses; and (4) instructors and technicians of telecommunications
              companies.  The approach of immersing students or technicians in practical
              problems has great potential for facilitating understanding of science.

