Title       : HRas C-Terminus in Membrane Trafficking and Targeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0110114

Award Number: 0110114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice E. Buss jbuss@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Membrane binding, a process initiated and sustained by lipid modifications,
              controls the function of Ras proteins as potently as does GTP binding. Despite
              this importance, very little is known of how membrane tethering affects
              signaling.  Recent studies indicate that HRas trafficking to the plasma
              membrane proceeds through a previously unnoticed, and still uncharacterized,
              vesicular endomembrane pathway that requires farnesyl modification and nearby
              C-terminal amino acid residues.  No specific proteins that might escort HRas
              from these internal membranes to its working location, the plasma membrane,
              have been identified.  Upon reaching the plasma membrane, HRas is reported to
              localize into cholesterol-and sphingolipid-rich subdomains ("rafts ").  In
              vitro methods predict that the different physical properties of the farnesyl
              and palmitoyl lipids will give these lipids opposing roles in regulating HRas
              raft insertion, but studies with HRas in intact cells have not yielded clear
              results.  Raft partitioning is proposed to increase signaling efficiency, but
              there is conflicting information on whether partitioning limits or encourages
              access of particular regulatory or effector proteins to HRas while it is
              associated with the membrane.  Novel variants of HRas have been made, and show
              that changes in the lipids and residues of the C-terminus can alter HRas
              signaling pathways in intact cells. This new evidence indicates that the
              C-terminal region and lipids attached to HRas are more than a passive anchor
              domain, and are likely to play much more active roles during trafficking and
              organizing of HRas in the plasma membrane than current models envision. The
              objective of this project is to examine how the C-terminal amino acids,
              farnesyl group, and palmitates of HRas individually participate in both the
              trafficking and plasma membrane interaction phases of HRas membrane binding .
              Three aims will be pursued.  A.  Variants of HRas will be designed to
              characterize features of HRas that control its exit out of endomembranes, and
              to identify the vesicular paths and proteins involved in moving HRas to the
              cell surface. B.  The influence of the farnesyl group, palmitates and GTP
              binding on partitioning of HRas into subdomain sites of plasma membrane will be
              established by expressing proteins with distinct and novel combinations of
              these properties. C.  The membrane locations in which activation and
              termination of HRas signaling occurs will be identified by co-localization or
              co-immunoprecipitation of HRas with regulatory proteins and effectors.  These
              studies will use biochemical co-immunoprecipitation and membrane isolation
              techniques, as well as direct immunofluorescence imaging of membrane fragments.
               The primary emphasis will be intact cells, as this is the only currently
              available system where HRas palmitoylation can occur, and more importantly,
              enables the functional impact of changes in molecular properties to be gauged
              by monitoring the ability of variant proteins to cause focus formation in
              NIH3T3 cells.  The results will generate a clearer view of how HRas becomes
              incorporated into cellular membranes and enable development of methods to
              manipulate the interaction of HRas with membrane subdomains. This information
              will also identify new subdomain-selective targeting sequences with which other
              proteins, such as HRas effectors, can be re-directed to specific sites on the
              cell surface. These studies will help us understand what properties of the
              membrane-binding domain of HRas can influence biological activity and lead
              towards the long-term goal of learning how to guide that interaction toward
              beneficial outcomes. 


