Title       : Coping with a Watery Diet: Integration of Metabolic, Digestive, and
               Osmoregulatory Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0110416

Award Number: 0110416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Martinez del Rio cmdelrio@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The maintenance of water and electrolyte balance can pose a serious challenge
              for terrestrial animals. Consequently, the strategies used by terrestrial
              animals to conserve water have been well studied. This proposal emphasizes
              another, much less studied, aspect of osmoregulation in land animals. Unlike
              many animals living in dry environments, nectar feeding animals must cope with
              excessive water ingestion. Nectar-feeding birds respond to variation in the
              sugar concentration of floral nectar by modulating how much they eat.  They
              decrease ingestion as sugar concentration increases.  The intake response of
              nectar-feeding birds to sugar concentration has the consequence that at low to
              moderate sugar concentrations the birds ingest phenomenal amounts of water. The
              drinking rates exhibited by nectar-feeding birds would lead to pathological
              consequences in other terrestrial vertebrates. This project investigates how
              nectar-feeding birds cope with this apparent polydipsia (water over-ingestion).
              Hummingbirds can cope with natural voluntary polydipsia through two
              non-exclusive mechanisms: 1) They can avoid absorbing water in the intestine,
              and 2) they can get rid of ingested and absorbed water by producing copious
              urine. A primary objective of this project is to determine the relative
              importance of these two mechanisms. Because birds mix urine and feces in the
              cloaca, achieving this objective is not easy.  A minimally invasive method that
              relies on a pharmacokinetic mathematical model was designed to measure the
              fraction of ingested water that is absorbed in the intestines of unrestrained
              birds.  Preliminary data suggests that in hummingbirds most of the water
              ingested is absorbed in the intestine. Consequently, in these birds the task of
              disposing of ingested water seems to be assigned to the kidneys. 
The rate at
              which the kidney filters plasma is a good example of a trait whose magnitude is
              determined by many potentially competing demands. The need to conserve water
              and the need to eliminate metabolic by-products can be in discord. In this
              proposal another potential conflict is identified: The need to dispose of
              absorbed water is better served by high glomerular filtration rates, but these
              can be accompanied by the loss of valuable, albeit easily filterable,
              metabolites like glucose. Hummingbirds exhibit extremely high plasma glucose
              concentrations (several times higher than those of a diabetic human), and
              presumably show high glomerular filtration rates to get rid of absorbed dietary
              water. However, the concentration of glucose in the excreta of these birds is
              extremely low. A goal of this project is to elucidate how hummingbirds manage
              to avoid excreting glucose in the face of high plasma glucose levels and high
              levels of filtration by the kidney.
The project is significant because it will
              allow development of an integrated quantitative description of kidney function
              under the range of water loads and hydration conditions that birds experience.
              Also, understanding the limits to water processing will provide general
              insights into how animals are designed, on how aspects of design constrain
              ecological performance of animals, and into how aspects of design in one
              physiological system can impose limits on other systems. The osmoregulatory
              processes of nectar feeding birds highlight the relevance of understanding the
              impact that events taking place in the gut can have for feeding behavior, and
              renal and metabolic function. Comparative physiologists have emphasized low
              water availability as a constraint on energy and microhabitat use. Our research
              will emphasize a novel aspect of the water-energy interaction and fill a gap in
              our understanding of osmoregulation in land animals.    

