Title       : SBIR Phase II: Robotic Systems for Network Interrogation of Smart Civil
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0110217

Award Number: 0110217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Arms swarms@microstrain.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MicroStrain Inc
	      310 Hurricane Lane
	      Williston, VT  05495    802/862-6629

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II, project is aimed at the
              continued development and field testing of an autonomous robotic structural
              inspection system capable of remote powering and data collection from a network
              of embedded sensing nodes with remote data access via the internet. The system
              will utilize existing microminiature, multichannel, wireless, programmable
              Addressable Sensing Modules (ASM's) to sample data from a variety of sensors.
              These inductively powered nodes do not require batteries or interconnecting
              wires, which greatly enhances reliability and reduces installation cost. 
              Networks of sensing nodes can be embedded, interrogated, and remotely accessed
              in applications where visual inspection by people is not practical due to:
              physical space constraints, remote geographic locations, high inspection costs,
              and high risks involved for those performing the inspections. The sensors can
              indicate the need for repair, replacement, or reinforcement, which will reduce
              the risk of catastrophic failure and will be useful after natural disasters,
              such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods. The availability of
              critical structural health data on the internet would greatly assist highway
              engineers and scientists to acquire information about these structures, which
              will improve our understanding of the safety of civil structures and their
              requisite maintenance.

Market potential is significant, as various task
              specific robots can be employed (with our systems) for remote inspection and
              internet data delivery from a broad spectrum of structures, such as: bridges,
              bridge footings, dams, offshore oil rigs, buildings, hazardous waste sites, and
              nuclear power plants.
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project is aimed at the continued development and field testing of an
              autonomous robotic structural inspection system capable of remote powering and
              data collection from a network of embedded sensing nodes with remote data
              access via the internet. The system will utilize existing microminiature,
              multichannel, wireless, programmable Addressable Sensing Modules (ASM's) to
              sample data from a variety of sensors. These inductively powered nodes do not
              require batteries or interconnecting wires, which greatly enhances reliability
              and reduces installation cost.  Networks of sensing nodes can be embedded,
              interrogated, and remotely accessed in applications where visual inspection by
              people is not practical due to: physical space constraints, remote geographic
              locations, high inspection costs, and high risks involved for those performing
              the inspections. The sensors can indicate the need for repair, replacement, or
              reinforcement, which will reduce the risk of catastrophic failure and will be
              useful after natural disasters, such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and
              floods. The availability of critical structural health data on the internet
              would greatly assist highway engineers and scientists to acquire information
              about these structures, which will improve our understanding of the safety of
              civil structures and their requisite maintenance.

Market potential is
              significant, as various task specific robots can be employed (with our systems)
              for remote inspection and internet data delivery from a broad spectrum of
              structures, such as: bridges, bridge footings, dams, offshore oil rigs,
              buildings, hazardous waste sites, and nuclear power plants.


