Title       : RUI: Assembly and Expression MHC Class II Chains in the Channel Catfish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0110541

Award Number: 0110541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. McConnell mcconnellt@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The long-term goal of this research project is to characterize and define the
              specific processing events necessary for cell surface expression of MHC class
              II molecules in a teleost species. The immediate goal of this project is to
              determine the molecular events necessary for proper folding, assembly, and cell
              surface expression of class II heterodimers. In particular, the work seeks to
              determine the assembly of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
              heterodimers in teleosts proceeds with assistance from the endoplasmic
              reticulum chaperone calnexin and the invariant chain. Preferential pairing of
              class II alpha and beta chains will be tested with transfection of the
              previously characterized encoding genes into catfish class II negative
              fibroblast cell lines. RNA and cell surface expression of class II genes and
              proteins will be examined. In other experiments, immunoprecipitations,
              immunoblots, flow cytometry, and immunofluorescence microscopy will be used to
              test the role of calnexin, calreticulin, and invariant chain in the processing
              and trafficking of class II molecules. The availability of catfish lymphoid,
              macrophage, and fibroblast cell lines, along with the previous characterization
              of two expressed MHC class II A and class II B loci, make the channel catfish a
              unique system among teleosts for the study of MHC class II assembly and cell
              surface expression.
