Title       : Identification and Characterization of Signaling Complexes Required for Egg
               Activation at Fertilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0110790

Award Number: 0110790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen R. Foltz foltz@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110790
Foltz

Fertilization initiates the start of the development of a new
              organism. Sperm binding and fusion launch the egg from a quiescent state into
              an active state, committed to cell cycle entry. How does the meeting of these
              two cells signal the activation of development? In particular, the release of
              Ca2+ from internal egg stores is a hallmark of egg activation and has been the
              focus of intensive study. Studies using echinoderm (sea urchin and sea star)
              gametes have suggested a model for a signal transduction pathway that leads to
              initiation of Ca2+ release. The working model is that sperm-egg interaction
              activates a Src family tyrosine kinase(s) (SFK) that in turn (directly or
              indirectly) activates PLCg, causing the production of IP3 and subsequent
              release of Ca2+ from internal stores in the egg. This research will test the
              current signaling pathway model by identifying and characterizing the
              endogenous components in the egg, evaluating their interactions, and
              investigating their mode of regulation. The results of the proposed experiments
              should provide insight into how signaling components are organized in the sea
              urchin egg and interact with one another to trigger egg activation. There are
              two specific aims. First, the Src-type egg tyrosine kinase(s) that is activated
              at fertilization will be identified and characterized. cDNAs encoding egg SFKs
              are being cloned and antibodies will be raised against the proteins. The
              necessity of the SFK(s) for Ca2+ release will be tested by inhibiting its
              function using a dominant-interfering approach. The antibodies will be used to
              characterize the protein's activity at fertilization, localization in the egg,
              and potential interaction with PLCg and other egg signaling or cytoskeletal
              components. The second aim will investigate the mechanism of PLCg activation.
              The interaction of an egg SFK(s) with egg PLCg will be investigated, as will
              the localization and tyrosine phosphorylation state of PLCg. Together, the
              results from the proposed work should provide insight into how sperm-egg
              interaction results in one of the most important and universal events of egg
              activation, the release of Ca2+ in the egg.




