Title       : Transcriptional and Post-Translational Regulation of Plant Vacuolar Na+/H+
               Antiports
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0110622

Award Number: 0110622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Blumwald eblumwald@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Environmental stress due to salinity is one of the most serious factors limiting
              the productivity of agricultural crops, which are predominantly sensitive to
              the presence of high concentrations of salts in the soil. A comparison of ion
              distribution in cells and tissues of various plant species indicates that a
              primary characteristic of salt tolerant plants is their ability to exclude
              sodium out of the cell and to take up sodium and to sequester it in the cell
              vacuoles. Dr. Blumwald's work has identified a family of vacuolar Na+/H+
              antiports that play a paramount role in the ability of plants to grow in high
              NaCl concentrations. These antiports actively move ions into the vacuole,
              removing the potentially harmful ions from the cytosol. These ions, in turn,
              act as an osmoticum within the vacuole, which then maintain water flow into the
              cell, thus allowing plants to grow in soils containing high salinity. The
              cloning of plant Na+/H+ antiports and the generation of transgenic Arabidopsis
              thaliana plants with enhanced salt tolerance provides a unique opportunity to
              study the role of these transporters in salt tolerance and ion homeostasis in
              vivo. Dr. Blumwald's proposed research aims to identify and characterize
              proteins regulating the vacuolar Na+/H+ antiport activity, providing insights
              on the role of Ca2+-dependent transduction processes in the regulation of
              intracellular ion balance. The second objective will serve to identify
              mechanisms regulating the transcription of the antiports in salt tolerant
              plants that could be used to design crops with enhanced salt tolerance. The
              third objective, will use knockout mutants and RNA interference to determine
              the physiological role of the vacuolar antiports in K+ nutrition.
