Title       : Towards the Complete Gene Inventory and Function of the Medicago Truncatula
               Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0110206

Award Number: 0110206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5803691            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Cook drcook@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dongjin Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The legume family is one of the most important groups of plants worldwide
              because they have been fundamental to development of modern agricultural
              systems. Agronomically important members include soybean and rice in Asia, and
              maize and beans in the Americas.  Legumes are also the third largest family of
              flowering plants.  On a worldwide basis, this plant family contributes 33% of
              humankind's protein intake, while also serving as an important source of fodder
              and forage for animals, and of edible and industrial oils.  Legumes are also
              distinguished by their unique property of symbiotic nitrogen fixation,
              providing one of the major sources of available nitrogen in the biosphere.  In
              the US alone, legumes are grown on over 80 million acres, where they fix
              approximately 6 million metric tons of nitrogen worth an estimated $4.5
              billion. 

In response to the need for a tractable genetic system in legumes,
              scientists have developed Medicago truncatula as a model species for study of
              biological and agronomic issues important to legumes.  Of particular
              significance, Medicago is amenable to efficient molecular, genetic and
              reverse-genetic analyses, unlike the major crop legumes.

This project
              involves the large-scale analysis of the genome of Medicago.  A map of the
              organization of genes (comparative genomics), of their functions in legume
              biology (functional genomics), and analysis and public distribution of the data
              by means of computational tools (bioinformatics), are the emphases of this
              project.  Recent results from this research team document the first indications
              of conserved genome structure between Medicago and crop legumes, and between
              Medicago and the well-characterized model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  We have
              described the genomic architecture of resistance gene analogs and discovered
              new lineages of legume resistance genes.  We have contributed to the
              development of a public Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) resource containing in
              excess of 127,000 sequences, and created publicly accessible databases to
              relate this information to other scientists and to the public.  Already this
              information has accelerated the pace of discovery and characterization of
              agronomically important legume genes and traits, in both Medicago and crop
              legume species.

The goal of this research is to extend these analyses by
              contributing to a multi-institutional, international effort to develop a
              complete gene inventory and functional analysis of the Medicago genome.  The
              specific objectives of this research include (1) creating a comprehensive
              physical map of the genome, (2) assaying the coordinate expression of thousands
              of genes under conditions of (a) plant development, (b) interactions with
              microorganisms, and (c) nutrient stress, and (3) continuing to implement and
              improve publicly accessible database activities.

The long-term impact of
              this research will be to integrate genetic and functional information across
              legumes, and thereby expand opportunities for basic and applied research in
              economically important legume species.  This research will allow scientists to
              compare genes of agronomic and scientific interest in Medicago and the related
              crop legumes.  This knowledge will enable more efficient cloning and
              characterization of valuable genes and traits, such as disease resistance and
              crop productivity, and it will ultimately facilitate the development of
              improved crop varieties.  The database of expressed genes generated by this
              research will enable the detailed analysis of the role of specific genes in
              plant growth and development.  Many of the genes identified in the course of
              this research will become the focus of crop improvement strategies and of
              continued scientific investigation by legume biologists.  The proposed work
              benefits enormously from previous NSF-sponsored research on the model plant
              Arabidopsis.  Likewise, completion of the project will benefit not only
              research on legumes, but the broader scientific community as well.

