Title       : Role of the Dynamin-Related GTPase, Mgm1p, in Mitochondrial Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0110899

Award Number: 0110899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jodi Nunnari jmnunnari@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondria are semiautonomous intracellular organelles evolutionarily derived
              from endosymbiont prokaryotes.  They  are the primary site in eukaryotic cells
              where the energy of chemical bonds is oxidatively converted to a metabolically
              useful form.  Mitochondria are therefore often referred to as the "powerhouses"
              of the eukaryotic cell.  Like chloroplasts, mitochondria are separated from the
              cytoplasm of the cell by a double membrane system. The long term goal of this
              research project is to understand in molecular detail how the structure of the
              double-membraned mitochondrion is controlled. This is a complex problem because
              the chemical and physical structures of the outer membrane and inner membrane
              are different. In contrast to the outer membrane, the mitochondrial inner
              membrane is typically convoluted. These convolutions, referred to as cristae,
              form as a consequence of the greater surface area of the inner membrane, and
              presumably function to increase the organelle's ability to make energy.
              Interestingly, despite their distinct structures, current data suggest that
              fission and fusion of both membranes occur in tandem and that the molecular
              components that regulate these events are exclusively associated with the outer
              membrane. However, the range of cristae morphologies observed in cells suggests
              that the inner membrane is dynamic and that dedicated mechanisms and components
              exist to maintain its unique structure and perhaps to coordinate the behaviors
              of the two membranes. Virtually nothing is known about the mechanisms that
              regulate inner membrane structure in mitochondria.  In addition to the outer
              membrane-associated dynamin-related GTPase, Dnm1p, analyses from Dr. Nunnari's
              laboratory indicate that a second dynamin-related GTPase, Mgm1p, is localized
              to the mitochondrial inner membrane and that inner membrane structure in mgm1
              mutant cells is specifically aberrant. Members of the dynamin GTPase family
              share the common function to regulate the structure of various biological
              membranes. Thus, based on these findings, Dr. Nunnari hypothesizes that Mgm1p
              regulates the structure of mitochondria in cells by functioning to remodel the
              inner membranes. The experiments that will be done with support from this award
              will  test this hypothesis utilizing a combination of genetic, biochemical, and
              cytological techniques.
