Title       : The Development of a Prokaryotic Annotation Engine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0110270

Award Number: 0110270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen White   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Salzberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Institute for Genomic Research, TIGR, has developed tools for annotation and
              a complex web display for
presenting this information to the scientific
              community. The annotation system includes software that allows its annotation
              staff to initate a bacterial annotation project, update that data with manual
              curation, and
to electronically publish that data on TIGR's web site and at
              GenBank. TIGR web display includes a database system with the capability of
              representing all completed microbial genomes, graphical displays, and
the
              ability to allow users to perform complex ad hoc queries on that data.

The
              above tools were designed strictly for the purpose of running those
software
              locally at TIGR or on TIGR web servers. The current project will provide
              resources for the development of software that will be used by scientists to
              run those software locally on their own machines. This will allow users easy
              access to annotation systems that are consistent with the well-developed set of
              standard operational procedures developed at TIGR and will help ensure
              consistency of annotation across many
sequencing centers. By placing the
              software developed at TIGR in the hands of users, they will also be able to
              modify and improve upon the representation system, and use the graphical
              display to promote
individual analysis of bacterial genome information.
