Title       : The Ninth-Eleventh NSF Materials Chemistry Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0110859

Award Number: 0110859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Galvin megalvin@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9239,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This conference award to the University of Delaware is made by the Advanced
              Materials Program in the Chemistry Division and the Solid State Chemistry
              Program in the Division of Materials Research in support of the 9th-11th
              Materials Chemistry Workshops. The goals of the Workshops are to bring together
              scientists from diverse disciplines including inorganic, organic, physical,
              biological, polymer and analytical chemistry as well as other science and
              engineering backgrounds for discussion of ongoing and emerging areas of
              research and education in materials chemistry.  In addition, the Workshops are
              to promote dialog between industry, government and academic scientists in their
              endeavor to identify and investigate fundamental and technological issues. 
              Workshops will be held on the third week in October with up to thirty
              participants selected by a competitively reviewed application process.  Special
              efforts will be made to encourage industrial, government, minority, women and
              young material chemists to apply for the Workshops.  Specific workshop sites
              will be determined by the Workshop Chairpersons and are expected to be in
              Delaware, Wisconsin and Michigan.  

The Materials Chemistry Workshops will
              provide a forum conducive to the development of ideas, help bridge gaps among
              the materials chemistry constituencies in academia, industry and government
              laboratories, lead to new collaborations and define the frontiers of materials
              chemistry.

