Title       : Specification and Patterning of the Animal-Vegetal Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0110532

Award Number: 0110532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athula H. Wikramanayake athula@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110532
Wikramanayake

Depletion of nuclear beta-catenin in early sea urchin
              embryos affects the
fates of multiple cell lineages along the animal-vegetal
              (A/V) axis. It is
known that the micromeres, which form the early signaling
              center that
specifies mesendoderm, require nuclear beta-catenin to become
              competent to
carry out their inductive functions. Beta-catenin signaling is
              also
required in the veg2 lineage for these cells to respond to
              micromere
signals and to become specified as mesendoderm.
              Identifying
transcriptional targets of beta-catenin and elucidating their
              functions
would be a critical step in defining the molecular basis of
              mesendoderm
specification. This proposal will focus on SUWnt8, a
              nuclear
beta-catenin-sensitive Wnt gene that is activated in the
              micromeres
coincident with the entry of beta-catenin into the nuclei of these
              cells
and in the veg2 tier shortly after transit of beta-catenin into the
              nuclei
of this cell tier. Four proposed specific aims will define the function
              of
SUWnt8 in these cell lineages and will further the understanding
              of
mesendoderm specification in the sea urchin embryo. These aims are: (1)
              To
determine the role of cell interactions in regulating early
              SUWnt8
expression in the mesendoderm domain. This will provide insight into
              the
relative roles of cell autonomous and non cell-autonomous mechanisms
              in
early mesendoderm specification. (2) To determine how SUWnt8
              participates
in early mesendoderm specification by elucidating its role in
              the
micromeres and the veg2 tier by blocking its activity using
              morpholino
antisense oligonucleotide-mediated translational inhibition.
              Additionally,
a possible role for SUWnt8 in maintaining nuclear beta-catenin
              levels in
vegetal cells and in suppressing the activity of animalizing
              transcription
factors in vegetal cells will be determined. (3) While
              nuclear
beta-catenin is required for normal mesendoderm specification, there
              is
evidence that micromeres can induce mesendoderm in animal half
              blastomeres
in the absence of detectable nuclear beta-catenin. It will be
              determined
if SUWnt8 can signal through the planar cell polarity pathway via
              the
Disheveled protein to participate in mesendoderm specification in
              parallel
with the beta-catenin pathway. (4) The unique expression pattern of
              SUWnt8
makes it a powerful reagent for studying the transcriptional basis
              of
mesendoderm specification. The trans-acting factors that mediate
              SUWnt8
expression in the micromeres and the veg2 tier will be
              identified.
Together, these studies will further our understanding of how the
              sea
urchin A/V axis is specified and patterned and may provide insight
              into
the evolution of the A/V axis in bilaterians.




