Title       : Genomic Analysis of Plant Water Use Efficiency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0110069

Award Number: 0110069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3995267            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Comstock jpc8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bjorn Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. McCouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Water use efficiency (WUE)is among the most fundamental constraints molding the
              evolution of terrestrial plant cellular anatomy, tissue structure, physiology,
              and whole-plant morphology. Due to extensive physiological control, modern
              plants of both natural and agricultural systems have a tremendous capacity to
              maintain high rates of growth and productivity over a wide range of often
              challenging environmental conditions.Nonetheless, water utilization and the WUE
              of growth remain the single most important determinants of terrestrial
              productivity in both natural and managed ecosystems. Genes that act, singly and
              in concert, to regulate the development and plasticity of essential plant
              traits controlling WUE will be characterized. WUE is defined as the ratio of
              carbon gain in photosynthesis (A) to the associated water loss (E). A genomic
              analysis of WUE will be undertaken in two crop plants, rice and tomato. Stable
              mapping populations already available will be the basis of the first screen in
              whole-genome QTL analyses of rice and tomato. Phenotypic measurements, both
              physiological and morphological, will be made on contrasting phenotypes at
              several stages.Fine-mapping efforts will focus on QTLs that condition the most
              interesting phenotypes. These activities will enhance understanding of the
              integration of plant water relations and carbon metabolism, develop the most
              detailed maps of WUE genes and comparative maps across multiple species, and
              provide new molecular markers to greatly enhance breeding programs for improved
              WUE.
