Title       : Regulation of Insulin-Like Growth Factor (IGF) Actions by IGF Binding Proteins
               in Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0110864

Award Number: 0110864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cunming Duan cduan@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling system is essential for normal
              growth and development in vertebrates. The proposed project involves studying
              the molecular mechanisms by which the IGF signaling system acts to control cell
              proliferation, differentiation and cell death (apoptosis) in developing
              vertebrate embryos in vivo. There are three components to the vertebrate IGF
              signaling system: the IGF ligands, IGF receptors, and IGF binding proteins
              (IGFBPs).  While it is clear that the IGF ligands and receptors transduce
              signals that positively regulate growth, the specific role of each of the
              IGFBPs and their interactions with the IGF ligands and receptors in vivo is not
              well understood.  Our laboratory has been utilizing a model teleost fish, the
              zebrafish (Danio rerio) to investigate the IGFs/IGFBP interactions and their
              functional importance.  We use zebrafish because of their accessible,
              transparent and fast-developing embryos.  In addition, numerous genetic mutants
              are available for our studies. We have characterized the IGF signaling system
              in zebrafish and shown that IGFBP-2 inhibits IGF actions in developing
              zebrafish embryos. Our further studies have revealed the presence of several
              other IGFBPs in zebrafish.  These IGFBPs show different structural
              characteristics and distinct expression patterns.  The goal of this project is
              to understand how each of these IGFBPs interact with IGF ligands and receptors
              to regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis in developing
              zebrafish embryos. The overall hypothesis to be tested is that different IGFBPs
              are differentially regulated, and they each play a distinct role in specifying
              the IGF actions in defined embryonic tissues. The specific aims of the project
              are: 1) to determine the actions of IGFBP-2 in regulating cell proliferation,
              differentiation, and apoptosis in vivo by targeted expression of IGFBP-2 in the
              developing eyes; 2) to determine the structure of zebrafish IGFBP-1 and
              IGFBP-3, produce the corresponding proteins, and analyze these fish IGFBPs
              biochemically and functionally;  3) to determine the spatial and temporal
              expression patterns of these fish IGFBPs; 4) to determine the specific effects
              of IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-3 in controlling IGF actions in vivo by targeted
              expression in the developing eyes; and 5) to elucidate the physiological
              functions of the endogenous IGFBPs in vivo using a novel targeted gene
              "knockdown" approach. The expected results should provide novel insights for
              the roles of various IGFBPs in controlling IGF actions in a vertebrate embryo
              and will further our understanding of how the IGF signaling system acts in vivo
              to control growth and development in fish specifically and in vertebrates
              generally. Determination of the structures of fish IGFBPs and development of
              the corresponding protein, cDNA probe and antisera will make available valuable
              tools for investigation of IGFBP actions in fish. A comparison of the structure
              and function of IGFBPs from different vertebrate species will provide novel
              insight to our understanding of the evolution of this important gene family.
              Information gained from these studies may prove to be valuable to aquaculture
              for efficient production of animal protein to meet the needs of a continually
              growing human population.
 

