Title       : Exopolymer Production by Benthic Diatoms: Rhythms, Responses and Acclimation to
               Environmental Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0110875

Award Number: 0110875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Gretz mrgretz@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham Underwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1650,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0110875
Michael Gretz & Graham Underwood

The diatoms are among the most
              important primary producers in the global environment. These single-cell algae
              are exceedingly abundant and among the most numerous aquatic organisms. The
              diatoms are major contributors to the base of the marine food chain, upon which
              economically important marine fisheries and ecologically significant marine
              mammal and bird populations are dependent. Oceans occupy approximately 70% of
              our planet and marine microalgae, of which diatoms are a predominant component,
              exert a powerful influence on today's atmospheric chemistry (they are the
              primary oxygen producers on earth) and the biogeochemical cycling of carbon and
              other elements. Hundreds of millions of years of past algal growth has
              contributed to the important petroleum deposits upon which our modern society
              depends. Diatoms, both in terms of the organisms themselves and the material
              they secrete, are of fundamental importance to overall aquatic ecology. Much of
              the carbon that diatoms fix is secreted in the form of extracellular polymers.
              These exopolymeric substances (EPS) strongly influence biogeochemical cycling
              in ecosystems, as they are contributors to the sediment carbon pool, important
              in food chains and the biostabilization of sediments. This research will
              characterize the production rates, composition and characteristics of diatom
              EPS produced by benthic diatoms under various environmental conditions
              (nutrient limitation, damaging irradiance levels, salinity stress). The
              composition and structure of different EPS will influence the role such
              molecules play in the environment. EPS characteristics will be correlated with
              the changing microenvironment within estuarine diatom biofilms, and with the
              response of the organisms to important environmental stresses. This information
              is required to define how diatoms acclimate to the changing conditions within
              intertidal biofilms and to determine the nature of the different EPS produced,
              which will lead to further studies of the role of EPS within intertidal
              biofilms. This work will greatly advance our knowledge of EPS and the
              physiological conditions in nature that trigger production of different types
              and may lead to advances in stabilizing sediments or identifying new polymers
              of commercial interest. In addition, this project will provide a valuable
              contribution to student training by engaging students in a multidisciplinary
              effort that involves integrated international cooperation between laboratories
              in the U.S. and the U.K. 



