Title       : STTR Phase II: Development of an Autonomous Equilibrating pCO2 Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a0110500

Award Number: 0110500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Regis Cook regis_cook@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Oceanics Inc
	      1295 NW 163 St
	      Miami, FL  331695830    /   -

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop and
              test an autonomous, low cost, robust, precise, and miniaturized partial and
              total carbon dioxide measurement system.   This system will be able to
              characterize the carbon dioxide exchange between ocean surface waters and the
              atmosphere, thus helping to analyze the "greenhouse effect" and assess global
              warming on a worldwide basis.  The partial and total carbon dioxide systems are
              miniaturized for deployment by the International SeaKeepers Society in ocean
              and  atmospheric monitoring modules on cargo ships, cruise ships, and super
              yachts around the world as well as for use on piers, ocean buoys, and other
              platforms.  The prototype partial carbon dioxide system, developed in Phase I,
              measures carbon dioxide in seawater that has been equilibrated with air using
              an infrared detector.  It is sensitive to five parts per million and responds
              to rapid changes in carbon dioxide.  The prototype miniaturized total carbon
              dioxide system has a precision of three parts per million.  Phase II will
              miniaturize and test both systems in the laboratory and in the field.  Based on
              these tests and any modifications required, final commercial partial and total
              carbon dioxide measurement systems will be produced.

The International
              SeaKeepers Society is expected to deploy hundreds of these carbon dioxide
              sensor systems.  Other purchasers would include government agencies worldwide
              performing research and monitoring on the global warming phenomenon.

