Title       : Establishment of Robust Maize Transformation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0110023

Award Number: 0110023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4227981            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kan Wang kanwang@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi F. Kaeppler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanton B. Gelvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Kan Wang,	Principal Investigator,	Iowa State University
Stanton Gelvin,	Co-
              Principal Investigator,	Purdue University
Heidi Kaeppler,	Co- Principal
              Investigator,	University of Wisconsin-Madison
Bill Thompson,	Co- Principal
              Investigator,	North Carolina State University
				

As the Plant Genome
              Project matures, improved technologies for plant transformation are becoming
              essential. Given the rapid increase in genomic information and the need to
              understand the biological functions of numerous genes, it is essential to
              establish efficient transformation systems and make them available to
              researchers in the public sector.  

Maize is the most studied model plant
              that has important economic value.  Although genetic transformation systems for
              maize have been established in private laboratories, the lack of such systems
              is still a key limitation for public researchers.  This is because most public
              research groups do not have access to the resources and infrastructure
              necessary for maize transformation by currently available procedures.  In
              addition, the current technology has serious limitations, including low
              efficiency and throughput, difficulty with inbred line transformation,
              unpredictable transgene copy numbers and integrity, and undesirable transgene
              silencing during development and over generations.  

The long term goal for
              this program is to conduct research aimed at establishing robust maize
              transformation technologies by: 1) developing a routine Agrobacterium-mediated
              transformation system, 2) enhancing transgene integration and expression, 3)
              investigating alternative transformation protocols using non-tissue culture
              approaches, and 4) expand transformation to more maize inbred lines.  In
              addition, this program will facilitate transfer of improved protocols to the
              public sector by providing a more efficient transformation service, training
              research staff, and organizing transformation workshops.    



