Title       : Functional Analyses of APETALA3-Like Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0110731

Award Number: 0110731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian F. Irish vivian.irish@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110731
Irish

Flowers are a defining characteristic of the angiosperms, yet
              there is wide variation in floral form. Based on results from Arabidopsis and
              several other higher eudicot species, it has been proposed that, despite the
              wide variation in floral architecture, the molecular mechanisms controlling
              floral development are conserved across all angiosperms. This hypothesis,
              however, has not been critically tested.  One key regulatory gene, the floral
              homeotic APETALA3 (AP3) gene, has been shown to be required for specifying
              petals and stamens in the higher eudicot Arabidopsis.  The experiments
              described will address the larger question of whether the molecular mechanisms
              controlling floral development are conserved or have diverged by investigating
              the functions of AP3-like genes in other angiosperm species.  These studies
              will be carried out in tomato and in opium poppy.

Phylogenetic analyses
              indicate that a duplication event in the AP3 lineage occurred at the base of
              the higher eudicots, leading to two AP3-like lineages in these species: the
              euAP3 lineage and the TM6 lineage.  To date, all functional analyses have
              focussed on the role of the euAP3 lineage genes, of which the Arabidopsis AP3
              gene is a member.  The roles of the paralogous TM6 lineage genes are currently
              unknown and will be addressed by carrying out functional studies in tomato, a
              species for which a number of genetic and molecular tools exist. These
              investigations will include screening for insertional mutations in the TM6
              gene, transgenic manipulation of the TM6 gene, and genetic experiments
              utilizing a previously identified tomato AP3 insertional mutation.  The lower
              eudicots and basal angiosperms contain only one AP3-like lineage.  These genes
              are more similar in sequence to the higher eudicot TM6 genes and are termed the
              paleoAP3 lineage genes.  The function of a paleoAP3 lineage member will be
              investigated using opium poppy as a model system. These studies will include
              cloning and characterizing the opium poppy paleoAP3 gene and determining
              whether any of the previously identified poppy floral homeotic mutations
              correspond to lesions in this gene.  In addition, expression studies will be
              carried out in order to characterize the processes controlling floral
              development in this species.

The results obtained from these studies will be
              valuable in shedding light on how gene duplication and diversification are
              related to changes in gene function.  They will also provide a basis for
              developing new and more rigorous hypotheses to explain, at the molecular
              genetic level, how morphological innovations in floral form have
              arisen.




