Title       : Protein Export in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0110594

Award Number: 0110594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Flower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This research investigates a problem faced by all living organisms: how are
              proteins transported across membranes? These studies will use the model
              organism, Escherichia coli, which shares many aspects of the protein export
              process with higher organisms. In particular, the process of bacterial protein
              export is similar to that of eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum targeting. The
              wealth of genetic and biochemical tools available make the use of E. coli ideal
              for these studies. This project combines bacterial genetics and biochemical
              assays to create novel approaches to study the protein export pathway.

Most
              proteins are translocated across the cytoplasmic membrane of E. coli by the
              multisubunit Sec translocase. The essential components of the Sec system are
              SecA, SecE and SecY, while SecD, SecF and SecG enhance the efficiency of
              translocation. Export of a secretory protein requires sequential, productive,
              and seemingly complex interactions between the Sec proteins. The long-term
              goals of Dr. Flower's laboratory are to understand the functions of the Sec
              proteins and to elucidate the requirements for productive interactions amongst
              them. Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the conduct of
              this research.

Three specific goals will be pursued in this project. 

1)
              The inter- and intra-molecular interactions between proteins of the
              translocation complex will be examined by genetic analyses, including synthetic
              lethality suppression and multiple mutation experiments. Novel mutations are
              expected from these experiments that will shed light on the interactions
              between SecE and SecY. 
2) The mechanism of action of mutant forms of SecE and
              SecY, including new mutants isolated from goal 1, will be investigated using in
              vitro translocation and ATPase assays. The combination of new genetic screens
              and the biochemical assays provides a unique approach to understanding the
              functions of SecE and SecY. 
3) The role of membrane phospholipids in protein
              export will be explored by examination of the effect of mutations in
              phospholipid biosynthesis pathways on export and by determination of
              phospholipid ratios in strains with specific export defects. Results obtained
              previously indicate that SecG function is related to membrane phospholipid
              content; this hypothesis will now be tested. 

These experiments will further
              our understanding of the formation and function of a complex multisubunit
              nanoscale biological machine, and will  contribute to the training of the next
              generation of scientists and scientifically literate citizens.


