Title       : Cleavage in Xenopus Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0110985

Award Number: 0110985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. Danilchik danilchi@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110985
Danilchik

One of the most critical phases in the life of a new
              organism is cleavage, a series of rapid, synchronous cell divisions that
              populates the fertilized egg's volume with zygotic nuclei, clonally segregates
              its developmental potential, and reduces cell volume to that of somatic cells.
              Cleavage has long served as a favorite model for the study of animal-cell
              cytokinesis, since the egg's large size permits a variety of experimental
              manipulations and opportunities for observation unavailable in smaller cells.
              Nevertheless, cleavage is known to differ in several fundamental ways from
              somatic-cell mitosis, particularly by its synchrony, rapidity, lack of
              transcriptional activity, and reliance on maternally synthesized components. In
              amphibian embryos, cleavage is accompanied by the insertion of a new domain of
              plasma membrane between each new pair of cells. This membrane deposition has
              potential significance in events of early development, such as establishment of
              the body plan, since all receptor-mediated, cell-cell interactions depend on
              the composition of the membrane deposited between cells. Our discovery of a
              unique array of microtubules underlying the advancing cleavage furrow led to an
              investigation of the role of microtubules in the cleavage process. We now have
              evidence that the furrow microtubule array may be involved in delivery of
              vesicles to the site of new membrane expansion at the base of the cleavage
              furrow. Furthermore, we have detected novel membrane protrusive activity on
              either side of the expanding cleavage membrane domain that may be critical for
              pulling the new cells into close apposition as cleavage progresses. Our goal in
              this proposed project is to understand the function and integration of these
              processes in Xenopus cleavage. Specifically, our aims are to 1) learn the role
              of the furrow microtubule array in directing exocytotic vesicles to the growing
              cleavage plane, 2 ) analyze cytoskeletal assembly in furrows of living embryos,
              and 3) study the relationship between furrowing and membrane protrusive
              activity along the furrow margins. 


