Title       : Spectroscopic Quantitation of H-bond Strength in Enzyme-Substrate Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0110610

Award Number: 0110610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon E. Anderson anderson@biochemistry.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Carey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The presence of a single H-bond at an enzyme active site can be crucial to
              catalysis. Site directed mutagenesis has revealed that removing an H-bond donor
              or acceptor can reduce an enzyme's catalytic efficiency by a factor of as much
              as 105. The researchers are developing two novel methods of determining both
              the strength and direction of individual H-bonds between a substrate or
              inhibitor and functional groups in the enzyme active sites. These two methods
              are based on the use of stable isotopes.  Preliminary results have shown that
              the C-D stretching frequency of a primary or secondary alcohol depends directly
              on the strength of the H-bond from the alcohol.  This change in frequency also
              results in equilibrium isotope effects on the formation of the complex and
              kinetic isotope effects that can be used to characterize the transition state
              of the reaction. As an example, the H-bond in cyclic-AMP dependent protein
              kinase between the aspartate residue that may serve as a critical H-bond
              acceptor and the nucleophilic serine will be characterized. X-ray
              crystallography suggests that the aspartate is in the correct position to
              activate the hydroxyl group of a serine residue for its role as the nucleophile
              in an ATP-dependent phosphoryl transfer reaction. In spite of the
              crystallographic proximity of the aspartate, its role in catalyzing the
              reaction has been controversial. The incorporation of the present studies into
              the chemical mechanism of cAMP-dependent protein kinase will provide a paradigm
              for this large family of enzymes involved in signal transduction. 
              Understanding the mechanism of protein kinases will contribute to our ability
              to design and manipulate these important enzymes that provide for the immediate
              control of many biological functions. The unique insight into the activation of
              the nucleophile of an ATP-dependent  phosphoryl transfer will extend the
              current understanding of all kinase reactions.


