Title       : Fate Determination in the Disophila Embryonic Brain and Visual Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0110715

Award Number: 0110715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Volker Hartenstein volkerH@mcdb.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI: Hartenstein, Volker
IBN 0110715

Abstract:

This project analyzes the
              partitioning of the eye field in the Drosophila embryo.  The eye field in the
              anterior neural plate of vertebrates and the head of the Drosophila embryo
              exhibit a high degree of similarity regarding the fate map of the visual
              system, and the signaling pathways controlling this fatemap. Drosophila
              counterparts of Shh (Hh), BMB4 (Dpp) and EGF, as well as Pax6, Six6 and many
              other regulatory genes all function in the Drosophila embryonic head.
              Preliminary data show that Dpp is secreted in the dorsal midline and forms a
              dorso-ventral gradient that specifies the different domains within the eye
              field. Dpp is then down-regulated in the eye field, except for its posterior
              boundary from where it may form a posterior-anterior gradient that partitions
              the visual primordium into larval and adult eye, and optic lobe. Hh is secreted
              at the lateral boundary of the eye field and may form a gradient that
              antagonizes the early Dpp gradient. 
Dr. Hartenstein and his research group
              will address the topology and morphogenesis of the Drosophila eye field and
              test their models of Dpp and Hh function in partitioning the eye field. The
              first aim is to reconstruct the details of the fate map, and to investigate the
              morphogenesis of the visual system. The second aim addresses the function of
              dpp in the eye field by investigating the dpp loss of function, heterotopic and
              heterochronic expression of dpp, activated Dpp receptor, and dominant negative
              Dpp receptor. In the third aim Dr. Hartenstein will analyze the role of Hh and
              its interaction with Dpp. The hypothesis will be tested that Hh negatively
              interacts with Dpp function. This would represent an interesting parallel to
              the vertebrate neural tube where ventral release of Shh also antagonizes BMPs
              secreted from dorsal tissue. By generating Dpp:hh double mutants and expressing
              mutant constructs the interaction of these genes in the embryonic head will be
              tested. In aim four Dr. Hartenstein will address the control of Dpp activity in
              the embryonic head. By establishing specific differences and similarities
              between early eye patterning in Drosophila and vertebrates, Dr. Hartenstein
              anticipates to furnish relevant information that helps interpreting Shh and BMP
              function in neural fate determination and to provide important insights  in the
              evolution of the brain.


