Title       : Plasmodesmata and Phloem Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0110638

Award Number: 0110638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Turgeon ert2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project supports studies on the identification of phloem loading mechanisms
              in leaves.  Sugars manufactured by photosynthesis are loaded into the phloem of
              minor veins for export to growing organs.  There are two known phloem loading
              mechanisms.  Apoplastic loading involves trans-membrane transport while
              symplastic loading takes place entirely through the plasmodesmata-connected
              cytoplasm.  It is important to be able to distinguish between these mechanisms
              because they are inhibited by environmental stress, presumably in different
              ways.  According to the current paradigm, apoplastic- and symplastic-loading
              species can be identified reliably by plasmodesmatal counts.  An alternative
              hypothesis to be tested in this investigation is that apoplastic loading is
              universal, except for those species that translocate stachyose, or other
              carbohydrates of similar size, and load by polymer trapping.  Phloem loading
              studies, based primarily on the specific inhibition of trans-membrane transport
              by p-chloromercuribenzenesulfonic acid, will be conducted on five species that
              translocate sucrose but have been putatively identified as symplastic loaders
              on the basis of plasmodesmatal counts.  The prediction is that these plants
              load via the apoplast.  Further studies will be conducted to test the
              hypothesis that plasmodesmatal frequencies in minor vein phloem reflect overall
              plasmodesmatal numbers in leaves, depending on plant growth habit, and are not
              necessarily related to phloem physiology.



