Title       : Personal Digital Field Guides: Mobile Access to Comprehensive Regional Flora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0110072

Award Number: 0110072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $688875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cherri M. Pancake pancake@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Hanus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Sundberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Floras are the mechanisms for synthesizing and disseminating knowledge about
              plant biodiversity. The Northwest Alliance for Computational Science and
              Engineering and the Oregon Flora Project will collaborate to develop a software
              architecture and tools for creating comprehensive electronic floras that cover
              a broad spectrum of data about plants. The resulting personal digital field
              guide (PDFG) will be comprehensive and extensible.  Data will be available on
              the web.  The architecture and toolkits will be generalizable to other domains
              in the natural sciences.  The data set for the project represents the largest
              and most comprehensive resource on regional flora to date.  The project will
              integrate the diverse sources, enabling new ways of exploring the relationships
              of plants to their environments.  A broad range of users, including nature
              lovers, scientists, students, and decision makers, will be able to personalize
              the way they navigate through the flora, selecting the amount and type of
              information presented as well as how and when it will be accessed.
