Title       : Operation of the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at
               Michigan State University as a National User Facility and Support for its
               Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0110253

Award Number: 0110253
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82635000           (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Konrad Gelbke gelbke@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. York  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley M. Sherrill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1256      MICHIGAN ST UNIV (CYCLO FACIL)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This award provides funds for operating the National Superconducting
Cyclotron
              Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University as a national
user facility;
              for supporting the MSU faculty and staff to conduct
research in nuclear
              science, nuclear astrophysics, and accelerator and
instrumentation physics;
              and for serving as a center dedicated to
training the next generation of
              scientists.
	Since its inception, the National Superconducting Cyclotron
              Laboratory
(NSCL) at Michigan State University has played a significant role
              in
nuclear and accelerator physics research, both in the U.S. and
worldwide. 
              This role will continue at an enhanced level with the
Coupled Cyclotron
              Upgrade now nearing completion.  In the 1996
Long-Range Plan of the NSF/DOE
              Nuclear Science Advisory Committee, this
upgrade project was recommended to be
              the highest priority for new
construction.
	Large intensity gains of
              intermediate-energy primary heavy-ion beams are
made possible with the coupled
              cyclotron operation.  Together with the
increased acceptance of the new
              fragment separator, it will be possible
to produce fast beams of rare isotopes
              typically more intense by factors
of 100 - 10,000 than available at the
              previous facility, providing
luminosities in the light-to-midrange mass region
              (A<50) that will be
unsurpassed worldwide.
	A versatile array of new
              experimental devices will be brought on-line
that will significantly enhance
              the ability of users to conduct cutting
edge research with a broad range of
              rare isotope beams.  Three of these
new instruments are funded by the NSF: (1)
              a set of eighteen segmented
germanium detectors for studies of intermediate
              energy coulomb
excitation and knockout reactions; (2) a 4-Tesla-meter
              high-acceptance
spectrometer that can be combined with large-area neutron
              time-of-flight
detectors for neutron and charged-particle spectroscopy at very
              small
angles; (3) a high-resolution silicon-strip CsI detector array
              that
permits measurements of isotopic abundances, excited state
              populations,
and isotopically resolved correlation functions with a high
              precision
and efficiency that cannot be matched by any existing detector
              array. 
Other new equipment under development include a stopped-beam
              facility
(DOE funded) and a 9.4-Tesla precision Penning ion trap (MSU funded)
              for
precision mass measurements, weak interaction studies, and
              atomic
spectroscopy.
	For the next decade, the NSCL will be the premier rare
              isotope research
facility in the U.S., with a research focus on three major
              areas of
forefront scientific interest:
	1. exploration of the nuclear
              processes that occur in explosive stellar
environments and that are
              responsible for the ongoing synthesis of the
elements in the cosmos;
	2.
              exploration of the properties of hot nuclear matter at sub- and
supra-normal
              densities (such as those found in neutron stars);
	3. exploration of exotic
              nuclei with unusual ratios of protons to
neutrons and the determination of
              their properties.


