Title       : Developmental Polarity in Fucoid Zygotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0110113

Award Number: 0110113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl L. Kropf kropf@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110113
Kropf

Zygotes (fertilized eggs) of fucoid brown algae are ideal for
              investigating the mechanisms that establish polarity in developing organisms. 
              Dr. Kropf's lab has for some time been investigating the cellular and
              physiological mechanisms that establish a growth axis and determine the
              division plane in these zygotes.  From this work they have formulated
              hypotheses to be tested during this award period.  The working hypotheses are
              as follows:
Growth axis specification.  Dr. Kropf proposes that polarity is
              first set in place at fertilization with the site of sperm entry specifying the
              rhizoid pole of the growth axis.  This site is marked by local assembly of a
              cytoskeletal element, F-actin.  The fertilized egg then settles onto the rocks
              in the intertidal zone, attaches and begins to monitor its environment for
              spatial information to help determine the direction of the rocky substratum. 
              If relevant vectors are perceived, the sperm-induced axis is abandoned and a
              new axis is generated such the new rhizoid pole is toward the rock surface. 
              Concomitantly, the actin patch at the sperm entry site is disassembled and a
              new patch is assembled at the nascent rhizoid site.  Realignment of the axis
              can occur repeatedly over several hours.  Finally, about 12 hours after
              fertilization, growth ensues at the current rhizoid pole; the rhizoid formed
              attaches the zygote firmly to rocks and eventually forms the holdfast of the
              alga.
Division plane alignment.  Dr. Kropf speculates that division plane is
              determined at telophase of mitosis such that the new cell wall is deposited
              transverse to the axis defined by the two telophase nuclei.  The orientation of
              the telophase nuclei is determined by centrosomal position.  Centrosomes are
              inherited paternally and separate to opposite sides of the zygotic nucleus. 
              Initially, the axis defined by the two centrosomes is randomly aligned with the
              growth axis, but prior to cytokinesis the centrosomal axis becomes aligned with
              the growth axis by a combination of nuclear rotation and spindle elongation. 
              
Research in this proposal will test and extend the most important aspects of
              the models.  The primary objectives are to 1) investigate the requirement for
              dynamic actin in specifying the growth axis, 2) identify actin nucleating
              molecules, 3) determine the role of asymmetric cell shape in division plane
              alignment, 4) assess whether telophase spindle position determines division
              plane, and 5) investigate the role of microtubules in defining the division
              plane.


