Title       : Analysis of Meristem Function and Floral Patterning in the Arabidopsis
               ULTRAPETALA Mutant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0110667

Award Number: 0110667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer C. Fletcher fletcher@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110667
Fletcher

The control of stem cell activity is critical for the
              proper development of all higher organisms, as stem cells are the precursors of
              the organs and tissues that comprise the body.  Plants make excellent model
              systems in which to study and manipulate stem cells, because they maintain
              pools of such cells throughout their life cycle at growing tips called apical
              meristems.  The shoot apical meristem continuously maintains a stem cell
              reservoir while simultaneously generating organs such as leaves, stems and
              flowers. How the meristem keeps a constant balance between stem cell production
              and organogenesis is poorly understood, but studies by Dr. Fletcher and others
              using the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana are uncovering genes that regulate
              this balance and thereby affect shoot apical meristem activity. 

The goal of
              this project is to understand how the Arabidopsis ULTRAPETALA (ULT) locus
              controls the activity of shoot and floral meristems. We have isolated ult
              mutant plants that generate extra flowers and floral organs from enlarged
              meristems, and also have altered organ identity in the center of the flower.
              ULT is therefore a candidate regulator of both shoot apical meristem function
              and floral patterning.  Our first objective is to identify the defect(s)
              underlying the ult shoot and floral meristem phenotypes by analyzing the
              distribution of region-specific molecular markers.  We will also decipher the
              genetic relationship between ULT and other known regulators of shoot and flower
              development, which act in a number of different pathways.  Our third goal is to
              map and clone the ULT gene, and determine its mRNA expression pattern during
              development as a prelude to functional analysis of the gene product.  These
              experiments will identify specific mechanisms through which ULT regulates
              meristem size and floral patterning, and place ULT in context with other
              Arabidopsis genes known to affect these processes.  Analysis of ULT provides a
              unique opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that balance life-long stem
              cell production and organogenesis, and also to determine how a single molecule
              functions both in growth control and pattern formation to coordinate these two
              crucial processes during development. 



