Title       : Molecular Determinants of G Protein Signaling Selectivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0110839

Award Number: 0110839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Graber sgraber@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
On the order of a thousand different G protein coupled receptors (GPCR) exist
              in mammals to mediate a diverse array of physiological responses initiated by
              hormones, neurotransmitters, sensory stimuli, and other signaling molecules. 
              Each GPCR is coupled to a heterotrimeric G protein that is critical for
              transmitting the signal initiated by receptor binding to the intracellular
              environment.  A large number of distinct G protein heterotrimers are capable of
              forming from some 20 alpha, 6 beta and 12 gamma subunits. The abundance of
              distinct subtypes identified for each component is a striking feature of G
              protein coupled signaling pathways.  The functional significance of such
              closely related molecules remains to be appreciated, and more importantly, the
              molecular basis for selective interactions among the components is largely
              unknown.  At the biochemical level, significant contributions in this area can
              be made by developing the ability to employ components of signaling pathways in
              reconstitution paradigms.  The ability to functionally couple receptors
              expressed in Sf9 cell membranes with exogenous G proteins has been developed
              and will be used to examine the G protein coupling behavior of distinct
              subtypes of muscarinic receptors capable of functionally distinguishing among
              individual G alpha subunits.  The molecular basis of this selectivity will be
              defined by comparing the abilities of G protein heterotrimers containing
              chimeric alpha subunits, comprised of various regions of the alpha q subunit,
              to interact with the muscarinic M1 receptors.  Functional interactions will be
              assessed by examining both the ability of the G protein to induce the high
              affinity state of the receptor and the ability of the agonist occupied receptor
              to catalyze guanine nucleotide exchange on the G protein.  The unique feature
              of this project is the ability to examine interactions of defined molecular
              species in a single eukaryotic membrane environment using a reconstitution
              paradigm where the stoichiometries can be controlled with some precision. 
              Identification of the individual amino acids on G alpha subunits involved in
              functional interactions with muscarinic receptors will be required to
              understand the selective interaction of these GPCRs with particular G alpha
              subunits and is likely to reveal the precise molecular mechanism underlying
              receptor mediation of the guanine nucleotide exchange process, the initial
              intracellular step in a profusion of signal transduction cascades. 

