Title       : RUI: Stereochemical Determinants in Elimination and Proton Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0110700

Award Number: 0110700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry R. Mohrig jmohrig@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this Research at Undergraduate Institutions award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting Professor Jerry R. Mohrig, of
              the Department of Chemistry at Carleton College, for his studies of
              stereochemical determinants in elimination and proton transfer reactions. These
              studies, focused on the stereochemistry of addition and elimination reactions
              involving beta-substituted esters and thioesters of butyric acid and the
              related aldehydes and ketones, seek a comprehensive understanding of the
              stereochemical consequences of the carbonyl group and substituents at C-3 on
              the stereochemistry of addition-elimination and proton transfer reactions
              involving acyclic beta-substituted carbonyl compounds. In research to be
              carried out by a group of undergraduate chemistry majors, the importance of
              substrate acidity and the leaving group in determining the stereoselectivity of
              base-catalyzed 1,2-elimination reactions producing conjugated carbonyl
              compounds will be explored through a combination of synthetic and NMR
              spectroscopic studies. Similarly, the stereochemistry of electrophilic attack
              at enolate anions will be investigated.

Understanding and controlling the
              three-dimensional structure of noncyclic molecules remains an inportant
              challenge in organic chemistry. Within this context, the stereochemical details
              of reactions involving the addition to or elimination of fragments from
              molecules are of both fundamental interest and relevance to numerous
              biologically catalyzed processes. Professor Jerry R. Mohrig, of the Department
              of Chemistry at Carleton College, is supported by a Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
              his studies related to the stereochemistry of such reactions. Through a
              combination of synthetic and spectroscopic studies, carried out by
              undergraduate chemistry majors, Professor Mohrig is developing a detailed
              understanding of these important chemical processes while simultaneously
              providing undergraduates with the opportunity to carry out research on
              fore-front, significant problems.
