Title       : Regulation of Cdc42-Dependent Signaling Pathways Throughout the Cell Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0110138

Award Number: 0110138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas I. Johnson dijohnso@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The long-term objective of this project is to understand the
              signal-transduction mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis during the
              eukaryotic cell cycle.  Normal morphogenesis, the process by which the complex,
              three-dimensional organization of the cell is developed and maintained, is
              essential for the fidelity of cellular differentiation and reproduction.  The
              goal of this project is to decipher the signal-transduction mechanisms
              controlling cell polarity process in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
              Polarized growth in response to different signals during the yeast cell cycle
              can result in the generation of several different morphological structures,
              such as buds, mating projections, and pseudohyphae.  Two protein components of
              the cell polarity apparatus in yeast; the Ras-related GTPase Cdc42p and its
              guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Cdc24p have previously been
              characterized in this laboratory.  These components are integral parts of a
              signal-transduction pathway that leads to the generation of cell polarity
              during the cell cycle.  These components have conserved counterparts in other
              eukaryotes, suggesting that common signal-transduction mechanisms controlling
              cell polarity may exist.  

The specific aims of this project are directed at
              understanding the regulation of the Cdc42p GTPase and how it interfaces with
              different cell-cycle regulatory processes.  The hypotheses that will be tested
              with these experiments are:  1). Initiation of cell polarity signaling depends
              on localized targeting of Cdc24p but not Cdc42p; and  2). Cdc42p is activated
              and de-activated during the cell cycle.  Cdc24p is targeted to the nucleus and
              sites of polarized growth at specific times in the cell cycle.  However, recent
              data suggest a paradigm shift in which Cdc42p is localized around the entire
              periphery of the cell throughout the cell cycle and enriched at sites of
              polarized growth after activation.  To better understand this critical
              regulatory process, the targeting mechanisms for both Cdc24p and Cdc42p will be
              determined using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged wild-type and mutant
              proteins. S. cerevisiae  Cdc42p is activated by the Cdc24p GEF and de-activated
              through the action of the Bem3p, Rga1p, and Rga2p GTPase-activating proteins
              (GAPs).  Recent studies from this laboratory suggest that Cdc24p activates
              Cdc42p at multiple stages of the cell cycle, most probably prior to bud
              emergence in G 1 phase and cytokinesis in M phase.  If so, then Cdc42p is
              likely to be de-activated in the intervening time frames by the action of its
              GAPs.  The cell-cycle specific localization of individual GAPs will be
              investigated using GFP-tagged proteins. The answers to these questions will not
              only be relevant to the basic understanding of signal-transduction mechanisms
              in cell biology, but also to the understanding of the cellular morphogenesis
              process in yeast as well as in other eukaryotes.  

