Title       : Mode-Selective Differential Scattering Studies of Ion-Molecule Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0110318

Award Number: 0110318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Anderson anderson@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Scott L. Anderson of the University of Utah is funded for his research on
              mode-selective differential scattering studies of ion-molecule reaction
              dynamics by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.  This
              scattering technique will be used, in conjunction with theory, to elucidate the
              detailed mechnisms for reaction of polyatomic cations.  Reactions of
              formaldehyde cation will be used to probe the effects of collisional energy and
              vibrations on resulting chemistry, and direct-dynamics simulations of the
              reaction dynamics will be done in collaboration with Dr. William Hase. 
              Synchrotron radiation studies of reactions of water with other small cations,
              not amenable to laboratory state-selection, will be made in collaboration with
              Dr. Cheuk Ng and Dr. Rainer Dressler.  REMPI photoelectron spectroscopy probing
              Rydberg state properties and developing new cation state-selection routes will
              be done, and the reactions of these ions will be studied.  

Reaction
              dynamics among polyatomic molecules generally depend on kinetic energy and upon
              how internal energy is partitioned among internal degrees of freedom.  Laser
              excitation and ion scattering methods will be used to tune selected reactants
              to various states of excitation and the resulting collision and reaction
              dynamics will be experimentally measured and theoretically calculated and
              simulated.  These studies will provide critically important advances in our
              understanding of important gas-phase reactions important in combustion and
              interstellar chemistries.

