Title       : The Wnt Pathway and Inductive Competence in Early Xenopus Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0110893

Award Number: 0110893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Wilson pawilson@med.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110893
Wilson

Inductive signals between cell populations govern much of
              embryonic development.  A central feature of these interactions is changing
              competence:  the response of cells to particular signaling ligands evolves in a
              complex and precisely regulated manner.  The long-term goal of the proposed
              research is to understand the molecular basis of competence, using changing
              responses to Wnt signaling in early Xenopus development as a model.  In the
              first hours of Xenopus development, activation of the Wnt signaling pathway
              drives formation of the dorsal axis;  only a few hours later, this response is
              lost, and the pathway instead functions in mesodermal and neural patterning. 
              The objectives of the current project are to understand why an important target
              gene, siamois, is activated by early but not by late Wnt signaling, and to tie
              competence of the Wnt pathway to induce this gene to the broader embryological
              response, dorsal axis formation. Using a simple promoter-reporter assay, the
              siamois promoter will be analyzed to identify sequence elements important in
              the loss of Wnt responsiveness at later stages.  Competence of siamois itself
              to induce a dorsal axis will then be examined using inducible activated and
              inhibitory versions of siamois, thus linking the regulation of this gene to
              axis induction competence.  Both aims will make use of a newly developed tool
              for inducible stimulation of Wnt responses, consisting of a
              dexamethasone-inducible, activated form of XTCF3, a DNA-binding protein known
              to mediate transcriptional responses to Wnt signaling.  This work will
              contribute to elucidating the mechanism of inductive competence, an important
              and long-standing problem in developmental biology.

