Title       : ITR/AP: Forward and Inverse Conditional Moment Algorithms for Flow and Transport
               in Multiscale, Randomly Heterogeneous Hydrogeologic Environments Under
               Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0110289

Award Number: 0110289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shlomo P. Neuman neuman@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1579,1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0110289
Neuman

To efficiently utilize and protect subsurface water supplies,
              one must quantify fluid flow and solute transport in complex hydrogeologic
              environments. Such environments exhibit random spatial variations in hydraulic
              and transport properties on a multiplicity of scales. The trend has been to
              describe this variability geostatistically and to analyze subsurface fluid flow
              and solute transport stochastically. The common method of stochastic analysis
              is computational Monte Carlo simulation. We propose an alternative, which
              allows one to compute leading multiscale conditional ensemble moments of
              groundwater flow and transport directly on the basis of nonlocal
              (integro-differential) equations that are distribution free. The approach rests
              on a body of work published by the PI, his students and coworkers over the last
              few years. It provides forward predictions of flow but not transport,
              conditioned on measurements of hydraulic conductivity but not head or
              concentration. We propose to fill these gaps by developing a forward
              computational algorithm for transport and inverse algorithms for both flow and
              transport, within a multiscale framework proposed by us recently. No such
              inverse or multiscale algorithms presently exist, and their development would
              constitute an important conceptual and algorithmic breakthrough. In particular,
              our objectives are to develop, within a multiscale stochastic framework, (1) an
              inverse algorithm that allows conditioning moments equations of steady state
              groundwater flow on measured hydraulic head and conductivity; (2) a
              high-accuracy forward conditional moment algorithm to predict advective solute
              transport in random steady state velocity fields, and to assess prediction
              errors; and (3) an inverse algorithm that allows conditioning moments equations
              of advective solute transport on measured concentration, hydraulic head and
              conductivity.

