Title       : Testing the Reverse-splicing Model of Intron Spread with rDNA Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0110252

Award Number: 0110252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debashish Bhattacharya dbhattac@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin R. Gutell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francois M. Lutzoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Debashish Bhattacharya at the University of Iowa
              to determine how intervening sequences (so-called "introns") spread into novel
              sites in genes.  Introns compose a significant portion of genomes (about 16% in
              humans) and play important roles in gene expression and disease, yet their
              means of spread remains unknown.  This is because few proven cases of recent
              and widespread intron spread have been documented.  The finding of a wealth of
              recently inserted introns in the ribosomal (r)RNA genes of Euascomycetes fungi
              makes these organisms ideal for the study of intron spread.  Previous work
              shows that a good candidate for the mechanism by which introns get incorporated
              into genes is by reversal of the splicing process.  The rRNAs of a diverse
              group of Euascomycetes will be studied to test predictions of the
              "reverse-splicing" model such as the expectation that introns are
              preferentially retained at target gene sequences that have a high affinity for
              splicing factors and that introns are non-randomly distributed, with most of
              them clustering in regions that are not buried in RNA tertiary structure. 
              Introns play important roles in the evolution of eukaryotic genomes and are
              implicated in diseases.  For example, about 15% of point mutations that are
              linked to human genetic disease cause defects in the splicing of introns.  It
              is surprising, therefore, that no general model of intron spread exists.  In
              this grant, the recent finding of widespread introns in the nuclear rDNA of
              Euascomycetes fungi is exploited to address the issue of intron spread.  An
              important strength of the fungal system is the availability of robust secondary
              and tertiary rRNA structures. This allows the testing of the role of RNA
              structure in determining intron distribution, an analysis that cannot be done
              with most pre-mRNAs which have largely unknown folding properties.

