Title       : Geographies of Occupational Attainment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0110497

Award Number: 0110497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129986             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Harrington jwh@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How a worker comes to claim a particular occupation in a particular place, or
              how a place comes to contain a cadre of workers with a particular occupation,
              are vitally important economic and social questions.  This research takes an
              institutional approach to the individual's gaining and using
              occupation-specific skills and to the local availability of occupation-specific
              labor.  The objective of the research project is to compare the sources (by
              type and location) of computer programmers' training across regions, industrial
              sectors, and personal characteristics.  The research will first use secondary
              data such as censuses to investigate the relationships between rates of
              occupational attainment and various institutional factors for all Metropolitan
              Statistical Areas in the United States.  Case studies of five mid-sized
              metropolitan areas with a high proportion of programmers will be made via phone
              and in-person interviews with key employers and institutional leaders.  The key
              questions to be investigated are: sex and race; current employment arrangement
              and tenure; approximate age and location at which the individual gained
              original training as a programmer; motivations for occupational and locational
              choices;  earlier careers and parents' occupations;  and incidence and
              sponsorship of further training.  The information from both types of interviews
              will be used to relate local characteristics of labor-force size, employer
              size, employment practices, and growth rates to the locations and ways in which
              programmers gained and maintained their skills. 

For anyone in the labor
              force, one's occupation and one's location largely determine one's employment
              outcomes.  For the region, the local availability of trained workers is key to
              local economic well-being.  This project provides an understanding of the
              general process between location and occupational attainment.  In addition, the
              proposed project selects one particular occupation, computer programmer, that
              has been the object of much interest and debate.  The contribution of the
              proposed research lies in its combination of: recognition of institutional
              influences on individual behavior and regional outcomes; attention to training
              and migration decisions; attention to the paths of women and minorities within
              an occupation dominated by white men; and secondary data for all metropolitan
              regions as well as exploratory, interview data in five specific regions. 


