Title       : SBIR Phase II: Material Processing for Optimizing the Performance of an Embedded
               Bragg Grating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0110490

Award Number: 0110490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Battle battle@advr-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AdvR
	      910 Technology Blvd Suite K
	      Bozeman, MT  59718    406/522-0388

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable
              the fabrication of waveguides in potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) containing
              Bragg gratings with specified spectral and electro-optic characteristics. 
              These characteristics include reflectivity, bandwidth, central wavelength, and
              electro-optic tuning range.  To achieve this goal, the relationship between the
              processing steps used to form the Bragg grating and its resulting spectral and
              electro-optic properties will be fully quantified.  The ability to control the
              spectral characteristics and electro-optically tune these gratings will enable
              a broad range of new and commercially useful devices.  Using the processing
              steps developed, an array of Bragg gratings will be fabricated with each
              grating optimized for stabilizing the wavelength of a laser diode.  Translating
              the waveguide array with respect to the laser diode will tune its wavelength.
              This novel tuning technique will have significant technical and cost advantages
              over other tuning techniques.

Potential commercial applications include
              tunable filters for active dispersion compensation, high-speed add/drop filters
              for wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), and a broadly tunable source for
              test and evaluation of network components.  Other applications include
              stabilizing laser diodes for spectroscopy, seeding high power lasers, and
              frequency doubled diode-based replacement lasers for low power Argon-Ion and
              helium cadmium (HeCd) lasers.

