Title       : Alpine Treeline Stability: Mechanisms of Conifer Tree Seedling Establishment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0110917

Award Number: 0110917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Smith smithwk@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Vogelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      1834 Wake Forest Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27106    336/758-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	
If current projections of climate warming are accurate, future global change
              will include the disappearance of a significant portion of the Earth's
              biodiversity during the 21st century, e.g. alpine tundra ecosystems in
              temperate and subtropical latitudes may be replaced by the subalpine forest
              below.  Despite these predictions, mechanistic explanations for the upper
              elevational limits of subalpine forests across the globe have been pondered for
              over a century, and are still controversial today.  The stability of this
              alpine treeline will be evaluated based on the ecophysiology of tree seedling
              establishment away from the forest edge and into the subalpine-alpine ecotone
              by the two dominant conifers, Abies lasiocarpa (subalpine fir) and Picea
              engelmannii (Engelmann spruce).  Paradoxically, sunlight exposure during the
              day and leaf warming can enhance photosynthesis and growth in most plant
              species, while prior exposure to a clear, cold night sky (longwave thermal
              radiation sink) leads to lower minimum leaf temperatures, a major limiting
              factor at high elevation.  In combination, low leaf temperatures at night
              followed by high sunlight the following morning can result in potentially
              severe low temperature photoinhibition of photosynthesis (LTP) and substantial
              reductions in carbon assimilation.  It is hypothesized that this decrease in
              carbon assimilation is due primarily to excessive sky exposure and LTP,
              resulting in inadequate carbon gain to support the root growth necessary to
              survive rapidly drying soils following spring runoff.  In addition, the timing
              and degree of mycorrhizal infection of fine roots may also play a vital role in
              preventing lethal water stress.  Three primary venues for adaptation are
              proposed for seedling establishment under such a multiple stress regime: (i)
              microsite facilitation, (ii) seedling architecture, and (iii) photosynthetic
              physiology.  The relative effectiveness of each of these adaptive venues for
              seedling establishment will be evaluated quantitatively from field measurements
              on photosynthesis, growth, and survival.  If the hypotheses linking greater sky
              exposure to lower minimums in leaf temperature, greater LTP, less carbon gain
              and root growth, and lower seedling survival (desiccation death) are correct,
              conifer tree seedling establishment in this treeline ecotone could flourish
              under current scenarios of global warming and, thus, lead to the encroachment
              of subalpine forest and the potential loss of alpine tundra ecosystems.

