Title       : Coevolution Between Slavemaking Ants and Their Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2002     
File        : a0110482

Award Number: 0110482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Herbers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Coevolution between slavemaking ants and their hosts
Joan M.
              Herbers

Slavemaking ants are "social parasites" that can survive only by
              capturing worker pupae from another species. Those captured workers hatch out
              in the slavemaker nest and start to forage, clean, feed the larvae, and so on.
              The slavemaker ants do virtually nothing except find other colonies of host
              species. When the slavemakers find a host colony, they stage a "slave raid" in
              which they enter the host nest, injure or maim those defending their nest, and
              remove pupae to return to their own slavemaking nest. We have uncovered
              geographic variation in how these two species interact: in a site near Albany,
              New York, slavemakers are extremely fierce and hosts resist raids strongly. By
              contrast, the interaction in a site in mountainous West Virginia is more
              benign; slavemakers kill few hosts during a raid, and the hosts themselves
              offer little resistance. In a third site near Burlington, Vermont, the ants
              show characteristics intermediate between these two extremes. The powerful
              tools of molecular ecology will be used uncover how often slave raids end in
              death of the host, how many slave raids a given slavemaker nest mounts in a
              year, and what the impact on their host population is. Second, mounting slave
              raids between ants parasites and hosts collected from the same site versus
              different sites will offer insight to how localized interactions can be.
              Finally, the genetic, ecological, and behavioral will be analyzed in terms of
              the "coevolutionary arms race" metaphor that has proven useful in studies of
              other parasite-host relationships.

