Title       : Functional Analysis of the Sorghum Transcriptome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0110140

Award Number: 0110140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3576196            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee H. Pratt   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Mullet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia E. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Gingle  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Members of the grass family (Poaceae) constitute, directly or indirectly, the
              most important food source for humans.  Sorghum, which is a member of this
              family, possesses several characteristics that make it ideal for genome-scale
              investigations.  It is a diploid plant, has a haploid genome of moderate size
              (~750 Mb), is the fifth most important cereal crop worldwide, and is unusually
              well adapted to harsh environments, including high temperature, drought and low
              nutrient availability.  Moreover, it has already been the subject of intensive
              investigations, providing a solid background of information on which to base
              future work.  This prior work includes creation of well developed genetic and
              physical maps, the potential for transformation, demonstrated synteny with
              other important cereals, and well characterized physiology.  This research
              program is designed to develop and utilize genome-scale tools that will
              identify beneficial genes/alleles and potentially unique mechanisms for
              improving plant function in adverse environments.

Initial work has
              identified a sorghum unigene set in excess of 14,000 members, has resulted in
              the deposition of approximately 100,000 ESTs in public databases, and has led
              to the development of a comprehensive Oracle relational database that is
              managed and accessed through a web browser.  Through the integration of efforts
              at The University of Georgia and Texas A & M University the size of this
              unigene set will be augmented while characterizing further the sorghum
              transcriptome, and genome function will be explored by coordinated microarray
              experiments.  Specifically, 50,000 cDNAs selected both randomly and after
              virtual subtraction will be picked from 10 new libraries.  The libraries will
              be enriched in full-length sequences.  Each cDNA will be sequenced at both ends
              and data will be deposited in both GenBank and our own relational database. 
              Together with existing sequences, the data will be mined to determine features
              of 3' and 5' untranslated regions and the frequency and possible significance
              of alternative splicing.  An enlarged set of ~20,000 unique members ("unigene
              set") will be assembled and annotated.  Unigenes will be linked whenever
              possible to an integrated sorghum genetic/physical map.  Microarray experiments
              will be designed to permit the construction of a compendium of gene expression
              profiles while simultaneously answering specific biological questions. 
              Well-characterized genotypes will be investigated to explore relationships
              between genome expression, light perception and flowering time and to
              characterize pre- and post-flowering responses to drought in contrasting
              genotypes.  The current relational database will be expanded to include all
              relevant information about experimental parameters, phenotype, and other
              parameters, as well as the microarray data themselves.

Specific deliverable
              outcomes include the following.  The unigene set is to be augmented by 6,000
              new members, many or most of which will be full-length.  In addition, numerous
              full-length genes belonging to already identified unigenes will be identified. 
              Clones comprising this set will be available as a public resource.  A
              thoroughly annotated collection of microarray data, assembled following
              emerging guidelines, will similarly be made available as a public resource that
              will be available for extensive mining extending well beyond the end of this
              project.  Bioinformatic approaches will be used to identify genes and gene
              networks that play a role in drought tolerance, as well as in light perception
              and flowering time.  The value of the database developed by this project will
              be enhanced further by integration into it of data deriving from other research
              efforts.

