Title       : RUI: Neural Regulation of Metamorphosis in a Gastropod Mollusc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0110832

Award Number: 0110832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Pires pires@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pires
0110832

Abstract
Metamorphosis is a profoundly important transition
              in the life history of most animals. The passage from a larval to juvenile form
              entails destruction of some tissues, respecification of others and generation
              of new structures. In larvae of gastropod molluscs and in a diverse range of
              larvae from other phyla, metamorphosis is initiated by a chemical signal from
              the environment. The chemosensory induction of gastropod metamorphosis, its
              stereotyped behavioral context and the neuromuscular nature of some morphogenic
              movements, and the rapidity of morphological change all suggest pervasive
              control by the larval nervous system. However, very little is known of the
              mechanisms by which the nervous system can direct dramatic morphological change
              at the level of the entire organism.  Dr. Pires will investigate the neural
              control of metamorphosis in the gastropod, Crepidula fornicata, focusing on
              neural signaling in the destruction of the larval velum. This ciliated swimming
              and feeding organ is precipitously shed by loss of adhesion among and between
              several types of velar cells within minutes after competent larvae come in
              contact with the natural cue that induces metamorphosis. The large ciliated
              cells that line the margin of the velum are the first to detach in
              metamorphosis, are electrically excitable, and have been shown in other
              gastropods to carry a synaptically-driven calcium-mediated action potential
              that causes arrest of ciliary beating. These cilia are arrested in C. fornicata
              and other gastropods in the moments before destruction of the velum visibly
              begins, yet no studies have investigated the mechanistic relationship between
              electrical activity in the velum and the loss of cell adhesion that occurs in
              metamorphosis. Previous work by Dr. Pires and others has implicated endogenous
              dopamine as a neuromodulator that potentiates metamorphosis, but its effects on
              signaling in the velum are unexplored.  There is also evidence that hydrogen
              peroxide or other reactive oxygen species are generated in the metamophosing
              velum and can induce velar destruction if exogenously applied, but it is not
              known if reactive oxygen species have a necessary signaling role in a neural
              mechanism that mediates velar destruction in natural metamorphosis.
Dr. Pires
              will exploit the large size and predictably fast metamorphosis of C. fornicata
              larvae, and take advantage of microsurgical methods that he developed for
              working with isolated velar tissues. Dr. Pires and his students will apply
              intracellular and extracellular electrophysiological techniques as well as
              pharmacological, histochemical and high-performance liquid chromatographic
              methods to analyze how neural signals effect a rapid loss of cell adhesion in
              the metamorphosing velum. This project affords undergraduate research students
              an unusual opportunity to engage in developmental neuroscience that cuts across
              several levels of biological organization. An important further training
              dimension of this project is that summer work will take place at the University
              of Washington's Friday Harbor Laboratories, where undergraduates will be
              immersed in a rich and exhilarating scientific community at a time when they
              will be making decisions about future research careers.


