Title       : 3D Structure and Function of the Mammalian Kinetochore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0110821

Award Number: 0110821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $656408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. McEwen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In eukaryotic cell division, the partitioning of daughter chromosomes into the
              daughter cells is achieved by attachment of the chromosomes to microtubules
              which then move the chromosomes apart prior to cytokinesis. The site of
              attachment of the microtubules to the chromosomes is a morphologically and
              biochemically distinctive chromosomal region called the kinetochore.  Recent
              work by Dr. McEwen, employing state-of-the-art preservation and high resolution
              imaging technologies, has challenged the "trilaminar" morphological model of
              the kinetochore that has been accepted in the field for the past thiry years,
              and which was probably inaccurate due to fixation artifacts inherent in
              conventional fixation protocols.  Now,Dr. McEwen's long-range goal is to define
              a high-resolution structural map of the mammalian kinetochore that explains and
              predicts functional mechanisms. The research combines state-of-the-art methods
              of light and electron microscopy with molecular approaches to compute the
              structural map and obtain functional characterization of key kinetochore
              components. The current project has four objectives, listed below.
Research
              Objective 1. Establish a prototype high-resolution 3D structural map of the
              mammalian kinetochore. 1a: Identify key features of the kinetochore and look
              for evidence of a subunit structure. 1b. Test the hypothesis that the
              kinetochore has discrete structural domains that dynamically respond to
              microtubule attachment and deprivation, and that an enlarged outer domain is
              correlated with promiscuous microtubule capture and a high incidence of
              aneuploidy.
Research Objective 2. Test three hypotheses concerning the
              molecular role of CENP-E in mitosis. 2a: CENP-E has a role in maintaining the
              stability of kinetochore microtubule attachments. 2b: CENP-E prevents
              monooriented chromosomes from over-traveling poleward into the spindle pole.
              2c: CENP-E is not required for release of the anaphase onset
              checkpoint.
Research objective 3. Test the hypotheses that CENP-E function is
              redundant with ZW10/dynein in binding kinetochore microtubules, and opposes
              dynein in poleward motion.
Research objective 4. Test the hypothesis that the
              kinetochore is sequentially assembled, with kinetochore proteins CENP-C and
              BUB1 being required for complete assembly.

This research project will
              provide important and significant new information on the complexities of
              kinetochore structure and function.  It will fill a major gap in our present
              knowledge of how molecular components of the kinetochore are arranged and how
              they interact with other components of the cell division apparatus.

