Title       : QEIB: A Comprehensive Theory of Mating Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0110506

Award Number: 0110506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84788              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne H. Alonzo shalonzo@ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
A general theory of reproductive behavior is imperative both to our basic
              understanding of evolutionary processes as well as our ability to manage
              threatened species.  Although recent developments have greatly increased our
              understanding of mating systems, it has left us without a comprehensive theory
              for predicting and explaining general patterns of reproduction.  A variety of
              important biological factors have been treated in isolation from one another,
              although we know that each one is critical to our understanding of evolution. 
              A more comprehensive approach is necessary if we wish to explain such varied
              observations as females mating with multiple males in the absence of sperm
              limitation and a skewed mating distribution where no known male or territory
              trait explains success.  Interactions within and between the sexes, spatial and
              temporal dynamics of reproduction, environmental variation are all be essential
              components of a comprehensive theory of mating systems.  Although each of these
              elements has been addressed to some degree in isolation, we have not examined
              the connections between each of these factors to the evolution of specific
              mating behaviors.  For example, resource dispersion and variability in social
              conditions will affect interactions between individuals.   Concurrently
              stochasticity in critical resources will influence both the interactions
              between individuals as well as their spatial dispersion.  Furthermore, although
              we are interested in population-level consequences, interactions only occur
              between individuals that encounter one another in space and time.  To create a
              general theory, we need a framework which allows us to examine multiple
              interactions within and between the sexes as well as consider the importance of
              environmental conditions and spatial dynamics.  The complexity of these
              interactions demand mathematical modeling.  Dynamic programming games make it
              possible to consider the effect of an individual's social and ecological
              environment on reproductive behavior.  I propose a new approach which makes it
              possible to simultaneously study a variety of phenomena that interact to create
              mating systems and determine reproductive strategies. This method will be used
              to study general models examining the interactions between stochasticity,
              space, and conflict on specific mating behaviors.  Yet, theory is not better
              simply because it is more complex.  Instead, the approach I am advocating will
              also be verified by its ability to increase our understanding of observed
              variation.   Their ability to explain observed behavior will not only increase
              our understanding of a single species but also have general implications for
              our understanding of mating systems. 

