Title       : GabR - A Novel Pyridoxal 5'-Phosphate-Dependent Transcriptional Regulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0110651

Award Number: 0110651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris R. Belitsky bbelit02@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goals of the present project are designed to investigate the molecular
              mechanism of regulation of the pathway of glutamate generation from
              gamma-aminobutyrate (GABA) in Bacillus subtilis.  The most interesting
              component of this pathway is GabR, a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)- and
              GABA-dependent transcriptional activator that regulates expression of an operon
              that encodes two enzymes of GABA utilization.  GabR is a member of a novel
              family of unusual proteins that apparently evolved by joining a DNA-binding
              domain to an aminotransferase domain.  Of particular interest is the
              requirement for PLP (an essential catalytic cofactor of aminotransferases) and
              the apparent PLP-binding site of GabR for transcriptional activation.  The
              preliminary data indicate that, in order to activate expression of the target
              genes, GabR performs (at least) a partial aminotransferase reaction.  The main
              goal of the project will be to show that GabR activity as a transcriptional
              activator is modulated by GabR-catalyzed transamination of its cofactor PLP,
              using GABA as an amino group donor.  This goal will be achieved by analyzing
              interactions between GabR and its coactivators, by utilizing structural analogs
              of PLP and GABA, and by characterization of mutant GabR proteins defective in
              transcription activation or able to activate transcription constitutively. 
              GabR properties as a specific DNA-binding protein will be characterized.  GabR
              will be the first member of this protein family to be subjected to detailed
              biochemical and molecular analysis and will provide clues to the mechanism of
              action of other GabR-like proteins.  Because the aminotransferase reaction
              requires an amino group-containing substrate, the prediction is that all
              GabR-like proteins have such compounds as their effectors.
