Title       : Physiology and Function of Sensory Feedback Loops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0110607

Award Number: 0110607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang O. Friesen wof@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract

	Animal locomotion results from the intricate interplay between
              connections within the nervous system and sense organs that monitor the
              execution of commands from the central nervous system. For animals that swim by
              undulating the whole body, sensory receptors detect body bending and transmit
              that information to the central nervous system, where the 'commanded' and
              realized movements are compared and compensatory actions are orchestrated. Much
              is already known about the neuronal wiring diagrams for some behaviors and
              about relevant sensory structures, but the nature of the connections between
              the two is largely unknown. The experiments funded by this grant are designed
              to advance the understanding of interactions between stretch receptors in the
              body wall, their connections with the central nervous system, and the
              importance of these interactions in generating an optimal body shape during
              locomotion.

	Experiments are conducted on animal preparations and on
              isolated central nervous systems with two approaches. One approach is
              electrophysiological, with the aim of describing stretch-sensitive receptors in
              greater detail and to map their interactions with neurons in the central
              nervous system. The other is a 'systems' approach, with experiments designed to
              test the functional importance of the stretch receptors for swimming movements.
              Electrophysiological experiments to map neuronal interactions are conducted
              with standard extracellular and intracellular recording techniques. Systems
              experiments, employing similar techniques, include tests of whether stretch
              receptors form oscillatory circuits with the central nervous system and of the
              nature of intersegmental mechanical interactions. Because there is significant
              functional similarity between swimming and related locomotory movements in all
              animals, insights gained from this research will be widely applicable
              throughout the animal kingdom.


