Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Charge-Charge Interactions in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0110396

Award Number: 0110396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Makhatadze   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the mechanisms of stabilization of protein structure represents
              one of the major
aspects of the protein folding problem. The contributions of
              various short-range interactions,
such as hydrogen bonding, the hydrophobic
              effect, and configurational entropy, to protein
stability have been well
              documented. However, it is becoming more and more evident that the
long-range
              electrostatic interactions between charged protein groups are also
              important
contributors to protein structure and stability. The proposed work
              has an overall goal to explore
the relation between the charge-charge
              interactions on the protein surface and the protein
stability by engineering 
              a thermostable protein by redesigning the charge-charge interactions on
              the
protein surface, and analyzing  the optimized charge-charge interactions. 
              

The theoretical part of the work is based on the calculation of the
              charge-charge
interactions in proteins using Tanford-Kirkwood approach with
              Bashford-Karplus approximation
(TK-BK procedure). The experimental measurement
              of the stabilities of the protein variants
designed using TK-BK predictions
              will be done using differential scanning calorimetry, or using
chemical (urea)
              induced denaturation monitored by the changes in the circular dichroism
              or
fluorescence intensity properties. The fundamental importance of this
              research is that
using a combination of theoretical calculations and
              experimental measurements the relationship
between charge-charge interactions
              and the protein stability will be explored. From the practical
point this
              research will provide the foundation for the design of proteins stable at
              extreme
temperatures. This will benefit the industrial use of proteins where
              thermostability of enzymes is
in many cases the largest obstacle.
