Title       : Mechanistic Organic Chemistry of Relevance to the Interstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0110769

Award Number: 0110769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. McMahon mcmahon@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Robert J. McMahon, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Wisconsin - Madison, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program for his studies directed toward the elucidation of the identity,
              structure, properties, and reactivity of organic molecules that occur in
              interstellar space. A combination of experimental and computational
              investigations are focused on organic species that are either known to or are
              likely to exist in the interstellar medium. These organic species will be
              generated in the laboratory, and their molecular structure investigated by
              infrared, ultraviolet/visible, electron spin resonance, and microwave
              spectrometry. In order to address the question of the existence of cyclic,
              aromatic species in interstellar space, as well as the mechanisms for their
              formation from acyclic molecules whose existence has been demonstrated, the
              fundamental chemical mechanisms by which open-chain organic molecules undergo
              ring closure will be investigated. Additional studies will attempt to detect
              aromatic species and their precursors in the interstellar medium through a
              combination of laboratory rotational spectroscopy and subsequent
              radio-astronomical searches.

The origin of the so-called "diffuse
              interstellar bands" has been described as one of the fundamental problems in
              modern astronomy and molecular spectroscopy. At the present time, it is not
              known with certainty whether cyclic species displaying the unusual
              stabilization known as aromaticity exist in interstellar space and, if so, how
              these species can be formed from the acyclic molecules that are known to exist
              there. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
              Professor Robert J. McMahon, of the Department of Chemistry at the University
              of Wisconsin - Madison, is carrying out a combination of experimental and
              calculational studies designed to address these questions. By preparing acyclic
              precursors to aromatic species and examining their structure and reactivity,
              Professor McMahon explores the fundamental reaction chemistry which could occur
              in interstellar space. By probing these species with a variety of spectroscopic
              techniques, he both elucidates their structures and provides spectroscopic
              "signatures" which may be sought in the interstellar medium, providing evidence
              for the existence (or absence) of these species.
