Title       : Dissertation Research: Common Property-Uncommon Interests: Pastoral resource
               management and eco-tourism in the Reserva de Huascaran, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a0110294

Award Number: 0110294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Winterhalder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research in ecological anthropology studies the factors
              affecting traditional pasture use and common property management in a highland
              biosphere reserve in Ancash, Peru.  The project studies the interaction of
              ecotourism and pastoral land use among subsistence-based agro-pastoral
              households.  The theories explored in the research contribute to our
              understanding of individual decision-making, common property resource
              management, and conservation in mixed subsistence-market economies.  Hypotheses
              will be tested that link changes in herd size and composition to incentives
              generated by the ecotourism industry; specifically that household earnings are
              being invested in livestock and that the preference is shifting toward animals
              suited for the portering and transport services demanded by visiting tourists. 
              Household surveys of market participation, monetary income and livestock
              ownership will help to track recent changes in herd size and composition
              associated with recent changes in household economic activity.  The study will
              extend the analysis of subsistence-market articulation by considering how the
              socio-economic changes associated with market involvement affect the use of
              common property pastures located in the core-protected area of the reserve.
              Hypotheses will be tested that link decisions regarding the use of common
              property pastures to differences in household wealth and labor, and will
              additionally explore how existing common property institutions manage the
              resource use of diverse households.  The spatial and temporal herding behaviors
              of sample households will be assessed by participant observation and time
              allocation data, which will be linked to an existing geographic information
              system.  Observations of spatial and temporal herding behaviors will be
              supplemented by vegetation/soil analyses of common property pastures. This
              research will contribute to an understanding of the ecology of resource use at
              different scales of the household, community, and landscape; as well as further
              ongoing debates about the sustainability of development options common to many
              biosphere reserves. It will also contribute to the training of a young social
              scientist and advance our knowledge about this important highland region.

