Title       : The Kahler Ricci flow and the extremal Kahler metrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0110321

Award Number: 0110321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiu Xiong Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract for DMS - 0110321

This projects mainly deals with some central
              issues
in Kaehler geometry: the uniqueness and existence of extremal
              Kaehler
metrics and as well how to obtain such a solution. On the
              Kaehler
Ricci flow problem,  I am working  with G. Tian. Our main
              results
are:  in any Kaehler-Einstein manifolds, if the initial metric has
              positive
bisectional curvature, then the flow converges exponentially to
              a
unique Kaehler-Einstein metric.  I plan to work with him to eliminate
with
              the assumption of positive bisectional curvature or the assumption
of Kaehler
              Einstein metrics. On the problem of geodesic, the main results
of my research 
              are: a) there exists a  geodesic with second derivatives
uniformly bounded,
              between any two Kaehler metrics in
a Kaehler class. A direct consequence of
              this result is that the constant
scalar curvature metric is unique in each
              Kaehler class if the first
Chern class of the manifold is negative. b) the
              space of Kaehler
metrics is a metric space and it is non-positively curved in
              the
sense of Alexandrov. On the problem of geodesic, I want to improve
              the
regularity of geodesic to  three derivatives uniformly bounded
(or to
              understand when this regularity might fail). That will be a very
important
              consequence in Kaehler geometry.


Kaehler Einstein metric arose naturally
              from Physics, algebraic geometry and
some other diverse areas of mathematics.
              Extremal Kaehler metric is a
natural generalization of these concepts by E.
              Calabi.  The method of finding these
metrics is by solving a totally nonlinear
              elliptic partial differential equation on
manifolds. Most of the time,  one
              can not find solution explicitly. Then one has to
rely on various kind a
              priori estimates to determined when there exists a solution
and if the
              solution metric should be unique.  In this project, we will develop some
new
              techniques to handle these difficult estimates. And these techniques will
have
              impact in other related problems of mathematics.

