Title       : C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals: Generation and Mechanistic Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0110588

Award Number: 0110588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amanda Bryant-Friedrich friedric@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this Minority Research Planning Grant Professor Bryant-Friedrich will gain
              knowledge and know-how related to the field of oxidative nucleic acid damage.
              She will also develop methodologies for the synthesis of modified nucleosides
              and nucleotides that function as C-3'-radical precursors in oligonucleotide
              systems. A foundation for the proposed research will be built by attending
              several conferences on radiation damage to DNA and on the biology of aging.
              These conferences will bring together practitioners in the field with expertise
              in chemistry, physics, biology and medicine. This will allow interaction with
              US and foreign researchers who investigate not only the mechanism of DNA damage
              but also those who study the actual induction process, the nature, structure,
              and distribution of DNA damage, as well as cellular effects and repair
              processes. The above interactions will be used as background information to
              establish a research program which focuses on the use of synthetic organic,
              physical organic, ahd bioorganic techniques for the independent generation of
              nucleoside radicals and the identification of the products that result from the
              degradation of these radical species. It will be necessary to synthesize
              precursors containing a wide variety of naturally occurring nucleobases as well
              as modified bases. These modified derivatives will be used in monomer
              experiments to determine the conditions necessary for efficient generation of
              the desired radicals, focusing on reaction times, solvents, proper derivatives,
              etc. When these details are established, further modification of the monomers
              will be carried out to facilitate their use in automated DNA synthesis. The
              work proposed by Professor Amanda Bryant-Friedrich in her proposal entitled
              "C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals: Generation and Mechanistic Investigations"  is
              enthusiastically supported.
