Title       : Genetically Directed Syntheses of New Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0110437

Award Number: 0110437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Tirrell tirrell@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The statistical nature of step and chain growth polymerization processes ensures
              that the products of such reactions must be heterogeneous.  Conventional
              p9olymeric materials therefore consist of complex mixtures of chains, often
              characterized by broad distributions of chain length, sequence and
              stereochemistry.  In many materials applications, this kind of molecular
              heterogeneity is acceptable, and in some applications it is advantageous,
              insofar as it may suppress crystallization and preserve desirable properties
              such as optical clarity, elasticity or ease of processing.  On the other hand,
              synthetic developments that have afforded improved control of macromolecular
              architecture, such as Ziegler-Natta catalysis and living polymerization, have
              had profound impact on polymer science and technology.
%%%
Over the past
              decade, several laboratories - including the PI's - have exploited the capacity
              of the protein biosynthetic apparatus of bacterial cells to make new
              macromolecular materials characterized by essentially complete control of
              molecular architecture.  The most important advantages of this method appear to
              lie in two areas: i). In the integration of material properties with biological
              function, and ii). In the design and fabrication of small-scale structures
              (sometimes called nanostructures), in which  uniformity of  molecular
              architecture is critical.  This proposal addresses the latter objective, with a
              specific focus on the assembly behavior of systems containing monodisperse
              macromolecular rods related to poly (g-benzyl a,L-glutamate) (PBLG).  This
              research is co-funded by the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials
              Research and the Molecular Biochemistry Program in the Division of Molecular
              and Cellular Biosciences.
***

