Title       : Metalloporphyrin-Based Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0110685

Award Number: 0110685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel S. Miller jsmiller@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9239,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award, made to the University of Utah in support of Professor Joel Miller's
              research is supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry
              Division. The research deals with the design, synthesis, characterization and
              properties of metalloporphyrin-based magnetic materials.The broad goals of the
              research are to understand the fundamental science that governs behavior in
              organic-based magnets, to identify new magnetic phenomena, and to to make
              organic-based magnets with enhanced and controllable critical temperatures and
              coercive fields. The research will elucidate structure-function relationships
              in the one dimensional manganeseporphyrin-tetracyanoethylene system including
              the role of the metal atoms, the pressure dependence, the photomagnetic
              response and the role of spins on the periphery of the porphyrin ligand. The
              one dimensional systems will be extended to two and three dimensions by
              covalent bonding and by supramolecular hydrogen bonded
              manganotetraphenylporphyrins.  New types of magnets will be prepared based on
              new classes of radical-ion acceptors capable of binding two manganese moieties.
               A feature of the research will be extensive collaborations with experts for
              structural and performance measurements and for computational modeling.

This
              research will provide a fundamental understanding of magnetic behavior in
              molecular and supramolecular organic magnets as well as provide more
              temperature-stable, higher field magnets. Soluble molecular magnets will
              advance thin film magneto-optical applications. Collaborations with
              international chemists and physicists will provide strong interdisciplinary
              training for students.


