Title       : Characterization of Salicylic Acid-Binding Proteins in Plant Defense Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0110272

Award Number: 0110272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Klessig dfk8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1116,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Plant disease causes an estimated loss worldwide of $100B annually. A variety
              of strategies are being developed to protect plants against disease. One
              approach is to induce the plant's own natural defenses. This strategy is
              attractive since it can provide protection against a broad spectrum of
              pathogens. Broad-spectrum resistance to a wide array of pathogens, know as
              systemic acquired resistance (SAR), can be activated by infection with a
              pathogen or treatment with SAR-inducing natural chemicals such as salicylic
              acid (SA) and its synthetic functional analogues, INA or BTH. The development
              of strategies that control disease by manipulating endogenous plant defense
              responses will be very important for sustaining agricultural production and
              improving our environment and health.
It is now well established that SA plays
              a key role(s) in the development of resistance in many, but not all,
              plant-pathogen systems. While our understanding of SA function(s) in disease
              resistance is far from complete, it is becoming increasingly clear that its
              role(s) is complex. This increase in the complexity of SA function(s) in
              defense is matched by the discovery in tobacco of multiple proteins with which
              SA interacts. An understanding of SA function(s) in defense against microbial
              pathogens will require the identification and characterization of these
              proteins, the major objective of this research.  This project focuses on SABP2
              and SABP3. SABP3 was recently shown to be the tobacco carbonic anhydrase (CA)
              that is located in the chloroplasts. The first objective is the completion of
              the cloning of SABP2. The sequence of seven peptides of SABP2 have been
              obtained and are being used to clone its gene. High priority will be to
              determine SABP2's role in disease resistance. This will be done by silencing
              its expression using the PVX-based silencing system and/or by obtaining a
              knockout mutation in the corresponding gene in Arabidopsis.  The second major
              objective of this project is to determine the nature of SABP3/CA's anti-oxidant
              activity and whether SA alters this activity. Several approaches will be used.
              Currently there are available antisense CA transgenic tobacco, which have
              98-99% reduction in their carbonic anhydrase enzymatic activity. These plants
              will be tested for their sensitivity to oxidative stress and resistance to
              pathogens. In addition, the effects on tobacco SABP3/CA's anti-oxidant activity
              will be tested. For this a mutant strain of yeast, designated Dnce103, will be
              employed. Dnce103 is very sensitive to oxidative stress due to a deletion of
              its CA-like gene. SABP3/CA expressed in this mutant overcomes its sensitivity
              to oxygen. It is hoped that SA will alter SABP3/CA's effect on this mutant.

