Title       : Development of a New Ion-Molecule Reaction Dynamics Imaging Apparatus for
               Chemistry Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0110103

Award Number: 0110103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent M. Ervin ervin@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemistry
              Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Prof. Kent M. Ervin of
              the University of Nevada in Reno will develop an ion-molecule reaction dynamics
              imaging apparatus for chemistry research.  This new analytical tool will
              falicitate investigations of the dynamics and energetics of ion-molecule
              reactions.  In particular, it will allow the measurement of total reaction
              cross sections and product velocity and angular distributions for ion-molecule
              reactions with both high sensitivity and high energy and angular resolution. 
              The design calls for crossed ion and molecular pulsed beams with three major
              components:  a quadrupole ion trap source; a reflectron time-of-flight mass
              spectrometer; and a velocity mapped ion imaging detector.  

Applications
              include fundamental investigations of reaction dynamics as well as ion and
              neutral thermochemistry.  Greater accuracy and precision in energetics
              measurements will be possible compared with traditional instruments because of
              the high-resolution measurement of the kinetic energies of products.  The
              instrumentation design is potentially attractive for future analytical
              chemistry applications - for example, for on-the-fly energy-selective
              collision-induced dissociation analysis in gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
              or from electrosprayed ions in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry.  



