Title       : Characterization of Chemosensory Pathways in Cnidarians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0110550

Award Number: 0110550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Characterization of Chemosensory Pathways in Cnidarians
P. Anderson, IBN
              0110550

ABSTRACT

	The ability to detect and respond to chemical stimuli
              is a fundamental property of all organisms, and in metazoan animals,
              specialized sensory structures (chemosensory cells) and intercellular pathways
              have evolved to detect and transmit information about the chemosensory
              environment of the animal. Although different organisms may employ slightly
              different mechanisms in chemosensory pathways, the general picture that has
              emerged from research with a limited number of albeit widely separated groups
              (particularly arthropods and vertebrates) is that the underlying principles
              that govern chemosensory systems are remarkably similar.  However, very little
              attention has been paid to the earliest metazoans, the "first" animals to bear
              specialized sensory cells.  Cnidarians (sea anemones, corals and jellyfish)
              represent some of the earliest metazoans, and they are the first extant
              organisms to possess a recognizable nervous system. Thus, they are ideal
              animals with which to examine the properties of early metazoan chemosensory
              systems and, in particular, to determine whether the common mechanisms of
              chemosensory function apply to all metazoans.  This proposal seeks to examine
              chemosensory transduction in cnidarians, by studying a system that, in and of
              itself, is both fascinating and remarkable, the stinging cells of
              jellyfish.
	The sting cells or cnidocytes of jellyfish and other cnidarians
              discharge in response to near simultaneous applications of the chemical and
              mechanical stimuli that signal the presence of potential prey.  However, this
              discharge is very tightly regulated by a variety of processes, including
              chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors.  This proposal will examine chemoreceptors
              associated with cnidocytes in the tentacles of two species, the Portugese
              Man-of-War (Physalia physalis) and sea nettle (Chrysaora quinquecirrha), two
              species that are, at the very least, serious nuisances for bathers and
              fishermen.  The broad goals of this project are to understand the mechanisms
              used by those receptors to detect and transduce chemical stimuli, to convey
              that information to the cnidocytes, and identify and characterize the cellular
              events that information triggers in the cnidocytes, making them receptive to
              the subsequent mechanical stimuli that trigger discharge.  As such, this
              project will obtain basic information about chemosensory systems in early
              organisms.
	The project also has very applied goals inasmuch as information
              about the pathways and mechanisms that regulate cnidocyte discharge may provide
              useful insights into ways to inhibit cnidocyte discharge.  Such information
              could ultimately be used to develop ways to protect bathers and fishermen from
              the painful and sometimes dihabilitating stings these animals can produce.
              
	The project will provide training to at least one postdoctoral fellow, and
              to several undergraduates through the Whitney Laboratory's very active and
              successful Research Experience for Undergraduates Program.  This program has an
              excellent record of including minorities, and at least one minority student is
              expected to be trained through this project.

 

