Title       : Evolution of Eye Regression in Cavefish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0110275

Award Number: 0110275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery WJ33@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110275
Jeffery

Little is known about the remarkable evolutionary changes
              that have occurred in cave animals.  This proposal continues Dr. Jeffery's 
              research on the evolution of eye degeneration in Astyanax mexicanus, a teleost
              consisting of an eyed surface form (surface fish) and numerous conspecific
              eyeless cave forms (cavefish).  Although cavefish lack eyes as adults, they
              form small eye primordia during embryogenesis, which later arrest in
              development and degenerate.  In concert with eye degeneration, more elaborate
              feeding and gustatory systems have evolved in cavefish.  His previous grant
              resulted in three new discoveries.  First, he showed that eye degeneration has
              evolved independently in some cavefish populations.  Second, he showed that
              lens apoptosis plays a major role in eye degeneration.  Accordingly, the
              cavefish eye can be restored by transplantation of a surface fish lens
              primordium into the optic cup of a cavefish embryo.  Third, he showed that
              Pax6, a gene required for eye development, is downregulated at the anterior
              midline in cavefish embryos.  This discovery led to the hypothesis that
              cavefish exhibit enhanced midline signaling, the major focus of this proposal. 
              He now plan to test this hypothesis and the possibility that degeneration of
              eyes and elaboration of feeding and gustatory organs have evolved repeatedly in
              cavefish due to hyperactive midline signaling during embryogenesis.  The first
              objective is to determine whether cavefish embryos show hyperactive (hedgehog
              and/or nodal/TGFB) signaling at the anterior midline.  Preliminary evidence
              shows that sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene expression is enhanced at the anterior
              midline in a single cavefish population.  The second objective is to determine
              whether hyperactive midline signaling and Pax6 downregulation also occur in
              independently evolved cavefish populations.  This will indicate whether the
              same or different developmental mechanisms have been changed during cavefish
              evolution.  The third objective is to determine the effect of perturbing
              midline signaling on Pax6 expression and eye degeneration.  He will test the
              possibility that surface fish and cavefish eye phenotypes are interchangeable
              by altering the levels of midline signaling gene expression in surface fish and
              cavefish embryos.  Preliminary results show that changes in the level of Shh
              expression can phenocopy surface and cavefish. Time permitting, he will also
              determine whether eye degeneration involves changes in the organizer of
              cavefish embryos and whether there is a "developmental tradeoff" eye
              development and enhancement of feeding and gustatory systems, thus explaining
              evolutionary forces resulting in the cavefish phenotype.  He expects the
              results of this investigation to provide new insights into the mechanisms
              underlying an evolutionary change in morphology.  



