Title       : Solid State NMR Methods Applied to Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0110505

Award Number: 0110505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary P. Drobny drobny@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Castner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick S. Stayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at developing characterization tools to be used to design
              self-assembling peptides that fold into defined a-helices or b-strands at
              polymeric biomaterial surfaces. The goal is to define peptide sequences that
              direct the assembly of functional peptides/proteins onto polymeric surfaces
              when the adaptors are fused to them. The project will develop an atomic level
              picture of the secondary structure and dynamics of peptides/proteins on
              biomaterial and nanoparticle surfaces and a high-resolution structural map of
              peptide-surface interactions. Recent studies of statherin peptides on
              hydroxyapatite crystals have demonstrated that there is sufficient sensitivity
              to perform similar solid state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (ssNMR)
              characterization of peptides on a wider variety of surfaces. At the same time,
              NMR studies of peptide/protein conformation and dynamics on surfaces will be
              integrated with other spectroscopic-based surface characterization studies such
              as Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) and Time of Flight -
              Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (TOF-SIMS)  to tie together new capabilities
              for the characterization of peptide conformation, orientation, and long-range
              order on biomaterial surfaces. 

The development of strategies for
              immobilizing functionally active proteins and peptides on polymeric surfaces is
              a central aspect of the biomaterials, tissue engineering, drug delivery,
              affinity separations, and diagnostic fields. These details are crucial to
              understanding why particular materials work well or don't work well, and the
              new molecular insights will provide important design criteria based on
              knowledge of peptide/protein structure, dynamics, and assembly at polymeric
              biomaterial surfaces. Students trained in this area of biomaterials science and
              applications will compete very well for both academic and industrial jobs. This
              project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research and the
              Chemistry Division.

