Title       : Sequence, Evolution and Expression of Mitochondrial Genomes in the Genus Zea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0110168

Award Number: 0110168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2339813            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Newton NewtonK@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra W. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christiane M. Fauron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mitochondria help to turn food into chemical energy in cells of plants and
              animals. Although the nucleus contains the vast majority of the cell's genes,
              mitochondria have their own DNA, coding for proteins vital for the survival of
              cells. In animals and most plants, mitochondrial genes are inherited only
              through the female (egg) parent. Plant mitochondrial genomes are generally much
              larger and more variable than those of animals. Plant mitochondria code for
              more proteins, including ones that can interfere with the development of
              pollen. This type of infertility (which does not affect female parts of
              flowers) is called cytoplasmic male sterility (CMS).  The CMS trait can be
              exploited in the production of stronger and higher-yielding hybrid plants.
              Despite their relatively small sizes and importance, very few plant
              mitochondrial genomes have been sequenced. 

Mitochondrial protein-coding
              genes appear to be very similar in different types of plants; however, most of
              the mitochondrial DNA lies between genes and its function and origin is
              unknown. Furthermore, it appears that these "intergenic" DNA sequences have
              little in common in different plants. Therefore, in order to understand how
              rapid changes occur in plant mitochondrial DNA, we need to analyze
              mitochondrial genomes from very closely related species. We will sequence the
              mitochondrial genomes from four types of cultivated maize and one of its close
              wild relatives, as well as from two other more distantly related monocot crop
              species, Tripsacum dactyloides (eastern gamma grass) and sorghum. We will
              identify all the potential genes and look at how they are expressed in
              different tissues and stages of development. The project will contribute to an
              understanding of the content, organization, expression and evolution of
              mitochondrial genomes i

