Title       : Magnetic and Electronic Properties of Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0110034

Award Number: 0110034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zi Qiang Qiu Qiu@physics.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on the spin-charge correlation in magnetic
              nanostructures.  For layered films, we will extend our research from single
              quantum well (QW) system to double QW system.   QW states in a single layer can
              result in the magnetic interlayer coupling.  Interaction between two QWs is
              expected to generate new magneto phenomena.  For stepped films, we will use
              nanometer-sized atomic steps to laterally modulate 2D thin films at nanometer
              scale.  Great achievements have been made in layered structures in the last
              decade.  Lateral modulation of a 2D thin film should further shrink the
              dimensionality to generate new properties.  New idea of spherical substrate
              will be applied to control the step orientation and the step-density in a
              systematic way.  All samples will be grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) and
              characterized by Reflection High-Energy Electron Diffraction (RHEED),
              Low-Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED), Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES), and
              Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM).  Electronic properties of the
              nanostructures will be measured by Angle Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy
              (ARPES) and the magnetic properties of the films will be measured by Surface
              Magneto-Optic Kerr Effect (SMOKE) technique.  Graduate students involved in the
              project will receive training in fundamental experimental techniques using
              cutting edge technology.

The miniaturization of of information storage
              technology has reached a stage that physical processes at the nanometer scale
              dominate the overall properties of the storage materials.  This rapid
              development challenges fundamental research to understand materials properties
              in nanostructures.  The goal of this proposal is to gain a deep understanding
              on how materials properties change as the size approaches the ultimate
              nanometer length scale in magnetic materials.  To realize this goal,
              well-defined magnetic nanostructures will be built by Molecular Beam Epitaxy
              (MBE) with a control at the atomic level, and investigated with
              state-of-the-art techniques such as Angle Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy
              (ARPES), Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM), and Surface Magneto-Optic Kerr
              Effect (SMOKE), etc.  Quantum confinement of electrons inside the
              nanostructures will be studied to explore its role in new magnetic properties. 
              Success of this project will be important not only to the understanding of
              low-dimensional magnetism, but also to the development of magnetic technology. 
              Graduate students involved in the project will receive training in fundamental
              experimental techniques using cutting edge technology.  This training will
              prepare them for a range of careers in both academe

