Title       : Combinatorial Regulation of Gene Expression by Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0110408

Award Number: 0110408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317871             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Lopes jlopes@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Lopes laboratory has discovered that the yeast Ino4p basic helix-loop-helix
              (bHLH) protein dimerizes with five other bHLH proteins and regulates at least
              159 genes.  The primary goal of this project is to understand how different
              combinations of yeast bHLH transcription factors regulate gene expression. 
              Yeast has seven well-studied bHLH proteins: Ino4p, Ino2p, Pho4p, Rg1p, Rtg3p,
              Sgc1p, and Cbf1p.  This project will define the complete bHLH protein
              interaction map (PIM) by testing each possible pair-wise combination using the
              yeast two-hybrid system and co-purification of epitope-tagged recombinant
              proteins.  This part of the study will also include two proteins recently
              assigned to the HLH class, Hms1p and YGR290Wp.  The Lopes lab has used
              microarray hybridization to identify 159 genes that are either induced or
              repressed by Ino4p.  The fact that Ino4p interacts with multiple bHLH proteins
              suggests that the target gene sets for each bHLH protein will overlap the Ino4p
              target gene set.  Microarray hybridization will be used to identify target
              genes for the each bHLH protein.  The binding sites for each heterodimer will
              be determined using epitope-tagged bHLH recombinant proteins coupled with an
              electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).  The ability of bHLH optimal
              binding sites to direct transcription in vivo will be tested using reporter
              genes.  The promoters of the bHLH target genes will be screened for the
              presence of the bHLH binding sites using the ScanACE program.  This project
              will also investigate the mechanisms whereby bHLH proteins regulate target gene
              expression.  The ability of bHLH dimers to regulate transcription may require
              direct binding to DNA or sequestration and prevention of bHLH proteins from
              binding to their target promoters.  INO4 represses expression of two PHO genes
              and the MFalpha1 gene.  A DNA-binding defective Ino4p mutant will be used to
              determine if this regulation is due to direct binding of Ino4p to the target
              genes or sequestration of a bHLH transcription factor.
	How cells turn on and
              turn off genes is a central question in biology.  It is well established that
              proteins called transcription factors play an important role in controlling
              these events.  This project will investigate how a group of transcription
              factors form multiple pairings to maximize the number of genes that they can
              turn on and turn off.
