Title       : The Genetic Basis of Morphological Differences Between Two Species of Setaria
               (Poaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0110809

Award Number: 0110809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Kellogg tkellogg@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Foxtail millet is a minor grain consumed by people in some parts of Asia, and is
              thus of potential value to Third-World agriculture.  This project studies the
              genome of foxtail millet to determine how similar it is to its relative corn,
              and also to determine similarities to wild grasses. A genome map will be
              developed by studying the offspring of crosses between foxtail millet and its
              wild ancestor, green millet.  One such cross has
already been done by
              scientists at the John Innes Centre (JIC) in Norwich, England; they have used
              genes from millet and from rice to determine the structure of the millet
              genome.   Using their plant material, several regions of the millet genome were
              identified that control the size and shape of the seed head, which influences
              the amount of grain produced.  The specific goals in this project are to: 1. 
              Locate genes from corn in the plants from the JIC.   This will allow
              determination of which corn genes also function in millet, based on map
              position.  2.  Place developmentally important genes on the JIC map to
              determine if they map to any of the regions known to affect the structure of
              the seed head.   If they map to the same region, it will not prove that they
              control seed head development, but if they map elsewhere, then they can be
              excluded as candidates.   3.  Make another cross between the two millet species
              to create a second, larger set of plants, to replicate the experiment.   4.
              Begin development of near-isogenic lines from our plants and the JIC plants, to
              verify the results of the mapping studies.   The characterstics that
              distinguish green millet and foxtail millet are not unusual for grass species. 
              They are mostly quantitative changes in the relatives sizes and numbers of
              parts, the sorts of changes that distinguish most species of grasses.  This
              study will thus help understand the genes in foxtail millet, but will also
              provide a glimpse of the genetic basis of plant diversity.


