Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Inositol and Inositolhexakisphosphate Metabolism in
               Barley and Wheat Seed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0110748

Award Number: 0110748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Souza   (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Raboy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to improve the understanding of phosphorous
              storage and use in wheat and barley seeds.  Approximately 75% of the
              phosphorous in wheat and barley seeds is in the form of phytic acid, which
              makes the phosphorous unavailable in diets of humans, poultry, swine, and fish.
               As a consequence, much of the phosphorous consumed is excreted, which  creates
              a significant environmental problem in animal waste management.  Moreover,
              humans consuming a primarily grain-based diet may suffer mineral
deficiencies
              because of the ability of phytic acid to form tightly-bound complexes with
              minerals.  The enzymes involved in phytic acid accumulation in seeds are  not
              fully characterized.  Low phytic acid wheat and barley selections have  been
              identified.  Using these mutants and techniques of genetic analysis,  this
              project will further the understanding of this important metabolic  process in
              cereal seeds.  The goal is to identify, clone, and  characterize genes
              associated with the synthesis of phytic acid and related  phosphorous
              biochemical pathways (specifically inositol monophosphatase and  inositol
              kinase), to better understand this pathway's role in plant biology,  and
              ultimately to improve world grain crops to reduce animal-derived  phosphorous
              pollution and improve mineral nutrition of humans and  domesticated livestock.
