Title       : Transposon-Mediated Functional Genomics in Barley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0110512

Award Number: 0110512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1532663            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy G. Lemaux lemauxpg@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transposon tagging in heterologous plant systems offers a powerful tool for
              isolating genes for which no gene product is known, but for which a mutant
              phenotype can be observed. The experiments focus on existing populations of
              Ds-containing plants in the barley variety Golden Promise, an old malting
              variety, and additional populations to be developed in both Golden Promise and
              Oregon Wolfe Barley, a variety into which have been introgressed a combination
              of observable dominant and recessive mutations. Plant populations with randomly
              dispersed, transposed elements can be used directly to find easily screened
              mutations. A more powerful approach to tagging is to identify lines containing
              Ds insertions near genes of interest and exploit the propensity of Ds to
              undergo high-frequency, localized movement to achieve saturated mutagenesis of
              the regions of interest. Barley is an ideal cereal for this effort since it is
              closely related to and shares many physical and physiological characteristics
              with other cereals. It does not contain Ds homeologs, is a is true diploid,
              self-pollinating and easily grown in both greenhouse andfield environments. In
              addition, a vast pool of mapping data exists that is publicly available. Recent
              advances underpinning the proposed research include: a) efficient transposition
              of Ds to linked and unlinked sites in barley and its successful use in gene
              tagging; b) the availability of a fine structure genomic map of barley based on
              data from several public research consortia, including the North American
              Barley Mapping Project; c) the existence of many observable, dominant and
              recessive phenotypes in the Oregon Wolfe Barley (OWB) genetic stocks; and d)
              the availability of efficient transformation systems for a wide range of
              germplasm of barley. Taken together, these factors make possible the
              development of barley populations containing mapped Ds insertions. These
              elements, especially when mapped, will be valuable tools for performing
              functional genomics and gene isolation. These lines will increase understanding
              of basic cereal biology, instruct students about the modern tools available for
              genetic dissection and provide resources to improve the quality characteristics
              and field performance of cereals and potentially other crops.
