Title       : The Photon Counting Histogram - A Fluorescence Fluctuation Technique For
               Studying Protein-Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0110831

Award Number: 0110831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim D. Mueller mueller@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The photon counting histogram (PCH) is a recently introduced technique that
              exploits
fluorescence fluctuations to distinguish molecules by their intrinsic
              fluorescence brightness. For
example, a homodimer A2 will appear twice as
              bright as its monomer A, if each protein A carries
one fluorescent label. The
              main focus of this proposal is the development of dual-color PCH.
Adding a
              second detection channel and splitting the photons between both channels
              according to
color will increase the sensitivity and capability of the PCH
              technique tremendously. Dual-color
PCH combines the benefit of separating
              photons of different molecules by color with the intrinsic
ability of PCH to
              distinguish the brightness of molecules. To illustrate this point, consider
              two
proteins A and B with differently colored labels. A mixture of their
              homodimers, heterodimers
and monomers (A2, B2, AB, A and B) is resolvable by
              dual-color PCH. A single measurement
will determine the brightness of each
              component together with their concentrations. Currently,
no other technique
              promises to deliver comparable performance. The second goal of this
proposal
              is the application of dual-color PCH to study subunit interactions of an
              oligomeric
enzyme. The association and dissociation of individual subunits is
              directly observed by dual-
color PCH analysis and allows the determination of
              protein assembly paths under varying
external conditions.

The existing
              theory of PCH for a single channel will be modified to describe
              dual-channel
detection. The algorithms and software programs to analyze the
              data will be developed and the
performance of the dual-channel detection
              system will be characterized on a two-photon
microscope. The practical
              resolvability of a mixture by dual-color PCH is from an experimental
point of
              view of crucial importance. This project will address and answer this question
              by
analyzing the influence of the photon count statistics on dual-color PCH.
              Another important
consideration is the emission spectrum of a fluorophore.
              Most pairs of fluorophores have
overlapping emission spectra and a perfect
              separation of the two fluorophores by color is not
possible. Optical filter
              combinations that maximize the signal-to-noise ratio of dual-color PCH
for
              dyes with overlapping emission spectra will be determined and tested. The
              experimental
characterization of dual-color PCH will start with binary
              mixtures and will continue with
mixtures of increasing complexity to determine
              the capability of dual-color PCH. In addition,
dual-color PCH with excitation
              at multiple wavelengths will be implemented to further increase
the
              performance of PCH.

The subunit interactions of phosphofructokinase (PFK)
              will be studied by dual-color PCH.
Specifically, the subunit exchange between
              hybrid tetramers and the dissociation and association
of the oligomeric
              protein will be examined. Individual subunits of PFK will carry
              specific
fluorophores, which allow PCH to distinguish the subunit composition
              and population of each
fraction by color and absolute brightness. It is
              important to stress that dual-color PCH will have
applications well beyond the
              study of oligomeric enzymes. The impact of this new technique will
be felt in
              many other biological research fields. The association of proteins to form
              complexes is
a general concept encountered in most regulation processes of
              cells. Dual-color PCH can detect
and identify protein association on the
              single molecule level. An important and pressing task of
the post-genomic era
              is the identification of the function of a large number of unknown
              proteins.
Dual-color PCH can assist in this task by mapping out their
              protein-protein interactions.
