Title       : Role of the ResDE-Signal Transduction System in Anaerobic Gene Regulation of
               Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0110513

Award Number: 0110513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michiko M. Nakano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bacteria can change their metabolism when they suddenly encounter an environment
              devoid of oxygen.  This ability allows bacteria to colonize and grow within
              diverse environments.  The genes necessary for bacteria to carry out anaerobic
              growth are activated in response to oxygen depletion by a mechanism involving a
              simple signal transduction system.  In the soil bacterium, Bacillus subtilis,
              this system is composed of the proteins ResE and ResD.  The sensor kinase ResE,
              through an as-yet-unknown mechanism, senses oxygen limitation and responds by
              donating a high-energy phosphate to ResD, a response regulator, which, upon
              phosphorylation, stimulates the expression of genes required for anaerobic
              growth, such as the genes encoding an anaerobic gene regulator FNR and nitrite
              reductase.  ResD interacts directly with the promoter region to activate
              transcription. Unlike the nitrite reductase genes, activation of fnr, while
              requiring ResD, does not seem to require ResD in its phosphorylated form.  The
              presence of oxygen seems to stimulate removal of phosphate from ResD, a task
              also carried out by ResE.  Mutations in aa3 quinol oxidase genes cause
              derepression of ResDE-controlled genes under aerobic conditions, indicating
              that electron flow to oxygen has an inhibitory role on the signal transduction
              pathway.  In addition, aerobic gene activation is heightened by the presence of
              nitric oxide (NO), which may stimulate the ResD-phosphorylating activity of
              ResE. The major questions to be answered this project are:  (1) How does ResD
              activate gene expression?  (2) What is the significance behind the fact that
              fnr does not require phosphorylated ResD for its expression? (3) What parts of
              the ResE protein are important for sensing and transducing signals to ResD in
              response to stimuli derived from oxygen depletion? (4) How does NO result in
              ResDE-dependent gene activation? Studies will be carried out to precisely
              identify the target of ResD in the DNA that constitutes the genes under ResD
              control.  Particular attention will be paid to the architecture and the
              ResD-binding characteristics of the fnr control region.  The domains conserved
              in the putative sensing domains of ResE will be altered by directed mutagenesis
              to identify regions necessary for recognizing signals derived from oxygen
              limitation and NO. This will provide a correlation between specific signals and
              the functional domains of ResE and will give insight into how cells sense and
              respond to oxygen depletion.



