Title       : Regenerative Neurogenesis in Echinoderms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0110692

Award Number: 0110692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose E. Garcia-Arraras jegarcia@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo Rosa-Molinar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regenerative neurogenesis in adult echinoderms.

	Regeneration processes are
              of vital importance to repair and replace lost tissues and organs.  In
              chordates and other animals groups, the nervous system is considered almost
              irreplaceable; neurons that are lost after trauma cannot be replaced and there
              is a limited  functional reconnection of nerve fibers. This project uses a new
              experimental system, the sea cucumber, a member of the phylum Echinodermata, to
              explore the regeneration of the nervous system.  Echinoderms, although
              invertebrate animals are closely related to the vertebrates, and posses an
              extraordinary regeneration capacity. 
	The project aims to study the
              regeneration of the nervous system within the digestive tract and the cellular
              division and differentiation associated with this process.  It also explores
              the regeneration capacities of the main echinoderm nervous tissue components to
              determine if the regeneration of cells and fibers constitute a general event in
              echinoderm tissues.  Finally, it  studies the expression of genes, known to be
              important in regenerative and embryological  organogenesis, and their
              expression during nervous system regeneration. 
	Results from our experiments
              will advance the understanding of neuronal regeneration by obtaining
              information from a key group of organisms, echinoderms, where regeneration is a
              natural regular event. The proposed work on nervous regeneration is part of our
              overall goal of understanding the process by which the cells that make up the
              nervous system are generated, and how they differentiate and assemble into a
              functional organ.

