Title       : Genetic and Molecular Mechanisms of Nuclear Receptor Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0110508

Award Number: 0110508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Robinow robinow@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The broad, long-term objectives of this project are to determine the genetic and
              molecular mechanisms by which nuclear receptors control post-embryonic
              development.  The short-term goals are to identify genes involved in nuclear
              receptor signaling pathways.  Genes that are involved in nuclear receptor
              signaling will be identified in Drosophila melanogaster using both genetic and
              molecular approaches.  A primary genetic screen will identify candidate loci
              that enhance phenotypes associated with sensitized stocks in which nuclear
              receptor signaling has been compromised.  A secondary screen will identify
              those candidate loci in which the enhancement correlates with altered
              expression levels of ecdysone-responsive genes; genes whose expression is
              dependent upon appropriate nuclear receptor signaling.  A subset of chromosomal
              deficiencies stocks and approximately 100 EP stocks will be tested.  EP stocks
              carry single random insertions of a modified P-element that allows ectopic
              expression of the gene residing near the P-element.  These genetic screens have
              the potential to identify genes that physically interact with nuclear
              receptors, genes that are direct targets of nuclear receptors, and genes that
              are further downstream in nuclear receptor regulated pathways. To complement
              this genetic approach, a yeast two-hybrid screen will b used to identify
              proteins that physically interact with the amino-terminal domain of the
              A-isoform of the ecdysone receptor (EcR-A).  Understanding  the genetic and
              molecular mechanisms by which nuclear receptors and their  ligands function is
              significant because nuclear receptor signaling coordinates the development of
              virtually all organs and tissues in higher eukaryotes.  Thus, to fully
              appreciate and understand developmental mechanisms, it is necessary to
              understand the role that nuclear receptors play in orchestrating the
              developmental program.  The proposed activities are significant because they
              have the potential to identify biologically relevant interactions between genes
              involved in nuclear receptor signaling pathways.
