Title       : The Evolutionary Genetics of Sexual Size Dimorphism in a Seed-Feeding Beetle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0110754

Award Number: 0110754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia M. Rauter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study will test theoretical predictions about how genetic relationships
              between traits change in response to natural selection. More specifically, it
              will examine how genetic relationships between traits expressed differently in
              males and females change in response to differing selection on males and
              females. Using an insect species that exhibits little sexual dimorphism, the
              experiments will impose artificial selection on the body size of either one sex
              at a time or both sexes at once (simulating patterns of natural selection often
              observed in nature) and examine (a) correlated evolutionary responses in the
              alternate (unselected) sex, (b) correlated responses of other non-selected
              traits (e.g., reproductive traits), and (c) the evolution of genetic variances
              and covariances. The experiments will also impose selection on female
              fecundity, and male and female development time.  This will test the hypotheses
              that selection for increased fecundity and selection for short development time
              influence the evolution of sexual size dimorphism in a manner predicted by
              theory.

Although many studies have examined how traits are genetically
              related to each other, few previous studies have examined how these genetic
              relationships change when traits are subject to natural selection. Yet natural
              selection is ubiquitous in nature; and human beings impose natural selection on
              organisms in agricultural animal and plant breeding programs, during
              application of pesticides to agricultural fields, in the use of antibiotics,
              and whenever natural biological events are manipulated. Understanding how
              genetic relationships among traits change as we impose natural selection on
              these traits is critical to understanding the long-term evolutionary responses
              of populations to this selection.

