Title       : Receptor-Ligand Interactions in the Muscle Type Nicotinic ACh Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0110282

Award Number: 0110282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustav Akk akk@morpheus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              SUMMARY:
The muscle type nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is located in
              the vertebrate neuromuscular junction and in the electric organ of some species
              of fish. Its function is to promote the depolarization of the endplate. As a
              member of the ligand-gated ion channel (LGIC) superfamily, its structural and
              functional properties are closely related to those of other members of the
              family such as the neuronal AChR, the GABAA receptor, the glycine receptor and
              others. 
The experiments in this proposal have been designed to study the very
              basics of the receptor-ligand interaction and channel gating, such as which
              residues on the receptor interact with which functional groups on the agonist,
              and the contributions made by the individual agonist binding sites to channel
              gating. The long-term goal of this project is to facilitate the understanding
              of the properties of the AChR and LGIC, in general.
The proposed experiments
              will utilize single-channel patch clamp coupled to the kinetic analysis
              techniques which will allow detailed studies of the effects of changes in the
              structure of the receptor or the ligand, and to correlate them with changes in
              the functional response, i.e. affinity, gating or desensitization, of the
              receptor. The analysis of the interactions between the receptor and the ligand
              will be examined using thermodynamic mutant cycle analysis. This method is
              based on the determination of whether mutations are additive or not, and allows
              to establish whether amino acid residues or functional groups interact with
              each other.
The AChR is used as a biophysical model system as it possesses
              relatively simple kinetic properties and a high single-channel conductance (or
              signal-to-noise ratio), necessary for studies involving kinetic analysis. The
              results of these studies can be applied in studies of other LGIC due to a high
              degree of homology between the members of the LGIC superfamily. 


