Title       : Metabolomic Profiling of Membrane Lipids and their Compositional Dynamics in
               Plant Stress Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0110979

Award Number: 0110979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xuemin Wang wangs@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jyoti Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth Welti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Membrane lipids comprise diverse molecular species, and their composition
              differs from membrane to membrane.  In addition, membrane lipid composition
              changes in response to internal and external cues. Furthermore, within a
              membrane, there may be microdomains with distinct lipid constituents and
              particular functions. However, it is not understood how these distinct
              compositions and their dynamics are generated and what their functions are in
              the cell.  The objectives of this project are to use a metabolomic approach to
              determine cellular membrane lipid composition and to understand the regulation
              and role of membrane lipid compositional dynamics in plant responses to
              stresses. A highly sensitive approach based on electrospray ionization tandem
              mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) will be established. ESI-MS/MS will be employed
              to profile membrane lipid molecular species and to determine the compositional
              dynamics in Arabidopsis plants undergoing temperature and drought stresses. To
              understand how lipid changes are regulated, this project will investigate
              enzymes involved in generating the membrane lipid compositional dynamics.
              Arabidopsis lines, abrogated of various isoforms of phospholipase D, the major
              lipolytic enzyme family, will be instrumental in the analysis. In addition,
              lipid molecular species of the defense mutant ssi2 that is defective in
              stearoyl-ACP desaturase and its suppressor lines will be profiled to determine
              the relationship between lipid composition and alterations in defense
              responses. The capability to combine full lipid profiling with cellular
              analysis of the machinery that generates compositional changes should yield new
              information on how cellular machinery and metabolites interact in a dynamic
              manner in the cellular response to changing environments.  Membrane lipids are
              vital biological constituents, providing structural backbones for biological
              membranes and crucial resources for producing second messengers in regulating
              cellular and organismal functions. Membrane lipids comprise diverse molecular
              species, and the composition differs from membrane to membrane. The lipid
              composition changes in response to internal and external cues. However, it is
              not understood how these distinct compositions and their dynamics are generated
              and what their functions are in the cell. This project will establish a highly
              effective approach based on electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry
              and use it to determine cellular membrane lipid composition and the role of
              membrane lipid compositional changes in plant responses to stresses.  Extensive
              profiling of membrane lipids and their metabolites will yield unprecedented
              information on how cellular machinery and metabolites interact in a dynamic
              manner in the cellular response to changing environments.
