Title       : Regulation of Inflorescence Architecture in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0110189

Award Number: 0110189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5343199            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Hake maizesh@nature.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cereal crops, such as maize, rice, wheat, sorghum, barley, millet, and oats,
              account for the majority of world's nutrition. In addition to the cereal crops,
              there are approximately 10,000 species of wild grasses, which cover about 1/5
              of the earth's land surface.  Nearly all grasses are characterized by the
              spikelet, a short branch that contains floral meristems. Floral meristems
              produce the seeds that are harvested. The arrangement of these spikelets in
              different grasses, and the branches on which they are borne, reflects differing
              fates of the meristems produced during inflorescence development. Identifying
              the genes that determine meristem fates and understanding the mechanism by
              which these genes integrate their activities would be of immense value for
              developmental biology, evolutionary biology, and applied genetics and breeding.
              Development of maize as a model system assumes that information from maize
              should be applicable to other cereals, and indeed to any other plant. 
              Comparisons between maize and the other cereals, and between maize and wild
              grasses, will test this basic assumption of model system development.
              Inflorescence genes will be identified that will serve as tools for three
              different disciplines: investigation of meristem development, quantitative
              trait analysis, and comparative biology in the grasses. Sequencing of expressed
              genes and expression profiling will be used to identify a subset of genes that
              are expressed at the earliest stages of development, and that correlate with
              the proliferation of specific meristem types in selected mutants. The function
              of these genes will be determined through genetics and mapping. Map positions
              of the inflorescence genes will provide a link to quantitative traits, and to
              mutations in maize and other grasses. A selected group of genes will be mutated
              by reverse genetics to determine their function in inflorescence development. A
              subset of the genes will also be studied in other cereals and wild grasses. 
              Whether these genes have been modified over evolutionary time and whether they
              function in other grasses the same way as they do in maize will be determined.
              These comparisons will provide a valuable data set for the study of evolution
              and diversity across 60 million years of grass evolution.
