Title       : Physiological Mechanisms of Hypoxia Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0110322

Award Number: 0110322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Jackson Donald Jackson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project will investigate adaptations to severe oxygen lack in the
              freshwater turtle, Chrysemys picta bellii, generally regarded as the
              air-breathing vertebrate most tolerant to oxygen lack.  Specific objectives are
              to understand the role of the turtle's shell in lactic acid buffering, to
              clarify the fate of lactic acid and its rate of removal during recovery from a
              period of anoxia, to explore further the response of the turtle's heart and
              heart muscle to oxygen lack, and to define the mechanisms and limitations of
              oxygen uptake directly from the water.  A broad objective is to test the
              hypothesis that this animal possesses no extraordinary resistance to anoxia per
              se, but that its effective shell buffering and its metabolic depression slow
              the secondary effects of hypoxia and thereby greatly extend its tolerance
              duration.

	To achieve  these specific objectives, the following approaches
              will be used.  1) Shell function:  Shell blood supply will be established using
              corrosion casts. Shell blood flow will be measured using proton-activated
              microspheres that trap in the capillaries, and the importance of shell blood
              flow to exchange processes evaluated by tying off selected blood vessels. The
              kinetics and limits of shell/blood Ca2+ and lactate exchange will be tested by
              incubating shell samples in acid media, and the mechanical consequences of
              demineralization of shell following anoxia determined.  2) Lactic acid
              metabolism:  Lactic acid removal from the system during recovery from anoxic
              submergence will be compared in turtles at rest and while engaged in moderate
              aerobic activity swimming in a flume. Lactate metabolism by skeletal muscle
              will be tested using radioactively-labeled lactate, and by measuring lactate
              uptake by isolated muscle strips.  Excretion of lactate during recovery will be
              tested at different plasma lactate concentrations using labeled lactate.  3)
              Heart function:  Cardiac responses to graded hypoxia will be observed in
              isolated ventricular strips, in perfused hearts in vitro, and in intact
              surgically cannulated turtles with ECG electrodes.  4) Oxygen uptake from
              water:  Oxygen consumption of turtles submerged in aerated water at 3 and 10oC
              will be measured, and the effect of blocking possible avenues of oxygen uptake 
              will be assessed.  The importance of hemoglobin to aquatic O2 uptake at low
              temperature will be evaluated by comparing turtles with normal and
              experimentally-reduced hemoglobin levels in their blood.

	To achieve the
              general objective, the comparative approach will be utilized.  Shell and
              cardiac muscle characteristics of selected species of turtles, both aquatic and
              terrestrial, representing various lineages will be studied, and compared to the
              painted turtle.  If possible, these will be animals whose anoxic tolerance has
              already been studied.  Shell size, shell mechanical properties, mineral
              concentrations, and in vitro ion exchange capacities will be measured for each
              species.  In addition, resistance to oxygen lack by ventricular muscle strips
              will be studied on each animal.  For the latter protocol, two outgroup
              reptiles, an aquatic snake and a terrestrial lizard will also be
              studied.

	Hypoxia is a fundamental environmental stress experienced by many
              organisms.  Understanding the particular adaptations that permit a specialized
              animal such as the freshwater turtle to resist this stress has considerable
              general significance.  This project therefore can contribute to knowledge on a
              particular animal specialist, and can also reveal principles that may apply to
              other less-adapted species.  Because the project consists of a variety of
              individual projects, it also lends itself well to student involvement and will
              provide opportunities for research experience and training to both
              undergraduate and graduate students.

