Title       : Aminoglycoside-Antibiotic Modifying Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0110741

Award Number: 0110741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Engin H. Serpersu serpersu@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Enzyme-substrate interactions between the aminoglycoside antibiotics
              and
aminoglycoside modifying enzymes are very interesting and challenging
              targets for basic
research. Aminoglycoside antibiotics constitute a large
              group of clinically important drugs, and today, there are more than fifty known
              enzymes that chemically modify aminoglycosides and render them useless against
              pathogenic bacteria. These enzymes fall into three groups based on the type of
              chemical modification they catalyze. These reactions are N-acetylation,
              O-adenylation, and O-phosphorylation. Most notably, each enzyme can use many
              aminoglycosides as substrates; conversely a single aminoglycoside can be
              modified by a large number of enzymes. This situation makes the structural and
              functional studies quite challenging and currently neither a solution structure
              of an aminoglycoside-modifying enzyme, nor a crystal structure of an enzyme
              that yields information on the conformation of a bound aminoglycoside is
              available. This research will determine the first solution structures of
              aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes by NMR. The enzymes are the
              aminoglycoside-2'-nucleotidyltransferase-Ia, and the
              aminoglycoside-3-acetyltransferase-IIIb. NMR and other biochemical and
              biophysical methods will be used to study enzyme-antibiotic interactions in
              detail. The specific aims include kinetic and binding studies, determination of
              structures of both enzymes with and without substrates, substrate titrations
              using isotope-enriched enzymes or substrates, site specific mutations of the
              critical residues, measurement of amide exchange rates with and without
              substrates. It is expected that the solution structures of an aminoglycoside
              2'-adenyltransferase, and an aminoglycoside 3-acetyltransferase will be
              determined. It is also expected that kinetic and thermodynamic properties of
              enzyme-substrate complexes, the residues involved in substrate binding and
              catalysis, conformations of tightly bound aminoglycosides, and
              aminoglycoside-enzyme contact site(s)will be studied. It is expected that these
              studies will reveal the types of interactions that  occur between enzymes and
              aminoglycosides, thus allowing the determination of shared characteristic
              features of the active sites of these enzymes that allow binding of
              aminoglycosides in a similar conformation. This can be significant since the
              homology between some of the aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes can be very
              little or none. In general, this type of a system allows one to compare
              conformations of many ligands bound to the same target site as well as the
              comparison of active site structures of different targets (enzymes) that have
              no homology to each other but provide the same complementary groups to bind the
              same ligands in the same conformation. Data obtained in such comparisons should
              be helpful to determine the essential principles that affect
              ligand-macromolecule interactions. Furthermore, it should also lead to
              predictions on the expected binding modes of structurally related compounds and
              change in their affinities as a result of mutations at the active site(s).
              Results of this work should yield a better understanding of  enzyme-ligand
              interactions and may have far reaching impact on studies of  many
              ligand-receptor interactions.

