Title       : Drosophila Even-Skipped Regulation and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0110856

Award Number: 0110856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448247             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Jaynes J_JAYNES@lac.jci.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110856
Jaynes

This proposal is to investigate two aspects of
              transcriptional
regulation in developing Drosophila embryos.  The first is a
              novel
long-range activity that occurs at the even-skipped (eve) locus at
              the
blastoderm stage of development, earlier than similar long-range
              activities
are thought to be active at other genes.  The second is the
              mechanism of
repression by the eve protein product, Eve.
        
Long-range
              regulation is thought to underlie such phenomena as
epigenetic control of gene
              expression.  Epigenetic mechanisms are known to
be important for maintaining
              the correct spatial domains of expression of
HOX and other genes, mediated by
              genes of the Polycomb and trithorax
groups.  This and other epigenetic
              phenomena, such as position effect
variegation and repression at the mating
              type locus in yeast, are mediated
in part by the regulation of chromatin
              structure.  In contrast to the
well-studied examples of these phenomena in
              Drosophila, long-range
regulation at eve occurs at very early stages of
              development, so that its
analysis may provide a novel perspective on the
              mechanisms involved.  This
proposal uses an integrated biochemical and genetic
              approach to investigate
these mechanisms, to identify specific DNA sequences
              that mediate the
effects, to identify and study the functions of proteins that
              bind to those
sequences, and to identify genes that contribute to long-range
              regulation
of eve.

Transcriptional repression is a crucial activity in the
              function of
many DNA binding proteins.  Through work on this project, Eve has
              been
shown to interact functionally with the corepressor Groucho.  Eve has
              also
been shown to contain a Groucho-independent repression activity. 
              This
proposal will investigate the mechanisms of each of these activities
              using
a genetic approach.  Fusion proteins between Eve repression domains and
              the Gal4 DNA binding protein repress reporter transgenes both early and late in
              embryonic development, providing an efficient means of screening for
genetic
              modifiers of this repression activity.  This proposal will
              screen
simultaneously for modifiers of Groucho-dependent and
              -independent
repression activity.  This work should provide novel insights
              into the
mechanisms of repression.



