Title       : Structure Determination of a Large RNA by NMR Spectroscopy: The VS Ribozyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0110689

Award Number: 0110689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thorsten Dieckmann dieckman@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              TECHNICAL:  The project is aimed at the structural characterization of the
              catalytic element of VS RNA, an 881 nucleotide, single-stranded plasmid present
              in the mitochondria of certain natural strains of  Neurospora.  Most ribozymes
              recognize a complimentary single-stranded RNA through Watson-Crick base
              pairing; however, the VS ribozyme recognizes its substrate primarily through
              tertiary interactions.  How this recognition occurs is not well understood, and
              it is clear that more structural information is needed to augment the wealth of
              biochemical data currently available.  Due to the size of the VS ribozyme (~154
              nucleotides) the project uses a modular approach.  Initially the structures of
              isolated domains of the RNA, stem-loops as well as helix junctions, will be
              determined using standard NMR methodology.  These structures and resonance
              assignments will then serve as starting points for the analysis of their
              conformation as part of the intact ribozyme using a combination of recently
              developed NMR techniques and specific/segmental labeling strategies.  The
              results from these experiments will provide insight into how RNA tertiary
              structure influences the secondary structure of the building blocks and provide
              information about the domain structures in the functional ribozyme.  In the
              last phase of the project residual dipolar couplings and information form other
              sources (NOEs, FRET studies, etc.) will be used to determine the global
              structure and cleavage mechanism of a functional ribozyme.

NON-TECHNICAL: 
              Ribozymes are RNA molecules with the capability to catalyze chemical reactions.
               This research is aimed at the structure determination of one such system:  The
              Neurospora VS ribozyme.  Multidimensional NMR spectroscopy will be used as the
              main tool to determine first the structures of isolated domains and then the
              global structure of the molecule.  The information derived from the structures
              will provide insights into how RNA catalysis works on the molecular level.

