Title       : Symposium: Society for Developmental Biology 60th Annual Meeting; Seattle, WA;
               July 18-22, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0110334

Award Number: 0110334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigid Hogan Brigid.Hogan@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Dev Biol
	      9650 Rockville Pike
	      Bethesda, MD  208143998    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110334
Hogan

Funds are requested for partial support of the 60th Annual
              Meeting of the Society for Developmental Biology, to be held July 18-22, 2001
              at the University of Washington in Seattle.  The Society has held this meeting
              since its founding in 1939, missing only two years during World War II.  This
              is an indication of its commitment and succeeding in holding meetings of the
              highest scientific quality, as well as a reflection of the community's interest
              on the field of developmental biology.  In all the scientific sessions work on
              diverse organisms including plants, invertebrates and vertebrates will be
              presented.  Sixty-nine speakers have been invited to tell us about some of
              their latest findings in the following areas: Gamete Formation and Function,
              Organ Building, Patterning of the Nervous System, Diversity of Form, Color
              Patterns, Analysis of Complex Systems, Cell Interactions and Signaling Pathways
              (2 session), Cell Motility and Guidance, Regulation of Proliferation and Cell
              Growth, Cell Fate Determination, Plasticity of the Differentiated State, and
              Developmental Biology and Medicine.  An additional thirty speakers have been
              chosen from submitted abstracts for platform presentations, allowing the
              inclusion of the latest results and providing an opportunity for postdoctoral
              fellows and graduate students to talk about their works.  Special interest
              workshops on Stem Cells, Left-Right Asymmetry, Developmental Biology and
              Disease Vectors, and Imaging and Cell Marking will be held.  The Education
              Symposium will center on the very current topic of Ethics and it will include a
              discussion period with audience participation.  Local teachers and high school
              students will be invited to attend this session.  We expect an attendance of
              about 700 people, and most of them will present their new data in the two
              dedicated poster sessions, one after lunch and the other in the evening.  We
              are certain that this format allows us to continue to emphasize the best
              science and to provide a forum to bring together junior and senior
              investigators, and to allow them to exchange ideas on science, education and
              the role of science in today's society.  Merit-based travel awards will be
              available to students and junior postdoctoral fellows, as well as Latin
              American faculty and students to attend the meeting.        

