Title       : Nested Deletions: A New Tool for Plant Genomics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0110170

Award Number: 0110170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $648549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Peterson thomasp@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant genomes are laden with local sequence duplications and clusters of
              homologous genes.  To simplify the analysis of these duplications and gene
              clusters, this project will develop a new genetic technology to generate
              chromosomal deletions quickly and efficiently.  This approach is based on the
              finding that transposable elements can participate in alternative transposition
              pathways that generate novel recombination products, including large deletions
              and duplications.  The system described here utilizes a transgene construct
              containing maize Ac/Ds transposon ends in tandem orientation within a I/dSpm
              transposon (Ned1; Nested deletions 1).  The Ned1 construct will be transformed
              into maize; subsequent crosses will introduce the En/Spm transposase to
              mobilize Ned1 to various genomic locations, and the Ac transposase to activate
              the deletion process.  The action of Ac transposase on the Ac termini within
              Ned1 generates an unlimited set of nested deletions with one end anchored at
              the transgene locus.  The Ned1 construct contains marker genes for detection of
              both Ned1 transpositions and Ac--induced deletions, as well as sequences for
              easy cloning of deletion endpoints via plasmid rescue.
The expected outcome of
              this project is the production of maize plants containing the Ned1 transgene
              construct.  These plants and their progeny will be tested for 1) transposition
              of Ned1 by En/Spm transposase; 2) induction of deletions by Ac transposase; 3)
              transmission of deletions to progeny plants.  Additionally, the Ned1 transgenic
              lines, En/Spm- and Ac-containing lines will be backcrossed to a commonly-used
              maize inbred line [B73] in order to make these materials most useful for the
              research community. This approach could be extended to the production of a set
              of maize lines containing Ned1 elements at dispersed sites throughout the
              genome that could be used to isolate deletions and other rearrangements in
              specific regions of the genome. 

