Title       : Activation-Tagged and Deletion Mutants and cDNA Microarrays for Functional
               Genomics of Rice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0110154

Award Number: 0110154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan E. Leach jeleach@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hei Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Ronald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guo-Liang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick S. Schnable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rice genome sequencing projects are defining thousands of new rice genes.
              However, the critical tools required to determine the functions of these genes
              are not yet available to public-sector researchers. To remedy this deficiency,
              novel approaches to generate collections of insertion mutants and to detect
              mutated genes in a complementary set of rice deletion mutants will be
              developed. The first objective is to develop and test vectors for creating
              activation-tagged rice mutants using the Ac/Ds system. Activation tagging
              allows the identification of gene knockout mutants and mutants exhibiting gene
              over-expression. The vectors will contain chemical-induced promoters that will
              allow the controlled transposition of the Ds element. The second objective is
              to develop and optimize a high throughput protocol for the detection of mutated
              genes in an existing deletion mutant collection. The strategy is to use
              polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect the mutated genes rapidly in pools of
              DNA from many mutants. The rapid detection of mutated genes by this protocol
              will allow the identification of mutants with deletions in specific genes of
              interest. The international dimension of the project will enrich the training
              experience of the postdoctoral fellows and extend the impact of the research. 
