Title       : Effect of Spontaneous Mutations on Global Genome Expression in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0110824

Award Number: 0110824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $517618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larissa L. Vassilieva vassilieva@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1116,1174,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this research is to assess alterations in the
              genome-wide expression pattern caused by accumulation of spontaneous
              deleterious mutations in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Mildly
              deleterious mutations play a central role in a broad array of evolutionary and
              genetic phenomena, including the distribution of the transposable elements, the
              level of nucleotide diversity in various regions of the genome, the magnitude
              of inbreeding depression, the evolution of sex and recombination, the
              degeneration of Y chromosome, the senescence and extinction of endangered
              species. Presently the knowledge of deleterious mutations has been limited to
              two levels of biological organization: the DNA and the organism. Difficulty in
              predicting the effects of most DNA mutations on organismal phenotypes limits
              the first. The second is unsatisfactory, because the high phenotypic variances
              of the fitness-related traits obscure effects of mildly deleterious mutations.
              
This project will survey the consequences of spontaneous deleterious
              mutations on the genome-wide gene expression level because microevolutionary
              changes in fitness are likely caused by mutations that change gene expression,
              rather than mutations that alter protein structure. The mutant strains used for
              this study will be mutation-accumulation lines, which have been created by
              propagating worms from single individuals from a population without selection
              for 400 generations. The combination of the complete genome sequence of C.
              elegans allowing DNA microarrays available to screen genome-wide expression,
              and the longest mutation-accumulation lines among eukaryotes presents an
              unparalleled opportunity to investigate deterioration of the global gene
              expression by spontaneous deleterious mutations. This work will contribute to
              establishing a basis for prediction of the evolutionary and genetic
              consequences of spontaneous mutations on  genome-wide expression patterns.

