Title       : Probing Chromosome Structure with Phage Mu
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0110675

Award Number: 0110675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman P. Higgins nphiggins@bmg.bhs.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Two related methods have been developed to probe the structure of bacterial
              chromosomes inside living cells. One technique is called Muprinting, and it
              uses PCR reactions to generate a high-resolution picture of the transposition
              target sites in a bacterial population infected with phage Mu. By comparing the
              PCR profiles of naked DNA in vitro and protein bound DNA in vivo, it is
              possible to detect the location of sequence-specific DNA binding. Proteins
              detected with Muprinting include repressors and RNA polymerases. A new method
              recently developed called Mu-screening allows the identification of the
              transposition targets that are used efficiently in vivo during replicative Mu
              transposition. It is now possible to identify hot spots and cold spots for
              transposon insertion, and to follow changes in these structure when cells are
              placed in different physiological environments. Two primary objectives will be
              pursued. First, Mu-screening will be used in conjunction with gene micro-arrays
              containing 4115/4238 ORFs in E. coli to identify the most efficient
              transposition targets in the genomes of E. coli and Salmonella enterica serovar
              typhimurium. Second, Mu transposition hotspots will be cloned and subjected to
              in vivo and in vitro Muprint analysis to precisely identify the regions where
              proteins are bound in living cells. Ultimately, the proteins bound to Mu
              hotspots will be characterized by biochemical and genetic methods. New methods
              to systematically investigate chromosome structure inside living cells are
              required to address the challenging problems in modern molecular evolution.
              With the stunning advances in the ability to efficiently acquire entire
              sequences of virtually any organism, new methods to understand chromosome
              function and structure are now urgent. Information gained from Mu-screening and
              Muprinting technology promises to provide insight into the area of chromosome
              evolution and into the question of structure in bacterial chromatin.
              Micro-array-driven structure analysis complements gene expression studies and
              should stimulate new genetic and biochemical models of chromosome function.
