Title       : Transgene Silencing: New Insight to Genetic Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0110477

Award Number: 0110477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transgene silencing is the unexpected lack of expression of a gene introduced
              into an organism through recombinant engineering. Many lines of evidence have
              led to the realization that gene silencing reflects a series of strategies that
              protect the genetic information present in an organism from interference by
              extraneous genetic information. Some of these strategies are related to
              well-known defense mechanisms that provide protection against infectious
              organisms, but others have not previously been recognized and their mechanisms
              are only just now being investigated. These considerations are reflected in the
              goal of this project, which is to identify genes involved in transgene
              silencing mechanisms and to characterize their operation in normal development.
              In addition to providing new insight to genetic control systems of transgene
              expression, this understanding will lead to the strategic design of future
              transgene constructs that will not be sensed by the recipient genome as being
              alien and thus be expressed more reliably.
A premise for the experiments to be
              undertaken is that inactivation of genes that are responsible for the silencing
              machinery will re-activate the silenced gene. Three different sets of rice
              lines, in which a transgene is transcriptionally silenced, have been developed
              and characterized that are eminently suitable for reactivation studies.
              However, because of its rapid growth cycle and its fully-sequenced genome,
              Arabidopsis will be used as a model plant to expedite selection of gene targets
              for rice. Inactivation of the host silencing system(s) will be accomplished
              primarily by an RNA interference (RNAi) approach in which double-stranded RNA
              corresponding to the gene target is expressed. Initial gene targets include
              rice methyltransferase, chromo domain-containing genes and histone deacetylase
              genes. This is because methylation and alteration of chromatin structure is
              known to be associated with many gene silencing events. Once a target gene
              yields an interesting knock-out (silencing inactivation) phenotype in
              Arabidopsis, existing databases will be searched for similar genes in rice.
              RNAi-based knock-out constructs of these genes will be made and their ability
              to restore transgene expression in the silenced rice lines investigated to
              evaluate the role of the knocked-out gene as being one responsible for
              silencing.

