Title       : Methanosarcina Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0110762

Award Number: 0110762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1389771            (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Ferry jgf3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will exploit the recently completed genomic sequence of
              Methanosarcina acetivorans to identify novel genes/proteins for two key
              physiological processes.  A functional genomics approach will be taken to
              further the understanding of (i) the fermentation of acetate to methane (the
              pathway by which two-thirds of the global output of methane is produced) by M.
              acetivorans, and (ii) the response to environmental stress by M. acetivorans
              and the Archaea in general. A large percentage of the open reading frames of
              sequenced microbial genomes have no significant deduced identity to any known
              proteins; thus it is expected that novel proteins and enzymes will be
              discovered and that their characterization will uncover new biochemical
              principles. 

Whole genome DNA microarray and two-dimensional gel
              electrophoresis methods will be employed to identify genes that are
              differentially expressed during growth on acetate versus methanol or
              methylamines, and in media containing high and low salt. The results are
              expected to (i) identify genes specific for methane formation from acetate and
              (ii) uncover general principles of  Archaeal adaptation to changing
              environmental conditions. The differentially expressed genes will be
              characterized by transcriptional mapping and the gene sequences will be
              analyzed for information regarding their potential function. Gene knockout
              experiments will be performed to validate their role in the acetate
              fermentation pathway or osmotic stress, and also to aid in the determination of
              their specific function. Selected genes will be over-expressed and the gene
              products characterized to determine their biochemical properties and specific
              physiological function

By elucidating physiological processes in greater
              detail, the project is expected to increase the understanding of biocomplexity
              by revealing how M. acetivorans reacts to changing environmental conditions and
              how it interacts with other members in microbial consortia that comprise the
              anaerobic link in the global carbon cycle.  In addition,  students from each
              academic institution will be exposed to a wide variety of experimental
              approaches and methods from each of the collaborating academic institutions .
              The fundamental interactive nature of the research will provide participating
              students with broad exposure to genetics, genomics, fermentation, microbial
              physiology, and enzyme characterization. This type of broad training is
              designed to provide personnel for future research that will be based on the
              plethora of genomic information expected in the next decade and beyond

