Title       : Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Interplay between Life Histories,
               Morphologies, Performance, and Behavior in Trinidad Guppies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0110807

Award Number: 0110807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Walker walker@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Evolution by natural selection, or the principle of adaptation, was Charles
              Darwin's proposed mechanism for evolution. Darwin viewed an adaptation as any
              feature of an organism that arose as consequence of natural selection and
              enhanced the survival and reproductive potential of the individual. Yet,
              understanding and empirically documenting the relationship between a particular
              trait that appears to be adaptive and the factors that selected for the
              evolution of the trait remains a challenging and controversial task.  In the
              time since Darwin, the main lessons learned from empirical studies of natural
              selection are that adaptations rarely occur in isolation, but rather are
              constrained by the function of other interacting traits, and are a ultimately a
              compromise between integrated aspects of the organism.  Accordingly, the study
              of adaptation requires an understanding of how different traits constrain each
              other and how they are integrated to produce locally adapted phenotypes. There
              is only limited empirical evidence for how such constraints are manifested in
              real organisms. The proposed work will examine how selection acts on the
              integration of reproductive strategies, body shape, swimming performance, and
              behavior in natural populations of the guppy, Poecilia reticulata.  The guppy
              is a model organism for the proposed work because it is one of the few
              organisms where adaptation has been documented.  This previous work shows rapid
              adaptive changes in the reproductive traits of guppies in response to predatory
              fish.  The work proposed here will first document the correlations among
              reproductive traits, body morphology, habitat use, foraging behavior, and
              stream type with field observations on female and male guppies from populations
              that are subject to different selection pressures. It will focus on the
              combined influences of stream current and predation. Because the reproductive
              traits of guppies are already known from these sites, the morphological and
              behavioral results obtained will provide the first data on whether body
              morphology, foraging behavior, habitat use, and reproductive strategies
              predictably covary with each other, or whether they vary independently in
              response to different selection pressures. Guppies will then be reared in the
              lab under different environments to test the degree to which these trait
              differences between populations represent fixed genetic differences or
              phenotypic plasticity. Finally, the proposed work will examine for the first
              time the consequences of pregnancy on body morphology and locomotion in an
              aquatic species by measuring how body profile and swimming performance change
              over the course of the reproductive cycle. Steady and escape swimming
              performance of gravid females from high and low predation localities will test
              the consequences of different reproductive allotments on locomotion and how
              adaptive changes in offspring number may compromise locomotion.  By studying
              how reproductive strategies, morphology, locomotor performance, and behavior
              interact with each other and collectively respond to different selection
              pressures, the proposed work will provide a better understanding of the
              trade-offs faced by live-bearing fish adapting to their local environments.
