Title       : Assembly and Function of the Photosystem II Manganese Stabilizing Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0110455

Award Number: 0110455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $621617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Yocum cyocum@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Photosystem II catalyzes O2 evolution and provides electrons that are used for
              sugar synthesis in photosynthesis.  The O2-evolving reaction is catalyzed by 4
              Mn atoms and requires a key protein subunit, manganese stabilizing protein,
              that controls Mn binding and rapid O2 evolution.  This research project will
              characterize how manganese stabilizing protein's structure allows it to perform
              its role in O2 evolution.  One set of experiments will identify amino acid
              sequences at the N-terminus of the protein that are essential for photosystem
              II binding, and that may also be required for Mn stability and rapid O2
              production.  A second research objective will further characterize manganese
              stabilizing protein's "natively unfolded" behavior in solution.  The protein's
              unusual thermostability will be exploited as a probe to extend the
              characterization of its unusual solution structure and determine the extent to
              which the single -S-S- bond can be shown to be necessary for the
              thermostability of manganese stabilizing protein.  Related experiments will
              determine whether solution structure changes in some mutant types of manganese
              stabilizing protein can be demonstrated to correlate with their assembly into
              photosystem II, and whether the integrity of the enzyme's Mn cluster affects
              this process.  A third research project will explore the role of a highly
              conserved amino acid, arginine, that appears to be essential for manganese
              stabilizing protein's ability to promote the catalytic activity of the Mn
              cluster.  These experiments will be coupled with analyses of structure and
              function of manganese stabilizing protein to discover why other changes in this
              amino acid residue produce unusual changes in manganese stabilizing protein
              activity without apparent changes in the protein's solution structure.
