Title       : Low Temperature Regulatory Circuits and Gene Regulons in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0110124

Award Number: 0110124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5072963            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Thomashow thomash6@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony H. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Stockinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants vary greatly in their responses to cold temperatures.  At one extreme are
              plants from tropical and subtropical regions such as soybean and rice, which
              suffer injury when exposed to chilling temperatures between 0 and 12 degrees
              Celcius.  In sharp contrast, plants from temperate regions are not only
              chilling tolerant, but many, such as Arabidopsis and wheat, can survive
              freezing after exposure to low nonfreezing temperatures, a phenomenon known as
              "cold acclimation."  

The overall goal of this project is to understand the
              "genomic" basis of cold tolerance.  The specific focus will be to develop a
              more detailed understanding of how plants respond to low temperature in terms
              of altering gene expression.  This emphasis is motivated by the recent
              demonstration in Arabidopsis that cold acclimation involves the action of
              cold-regulated genes including the CBF regulon, a group of genes that imparts
              freezing tolerance and is coordinately regulated by the CBF transcriptional
              activators.  

This project will comprise three related lines of
              investigation.  In the first, a low temperature "wiring diagram" will be
              constructed that includes a definition of low temperature regulatory circuits
              and the gene regulons that they control.  The second line of investigation will
              be to determine the similarities and differences of low temperature-regulated
              genes in plants that differ in freezing tolerance.  The third line of
              investigation will be to determine whether the Arabidopsis CBF cold-response
              pathway is highly conserved in other plants and whether differences in plant
              cold tolerance can be traced to differences in CBF cold-response pathways. 
              Comparative and functional genomics approaches will be used to address these
              issues including gene expression profiling using DNA microarrays.  

In sum,
              these lines of investigation will provide a deeper understanding of the
              "genomic mechanisms" that plants have evolved to cope with low temperature and
              have the potential to provide "genetic tools" to improve the cold tolerance of
              plants, traits of considerable agronomic and economic importance.  In as much
              as the CBF regulon not only imparts freezing tolerance, but dehydration
              tolerance as well, the results of this project also have the potential to
              provide genetic tools to improve the drought and salinity tolerance of
              agriculturally important plants.



