Title       : Genetic Mechanisms of Neurogenesis in Flatworms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0110718

Award Number: 0110718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Volker Hartenstein volkerH@mcdb.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110718
Hartenstein

It is proposed to analyze early neural development in
              embryos of the flatworm species Macrostomum sp. And Neochildia fusca that can
              be raised in the lab so that embryos of all stages can be obtained in
              sufficient numbers year round.  Flatworms are generally believed to have
              retained several primitive features of the common bilaterian ancestor and
              therefore represent a highly relevant system to study basic developmental
              processes, such as establishment of the body axes and early neurogenesis. 
              Given the basal phylogenetic position of flatworms the proposed experiments
              will contribute to our understanding of neural development and the evolution of
              molecular networks controlling this process.

Our first aim is to reconstruct
              normal neurogenesis.  Questions are the origin and pattern of neural
              progenitors, their proliferation and migration, and the pattern of axon tracts
              that emerges as neurons differentiate.  These studies will provide a framework
              of data in which to interpret the expression pattern of genes that will be
              identified as part of the following aims.  Aim 2 is the generation of a cDNA
              library for both species, which will greatly facilitate the screen for genes
              involved in neurogenesis.  Aim 3 proposes to use a combined PCI and library
              screen approach to identify cognates of the following highly conserved genes
              that play fundamental roles in neural development in vertebrates and
              invertebrate systems:  the regionalization genes vnd, ind, msh, Otx/otd,
              Tailless, lab and cad; the proneural genes ato and ASC, and the neural fate
              specifying genes of the POU/Homeodomain and LIM/Homeodomain family.  Obtaining
              probes for these genes will serve two purposes.  It will furnish early markers
              for neural precursors used to analyze normal neurogenesis at a satisfactory
              level of detail.  Secondly, the expression pattern of these conserved genes is
              expected to provide valuable insight into how they function during neural
              patterning in flatworms.  This in turn will aid in reconstructing how the
              relationship between specific molecular networks and morphogenetic events in
              neurogenesis arose during evolution.

