Title       : RUI: Lamprey Developmental Genetics and the Evolution of the Vertebrate Body
               Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0110540

Award Number: 0110540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320193             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Langeland jlange@kzoo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kalamazoo College
	      1200 Academy Street
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490063291    269/337-7162

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110540
Langeland

The overall goal of the proposed study is to take
              advantage of the unique
phylogenetic position of the lamprey, Petromyzon
              marinus, to address
fundamental issues of developmental and molecular
              evolution in the
vertebrate lineage.  Lampreys are the simplest extant
              vertebrates, situated
phylogenetically between the cephalochordates
              (represented by amphioxus)
and the gnathostomes (represented by mammals,
              birds, reptiles, amphibians,
and fish).  Morphologically, lampreys share
              several characteristics with
their gnathostome sister group, including
              multiple brain divisions, neural
crest and its derivatives, neurogenic
              placodes, pharyngeal arches, and a
cartilaginous endoskeleton, but they lack
              jaws and paired appendages and
retain a relatively simple axial morphology. 
              Genetically, lampreys also
appear to be less complex than gnathostomes, having
              undergone fewer
duplications of developmental regulatory genes.  Lampreys are
              thus a
perfect system with which to investigate developmental and molecular
              events
associated with early  vertebrate evolution.   Dr. Langeland has led
              in
recent efforts to establish lampreys as a viable system for
              comparative
developmental genetics.  There are two basic thrusts to this
              proposal: 1)
to use gene expression studies in lamprey embryos to
              investigate
fundamental aspects of the evolution of vertebrate head
              patterning, and 2)
to use gene phylogeny studies to test whether duplications
              of select
regulatory genes accompanied vertebrate origins. The Langeland
              laboratory
will clone and characterize members of the goosecoid, Emx, and
              snail/Slug
gene families in P. marinus.  These genes are excellent markers for
              three
key developmental innovations that accompanied vertebrate origins:
              the
establishment of the head organizer, the elaboration of rostral
              brain
patterning, and the acquisition and diversification of cephalic
              neural
crest.  Comparative expression analyses of these genes during
              lamprey
embryogenesis will allow more precise reconstruction of
              developmental
events associated with vertebrate origins.
In addition,
              determination of the copy number of these genes in lampreys,
and analysis of
              their phylogenetic relationships with their gnathostome and
protochordate
              homologs, will provide important evidence concerning whether
widespread gene
              duplications, or even whole genome duplication, facilitated
vertebrate
              origins. This research will take place at a four-year
undergraduate liberal
              arts college.  Extensive involvement of
undergraduates in all phases of the
              project will help maintain the strong
record of the host institution and of
              the principal investigator in
integrating research with teaching, and in
              preparing future Ph.D.s in the
life sciences.



