Title       : RUI: Comparative Hypoxic Chemosensitivity of Two Rat Strains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0110992

Award Number: 0110992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77753              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dona F. Boggs dboggs@mail.ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Animals respond to environments that are low in oxygen by increasing their
              breathing. This increase in breathing is stimulated by oxygen sensitive cells
              in a structure called the carotid body. There are a number of theories about
              how the carotid body cells can transduce the signal of low oxygen levels
              (hypoxia) in the blood into nerve signals to the brain that cause the increase
              in breathing, but which theory is correct remains unresolved. Oxygen is carried
              in the blood on hemoglobin that is present in red blood cells. Hemoglobin is a
              so-called 'heme'-protein and there are other heme-proteins in other cells in
              the body. One of the theories about how carotid body cells sense changes in
              oxygen levels is via a heme-protein that can bind oxygen either inside the cell
              or at its membrane.   
Comparative studies of several species of mammals,
              birds and even some reptiles have demonstrated a good correlation between the
              affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen, or the ease with which hemoglobin binds
              oxygen, and the amount of decline in oxygen in the blood required to stimulate
              an increase in breathing. The mechanism underlying this observation may be a
              matching or commonality of oxygen binding characteristics of the b-type heme
              protein binding oxygen in the blood and a b-type heme protein binding oxygen in
              the oxygen sensitive cells of the carotid bodies. If this is the case, the
              mechanism may help elucidate not only how the carotid bodies work but how the
              control of breathing has evolved to be well matched to the oxygen transport
              properties of the blood. 
To explore this concept further this project will
              investigate two strains of rats that exhibit different breathing and metabolic
              responses to reduced oxygen or hypoxia. The binding characteristics of their
              hemoglobin will be determined to see if they differ, and the response
              characteristics, or sensitivity, of their carotid bodies to hypoxia will be
              measured to determine whether or not the differences in hypoxic sensitivity of
              the whole animal, in terms of breathing and metabolism, can be related to
              differences in the  hypoxic sensitivity of the carotid body. If they are
              related, then future comparative studies of heme-proteins in the carotid bodies
              and oxygen sensitive ion channels will be conducted. If not, then alternative
              hypotheses about the mechanisms controlling the different hypoxic sensitivities
              will be pursued.  

