Title       : Physiological Bases for Long Term Effects of Winning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0110625

Award Number: 0110625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Marler camarler@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1193,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              . LAY ABSTRACT

Understanding how past experience shapes future behavior is
              one of the fundamental challenges for modern animal behavior and neurobiology. 
              Meeting this challenge will require characterization of physiological changes
              triggered by experiences known to influence specific behaviors, such as
              aggression during male-male encounters.  Two factors have been shown to
              critically influence the intensity of aggression expressed in an encounter: 1)
              the outcomes of previous encounters, whether won or lost, and 2) the location
              of the encounter, whether familiar or unfamiliar.  It is the goal of the
              proposed work to examine the physiological components that contribute to the
              effect winning has on future encounters (winner effect), as well as those
              components that contribute to aggression associated with familiarity with the
              encounter location.  Specifically, the function of observed changes in
              testosterone after competitive interactions will be evaluated.  In addition,
              neurochemical changes that occur in response to transient changes in
              testosterone will be documented.  To begin examining the role of site
              familiarity in the intensity of aggression, comparisons will be made between
              resident-intruder aggression (site-specific aggression) and neutral aggression
              (aggression in a neutral arena).  It is predicted that the neurochemical
              vasopressin will be more closely associated with resident-intruder aggression
              than neutral aggression.  The monogamous, highly parental Peromyscus
              californicus (California mouse), and the promiscuous, less parental P. leucopus
              (white-footed mouse) will be  developed as model systems for this analysis of
              interactions between experience and intensity of aggression. Information
              obtained in these studies may provide insight into some of the physiological
              mechanisms underlying plasticity in the intensity of aggression in mammals.


