Title       : Characterization of Signal Transduction Pathways in Plant Defense Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0110404

Award Number: 0110404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Klessig dfk8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Numerous studies have demonstrated that salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA)
              and ethylene play key roles in activation of various defense responses
              following pathogen attack. Induction of SA-mediated responses occurs via both
              NPR1- dependent and -independent pathways. The SA- and JA/ethylene-mediated
              pathways appear to be coordinately regulated with extensive cross-talk
              occurring between them. The nature of this cross-talk is poorly understood and
              may involve complex regulatory mechanisms. In addition, environmental factors
              can significantly and sometimes dramatically influence the outcome of
              plant-pathogen interactions; the molecular and cellular basis for these effects
              is largely unknown.
Two groups of Arabidopsis mutants have been isolated whose
              initial characterization argues that they will provide important insights into
              the molecular mechanisms underlying (i) the NPR1- dependent vs -independent
              pathway(s), (ii) the cross-talk between the SA- and JA/ethylene- mediated
              pathways and (iii) the effects of environment on disease resistance. The
              discovery that the fatty acid 18:1, or a derivative of it, functions as a
              signal together with JA to activate expression of the defensin gene PDF1.2, but
              suppresses SA-dependent defense response is particularly exciting. This
              co-activating signal was uncovered in the ssi2 mutant. ssi2 suppresses
              salicylate insensitivity of the npr1-5 mutant due to a mutation in a
              stearoyl-ACP desaturase which results in reduced fatty acid desaturation. One
              of the highest priorities is to determine whether 18:1 itself, or rather a
              derivative of it, is the co-activating signal. Suppressor mutants of ssi2 will
              also be isolated in order to better characterize the co-activating signal and
              its role in modulating defense responses.
The genes for two other ssi mutants,
              ssi1 and ssi4, have been cloned. In addition to isolating suppressors of each,
              it will be determined whether the function of other genes shown to have a role
              in SA signaling (ed. PAD3 or PAD4), JA/ ethylene signaling (eg. COI1 or ETR1)
              or R gene-mediated signaling (eg. NDR1 or EDS1) are required for some or all of
              the mutant phenotypes.
The second group of mutants constitutively expresses
              pathogenesis-related genes (cpr). cpr22, also exhibit SA-dependent (i) lesion
              formation, (ii) enhanced disease resistance and (iii) homozygous lethality as
              well as JA/ ethylene-mediated constitutive PDF1.2 gene expression.
              Interestingly, the SA -dependent, but not JA-mediated, phenotypes are
              suppressed by high relative humidity (RH). High RH also suppresses the
              SA-dependent phenotype of ssi4. In addition, ssi4 is extremely cold sensitive,
              with death occurring at 16 degrees C. Thus, further characterization of cpr22
              and ssi4 by conducting epistatic analyses and/or isolating suppressor mutants
              for each of these pathways should provide valuable insights into how
              environmental factors (RH and temperature) influence disease resistance.  It
              should be noted that SA may also play a signaling role in other processes,
              including thermogenesis, cell growth and trichome development. Thus,
              elucidation of the components involved in the SA defense signaling pathways may
              well provide insights into a much larger signaling network through which plants
              regulate a wide variety of responses.

