Title       : SBIR Phase II: Programmable, Scalable Wireless Information Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a0110460

Award Number: 0110460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499937             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Chapin jchapin@vanu.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanu, Inc.
	      One Porter Square, Suite 18
	      Cambridge, MA  021401496    617/864-1711

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project has two primary
              objectives: to continue the research and development of clustered software
              radio technology begun in the Phase I project, and to use that technology to
              extend current waveform implementations to a fully functional base station.  A
              high impact application of clustered software radio is for cellular telephone
              base stations, changing them from fixed hardware devices into flexible software
              devices that can support multiple commercial standards and also public safety
              needs.  This Phase II project will develop a clustered software radio base
              station that interoperates with commercial GSM mobile units and switching
              centers.  The goal is a base station sufficiently functional to be deployed in
              a field trial, which is the necessary next step in commercializing the
              technology.  The project will include innovative technology development in
              timing control, wideband synthesis, and intra-cluster data transport.

In the
              telecommunications industry, many foresee that base stations for
              third-generation wireless systems will be software radios or software-defined
              radios.  The development of clustered software radio technology by Vanu, Inc.
              for this market will improve interoperability, improve service to underserved
              rural areas, enable more efficient use of the radio frequency (RF) spectrum,
              provide substantial public safety benefits, and increase the pace of
              technological innovation in the wireless communication marketplace.  Moreover,
              the firm's computing architecture has broad application to signal processing
              problems outside the wireless industry.


