Title       : Structural and Biochemical Investigations on Fe-Only Hydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0110269

Award Number: 0110269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Peters petersj@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this projectl is to investigate the structural and
              catalytic
properties of Fe-Only hydrogenases. Hydrogenases catalyze reversible
              hydrogen
oxidation and function physiologically to either recycle the reduced
              electron carriers that
accumulate during a fermentative metabolism or couple
              the oxidation of hydrogen to the
generation of reduced electron carriers that
              can be utilized in energy yielding processes.
The metal-containing
              hydrogenases are classified according to their metal content and
include those
              that contain both Ni and Fe (NiFe-hydrogenases) and those that contain just
Fe
              (Fe-Only hydrogenases). These enzymes are of paramount importance in
              the
metabolism of numerous microorganisms. In addition, since hydrogen is
              being explored
as a future alternative fuel source, there is considerable
              interest in the details of these
hydrogen producing biological catalysts.  The
              studies will focus primarily on testing hypotheses that
were developed as a
              result of the detailed structural analysis of the Fe-Only hydrogenase
(CpI)
              isolated from the anaerobic soil microorganism Clostridium pasteurianum. The
              specific objectives are (1) additional structural and biochemical studies on
              CpI probing a number of remaining key questions with respect to the H Cluster
              structure and the role of the accessory [FeS] clusters; (2)
              site-specific
amino acid substitution experiments on CpI to examine the role
              of the polypeptide
environment of the H Cluster in catalysis and stability;
              (3) structural characterization of
the second Fe-Only hydrogenase (CpII) from
              C. pasteurianum to ascertain its primary
sequence and structural relationship
              to other Fe-Only hydrogenases and to probe the
contributions of the
              environment of the H Cluster and the accessory FeS clusters in
defining
              hydrogen oxidation versus proton reduction activities in the
              Fe-Only
hydrogenases.  The above objectives will be pursued by a
              multidisciplinary approach combining
biochemical methods, spectroscopic
              methods and structure determination by X-ray
diffraction methods to answer
              some of the key remaining questions with respect to the
structure and function
              of Fe-Only hydrogenases.
