Title       : Telomere Formation, Sites and Intermediates, During Macronuclear Development of
               Oxytricha Trifallax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0110952

Award Number: 0110952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Herrick glenn.herrick@path.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A new technique allows rapid and precise mapping of telomere addition sites
              (TASs) at chromosome ends of the hypotrichous ciliate macronucleus.  The
              macronucleus is carved developmentally from a copy of the cell's gremlin
              nucleus, involving the generation of >40,000 new telomeres, following the
              breakage of chromatids of polytenized germline chromosomes, creating
              chromosomes with just one or a few genes each.  Some chromosomes are created
              using exactly the same TAS pair (called "fixed TASs"), but others are generated
              by alternative processing.  In this case, some chromatids escape breakage
              altogether and use a heterogeneous set of TASs in a region dictated by
              cis-acting sequences (called "mixed" TASs).  One hypothesis of how this may
              work is the "hesitant cutter" hypothesis, whereby the TAS spectrum results from
              the action of a loose complex of the chromatid cutter and enzyme, telomerase. 
              This model suggests that the region is anchored by a binding site ("CBS") for
              the complex and a relatively poor cut site, such that the cutter is slow to
              cut; meanwhile the telomerase dissociates, the cut is made, the end left
              unprotected to nuclease erosion.  The nuclease could then proceed through the
              3' strand until it pauses under the influence of a cis-acting pause site, often
              at dT in a string of dTs.  This could allow telomerase to act when the erosion
              is paused.  Mapping TASs in mixed regions will allow the uncovering of three
              types of cis-acting sequences: the CBS, cut, and pause sites.  Numerous allelic
              variants of TAS regions will be so mapped, refining the effective site
              sequences.  In addition, fixed TASs will be mapped to allow the refinement of a
              consensus site already identified, 3' TAY (Y=purine).   This project will help
              illuminate the processes of chromosome breakage, telomere formation and the
              action of telomerase.  Basic understanding of these processes will be key to
              understanding cellular senescence.  
