Title       : Collaborative Research: Structural Determinants of Catalysis and Allosteric
               Regulation in DAHP Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0110984

Award Number: 0110984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Bauerle rhb7g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0110984
Mutational and biochemical studies will be combined to define the
              structural basis for
catalytic activity and feedback regulation in the
              3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate
synthase (DAHPS) isozyme family in
              Escherichia coli. This work will be complemented by
structural studies of the
              enzyme by x-ray crystallography, carried out in the laboratory of
departmental
              colleague and co-PI, Robert Kretsinger. DAHPS catalyzes the first step of
              aromatic
biosynthesis, the condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and
              D-erythrose-4-phosphate (E4P).
The three DAHPS isozymes in E. coli have
              similar catalytic properties, but differ in that each is
specifically feedback
              regulated by one of the three aromatic amino acid end products. The
              crystal
structure of DAHPS(Phe) complexed with PEP and metal cofactor has
              established that the enzyme
has an embellished (beta /alpha)8 barrel fold. In
              order to define the role of the required metal in catalysis, a strategy will be
              implemented to engineer metal-independent derivatives of DAHPS(Phe) by
              site-directed changes, loop transplantation and DNA shuffling. The strategy was
              derived from the superpositional analysis of the structures of DAHPS(Phe) and
              its metal-independent homologue, KDOP synthase. A model for the DAHPS reaction
              mechanism will be tested that involves the formation of a covalent Schiff's
              base intermediate between PEP and an active site lysine. An intramolecular
              signal transduction pathway responsible for the allosteric transition from R
              state to T state, based on changes in the three dimensional structure of the
              enzyme complexed with Phe, will be dissected by combined mutational, kinetic
              and crystallographic analysis. The organization of the regulatory site of the
              enzyme will also be confirmed by assessing the effects of mutations targeted to
              critical residues in the structural model. Lastly, rational design will be used
              to restructure the regulatory site such that inhibitor specificity is switched
              from phenylalanine to tryptophan or tyrosine.	

