Title       : Molecular Genetic Dissection of Red/Far-Red Light Signaling Pathways in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0110297

Award Number: 0110297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Brutnell tpb8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1329,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent studies in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana have greatly expanded our
              understanding of the complex light signal transduction networks mediating a
              range of developmental and environmental responses.  However, as studies
              rapidly progress in Arabidopsis, our knowledge of this complex pathway in the
              distantly related monocots is far less complete. Differences in phytochrome
              gene family organization, plant physiology and selection pressures have likely
              contributed to the divergence of light signal transduction pathways between
              higher eudicots such as Arabidopsis thaliana and monocotyledonous grasses such
              as Zea mays.  The goal of this project is to begin the detailed
              characterization of red/far-red light signaling pathways in maize utilizing
              classical and reverse genetics strategies, molecular genetic analyses and
              microarray technologies. A comprehensive analysis of phytochrome gene family
              structure and expression in maize will be conducted as an important first step
              in the analysis of light signaling pathways in maize. Through tools developed
              by NSF- and government-funding genomics initiatives, transposon-tagged alleles
              have been identified in two of the three phytochrome gene family members in
              maize.  Genetic and molecular characterizations of these mutants will include
              the use of microarray technology to compare nuclear and chloroplast gene
              expression profiles in wild type and these phyA and phyB mutants under a range
              of light conditions.  Finally, red/far-red light responses will be examined in
              a core set of 80 US, Canadian, European, and South American accessions that
              best represent diversity in the maize germplasm pool.  These studies should
              provide insights into the underlying genetic diversity regulating light
              responses in maize.
