Title       : Theory of Locally Crystalline Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0110329

Award Number: 0110329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Kivelson stevek@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research on the properties of strongly
              correlated electron systems; in particular, the behavior of liquid crystalline
              phases in these systems.  There is strong support for the idea that the liquid
              crystal phases of highly correlated electronic systems have considerable local
              crystalline (charge) order.  Various electronic liquid and liquid crystalline
              phases of doped Mott insulators are expected on theoretical grounds and/or are
              known experimentally (especially from neutron diffraction and x-ray scattering
              experiments) to possess considerable local "stripe" order.  There is also clear
              theoretical and compelling, although indirect, experimental evidence that there
              is a large degree of stripe order in the anisotropic metallic state observed at
              low temperatures in quantum Hall systems in higher Landau levels.  The metallic
              phases of the low-density two dimensional electron gas with rs less than, but
              near to the critical density for Wigner crystallization, are expected,
              theoretically, to have a large degree of crystalline order. The normal state of
              quasi-one dimensional charge and spin density wave insulators has long been
              known to possess substantial (phase disordered) local density wave order.  Even
              ordinary quantum Hall liquids, especially those at very low filling factor, are
              known to possess incipient crystalline order, as indicated by the deep
              magneto-roton minimum in the collective mode spectrum.  It is proposed to
              undertake a systematic theoretical study of the implications of this statement.
               In particular, we will find defined limiting situations in which the
              intuitive, but vague, notion of local crystalline order can be made precise,
              and to explore the consequences of local crystallinity on the electronic
              properties of highly correlated electronic liquids.  Special attention will be
              paid to the physics of the "fluctuating stripe" phases of the high temperature
              superconductors, to the incipient glassy character of such a locally
              crystalline liquid, and to the relation of this study to the theory of
              classical supercooled liquids.
%%%

