Title       : Shrimp Immunity: Genetic and Functional Studies of Diversity in an Antimicrobial
               Peptide.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0110576

Award Number: 0110576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $503650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Gross grossp@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Innate, non-adaptive immune reactions are the first line of defense against
              invading pathogenic microorganisms in all animals.  Even in vertebrates, with
              their complex T and B lymphocyte-based adaptive immune responses, it is always
              the innate immune system that responds first to immune challenge.  However, in
              invertebrates innate non-adaptive immunity is not only their first line of
              defense but their only line of immune defense.  The innate immune system
              utilizes a battery of defense mechanisms, both cellular and humoral.  Amongst
              the humoral immune effectors are the anti-microbial peptides (AMP) which have
              been identified essentially throughout the animal kingdom and in plants as
              well.  Not only are AMP widely distributed, but they also show a large
              diversity of structures.  In terms of immune studies on invertebrates, the
              insects (especially Drosophila) have received the majority of attention, and
              much is known about anti-bacterial and anti-fungal responses (including the
              involvement of AMPs) in this phylum. However, the crustacea, despite their
              importance in the environment and as both an aquacultured and a wild-caught
              food source, have received comparatively little attention. Recently, a new
              family of anti-microbial molecules, the penaeidins, has been identified in the
              Pacific white shrimp, Litopenaeus vannamei.  The penaeidins are synthesized
              within the granular hemocytes, and initially 3 distinct classes of penaeidin
              were identified, with 3 minor structural variants being found within one of the
              classes (penaeidin 3). Preliminary results from my research indicate that there
              are at least 4 classes of penaeidin, and that there is extensive variation in
              structure within each class. 

The objectives of this project are to
              understand the nature and source of diversity in the penaeidins and to define
              the anti-microbial activities of the new (fourth) class of penaeidin that has
              been defined. 

The project will address the first objective by examining the
              genetic basis of penaeidin diversity.  The hypothesis is that the observed
              variability of the penaeidins, both as multiple classes and as variants within
              each class, is genetically encoded.  A recombinant shrimp genomic library will
              be created and the penaeidin genes will be cloned, mapped and sequenced. 
              Comparison of the structure of the penaeidin gene(s) with the sequences of the
              penaeidin clones from hemocyte cDNA libraries will permit a full analysis of
              the genetic basis of penaeidin variability.  The number of penaeidin genes will
              be defined, the contribution of alternative RNA processing pathways
              (alternative exon usage), and the contribution of any other source of variation
              to the observed diversity of penaeidins, will be deduced.  The second objective
              will be approached in collaboration with Dr. Evelyn Bachere, of the Universite
              Montpellier.  The newly defined class of penaeidins (penaeidin 4) will be
              expressed as a recombinant form in yeast, purified, and characterized for the
              spectrum of its anti-microbial functions.  

Penaeidins show, amongst the
              anti-microbial peptides, very high levels of variability, even within a single
              individual.  This project will contribute to our understanding of the basis of
              this variability and its significance to crustacean immunity in terms of the
              spectrum of anti-microbial activities of these peptides. 

