Title       : Outer Membrane-Targeted Secretion of Respiration-Linked Fe(III) Terminal
               Reductases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0110915

Award Number: 0110915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. DiChristina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is a relatively recent addition to the suite of
              anaerobic respiratory processes carried out by microorganisms.  Compared to the
              wealth of knowledge existing on the molecular details of aerobic respiration,
              denitrification, sulfate reduction and methanogenesis, little is known about
              dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction.  Ironically, recent microbiological and
              geological evidence indicates that dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction may have
              been one of the first respiratory processes to have evolved on early Earth.  In
              the modern biosphere, dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is central to a variety
              of globally significant processes.  Recent genetic studies have indicated that
              Type II protein secretion is required for Fe(III) respiration activity by
              Shewanella  putrefaciens.  In Type II secretion mutants, a 91 kDa
              heme-containing, Fe(III) reductase is missing from the set of proteins loosely
              attached to the outside face of the S. putrefaciens outer membrane.  S.
              putrefaciens may therefore overcome the physiological problem of respiring on
              insoluble Fe(III) substrates by using the Type II secretion system to target
              the 91 kDa heme-containing Fe(III) reductase to the outside face of the outer
              membrane where it acts as a respiration-linked, Fe(III) terminal reductase.  A
              set of molecular cloning and biochemical analyses will be carried out to
              address this hypothesis.  Anaerobic bacteria that respire (breathe) particulate
              iron (solid rust) may have been the first organisms to "breathe" on early
              Earth.  Ironically, little is known about the details of this process.  The
              respiratory system of aerobic bacteria (and humans) is located inside the cell
              because oxygen is able to diffuse through the cell wall and contact the
              respiratory system.  Anaerobic bacteria that breathe on solid rust are
              therefore presented with a unique problem:  the solid rust is unable to enter
              the cell and contact the respiratory system.  The project will demonstrate that
              "rust breathing" bacteria overcome this problem by putting their respiratory
              system on the cell outer surface where it is able to contact the solid rust and
              generate energy.

