Title       : Inhibitory Regulation of Behavior and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0110372

Award Number: 0110372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Fischer thomas.fischer@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Neural networks are dynamic systems that enable organisms to adapt to and learn
              about complex and variable environments. At the core of this adaptive process
              is the phenomenon of synaptic plasticity, an alteration in the efficacy of a
              synapse due either to intrinsic processes (e.g. activity of the neuron) or
              extrinsic processes (e.g. neuromodulators released by other neurons).  The
              functional significance of synaptic plasticity will be examined by focusing
              upon a specific set of identified inhibitory neurons within a well-defined
              neural circuit in the marine mollusc Aplysia.  Inhibitory processes can have
              profound consequences on neural function, yet have received comparatively
              little experimental emphasis.  By focusing on a specific synaptic process in a
              specific set of inhibitory neurons, these studies will allow for a simultaneous
              exploration of the function of both synaptic plasticity and inhibition in
              behavioral regulation.  Two basic issues will be examined, integrating
              experiments at the level of synapses with the level of behavior:  (1) The role
              of synaptic inhibition in behavioral regulation will be explored, examining the
              hypothesis that plasticity of inhibition may serve as a dynamic gain control
              mechanism that can regulate behavior across rapidly-changing environmental
              conditions.  (2) The role of inhibition in learning will be explored, by
              examining the hypothesis that plasticity of inhibition may serve to dynamically
              regulate the capacity for neural networks to express learning-related
              changes.
Information obtained from this project could help to elucidate
              general computational principles utilized by a neural networks to generate
              adaptive modifications, which can potentially be employed in algorithms usable
              by other computational or information processing devices (e.g. smart machines).
               From a theoretical perspective, it could address fundamental questions
              concerning the nature of adaptive modifications within neural networks that are
              required for the expression of different forms of learning and memory.

