Title       : Role of the PhosphoCTD in Spliceosome Assembly-
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0110241

Award Number: 0110241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arno L. Greenleaf arno@biochem.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariano A. Garcia-Blanco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the project is to investigate the structural basis for and
              functional consequences of tethering the splicing machinery to the
              transcription apparatus.  In particular, features of a model proposed by Morris
              and Greenleaf  (J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39935-39943 [2000]) will be pursued and
              tested.  In this model the splicing factor Prp40, which binds to the phosphoCTD
              of RNA polymerase II, is postulated to recruit the U1snRNP to elongating RNAP
              II and to tether the developing commitment complex to the transcription
              machinery.  This coupling to the transcriptase is proposed to cause early steps
              in the formation of spliceosomes to be more proficient.  In the current
              project, three objectives will be pursued.  One objective is to reveal a
              molecular basis for coupling spliceosome formation to transcription.  To
              achieve this objective, the identity of the phosphoCTD-interacting domain of
              Prp40 will be ascertained.  Then, the binding affinity and specificity of the
              newly-defined phosphoCTD-interacting domain will be measured.  A second
              objective is to identify the steps in spliceosome assembly that are accelerated
              when there is coupling to RNAP II transcription.  Toward this end, the rate of
              pre-commitment and commitment complex formation will be measured in an in vitro
              system in which splicing can be coupled to transcription  (Ghosh, S., and
              Garcia-Blanco, M. A. (2000)  RNA 6, 1325-1334).  The third objective is to test
                a) whether phosphorylation of the CTD is required to tether the splicing
              machinery to RNAP II, and  b) whether the CTD is sufficient for the tethering. 
               The results of these experiments will contribute to an increased understanding
              of gene expression pathways in eukaryotes.


	The first step in gene
              expression is called transcription, a process by which the information in a DNA
              strand is copied into a long RNA strand.  The second step is called RNA
              processing, wherein the long RNA strand is modified so that it can function as
              a messenger RNA, to direct the synthesis of a protein.  A major event in RNA
              processing is that of splicing, during which segments of the RNA strand not
              meant to be in the messenger RNA are cut out and the flanking segments are
              spliced together.  Splicing has usually been studied independently of
              transcription, but in cells the two processes are coupled.  This project seeks
              to reveal how the two processes are coupled physically and to disclose how the
              coupling affects splicing events functionally.  One objective is to
              characterize the molecular components that couple splicing to transcription;
              this characterization is necessary to understand how the two processes are
              physically linked.   Another main objective is to identify the steps in
              splicing that are accelerated when splicing is linked to transcription. 
              Defects in splicing can have severe consequences for an organism.  The work
              described here will contribute new information that will lead to a better
              understanding of splicing mechanisms.

