Title       : Ammonia Transport in E. coli Asparagine Synthetase B
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0110943

Award Number: 0110943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon M. Schuster schuster@biotech.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Boehlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Asparagine synthetase is the enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of the
              amino
acid Asparagine, an important component of proteins in all organisms.
              This enzyme has
been isolated and studied from a variety of sources, and
              recently the crystal structure of
the bacterial form of the enzyme has been
              elucidated. The crystal structure illustrated
that there was a channel that
              kept one of the highly reactive intermediates of the reaction
from interacting
              and becoming inactive through reaction with water in the solvent. This
mode of
              protecting enzyme intermediates from solvent inactivation has been reported
              for
other cases over the last decade. In none of these cases, however, has the
              mechanism of
the transport been elucidated. This project will utilize
              bacterial Asparagine Synthetase as
a model for reactive intermediate
              transport. It involves an experimental approach to
describe the components of
              the transport process. Elucidating the chemical components
required for the
              channeling of intermediates will enable researchers to understand
              the
chemistry of transport and to allow for design of novel coupled enzyme
              activities.
