Title       : Collaborative Research: Protein Quality Control in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0110791

Award Number: 0110791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ardythe A. McCracken mccracke@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              When cells make proteins for export (secretory proteins), it is critically
              important that the proteins are as they should be.  If not, there is a quality
              control mechanism, termed Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation (ERAD)
              that detects aberrant proteins and destroys them.  The importance of cleansing
              the secretory pathway of aberrant proteins is underscored by the fact that if
              mis-folded proteins accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), they induce
              the "unfolded protein response" (UPR), a cellular response that can lead in
              extreme cases to programmed cell death.  

Drs. McCracken and Brodsky
              originally discovered that ERAD involves the selection of aberrant proteins
              (ERAD substrates), transport of the substrate proteins back across the ER
              membrane into the cytoplasm, and subsequent proteolytic degradation of the
              substrate proteins via the proteasome.  This pathway has since been shown by
              several laboratories to be involved in the degradation of at least 20 different
              substrate proteins and to be conserved across eukaryotic species from yeast to
              humans.  Subsequent work demonstrated that at least two ER-lumenal chaperones,
              BiP (KAR2) and calnexin, are required for ERAD export of soluble protein
              substrates.  One of these, BiP, is also required for protein import into the
              ER.  Brodsky and McCracken have recently identified mutations in BiP that are
              specific for ERAD, and as part of this project they will biochemically
              characterize these mutations (plus others that they plan to identify or create
              via site-directed mutagenesis) in order to determine what aspects of BiP
              structure and activity are specifically required for ERAD.  

McCracken and
              Brodsky have also demonstrated that the ERAD pathway for an integral membrane
              protein, CFTR, is substantially different from that for soluble substrate
              proteins and involves a different set of chaperones.  Neither BiP nor calnexin
              are required for CFTR degradation, but a cytosolic Hsp70 chaperone, Ssa1p, is;
              conversely, Ssa1p is not required for ERAD of soluble substrate proteins.  As
              part of this project, the molecular basis for this distinction will be
              explored.  Specifically, two hypotheses will be examined using genetic and
              biochemical techniques: (1) Ssa1p is required for CFTR ubiquitination; and (2)
              Ssa1p is required to maintain an aggregation-prone cytoplasmic domain of CFTR
              in solution.

A tabulation of the factors necessary and dispensable for the
              degradation of multiple ERAD
substrates indicates that the requirements for
              the degradation of ERAD substrates may or may not
utilize common factors.
              Thus, the continued identification of genes required for the turnover of
              a
given substrate is essential. To this end, Brodsky and McCracken have
              isolated mutations in which the degradation of the Z variant of Alpha1-Protease
              Inhibitor (A1PiZ) is compromised in yeast. In addition, because the presence of
              mis-folded proteins in the ER activate both ERAD and the UPR, known UPR-target
              genes that are required for the degradation of A1PiZ have been identified. As
              part of this project, McCracken and Brodsky will carry out a functional
              characterization of both classes of genes necessary for the proteolysis of
              A1PiZ; results from this study are expected to provide a better mechanistic
              understanding of the ERAD selection and targeting process.

In sum, these
              studies represent a combination of genetic and biochemical methods
              aimed
toward understanding a recently discovered cellular pathway in cell
              biology.  The project will employ multiple approaches and will benefit from the
              synergistic expertise of the two collaborating scientists, Drs. Ardythe
              McCracken and Jeffrey Brodsky, who initially discovered the ERAD pathway.  The
              project will also continue to contribute to both classroom and laboratory
              research instruction of undergraduate and graduate students.




