Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Brassinosteroid Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0110575

Award Number: 0110575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Clouse steve_clouse@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brassinosteroids (BRs) are essential growth-promoting natural products found at
              low levels in pollen, seeds and young vegetative tissues throughout the plant
              kingdom. The P.I.'s group has identified a BR-insensitive mutant in Arabidopsis
              thaliana (bri1) that confers severe pleiotropic phenotypic effects inhibiting
              plant development. BRI1 has been shown by others to encode a membrane-bound
              leucine-rich repeat Ser/Thr  receptor kinase. In animals, the Transforming
              Growth Factor-b (TGF-b) family of peptides, acts via receptor kinases to
              prominently impact several pathways involved in animal development and adult
              homeostasis. TGF-b Receptor Interacting Protein (TRIP-1) is an intracellular
              substrate of the TGF-b Type II receptor kinase that plays an important role in
              TGF-b signaling. TRIP-1 is a WD-repeat protein that also has a dual role as an
              essential subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF3 in
              animals, yeast and plants, thereby revealing a putative link between a
              developmental signaling pathway and the control of protein translation. The
              P.I.'s group recently found that transcript levels of TRIP-1 homologs in plants
              are regulated by BR treatment under a variety of conditions, and that antisense
              TRIP-1 plants exhibited a broad range of developmental defects including some
              that resemble the phenotype of BR-deficient and -insensitive mutants.
              Furthermore, recombinant BRI1 kinase domain phosphorylates recombinant TRIP-1
              in vitro. These findings suggest that TRIP-1 may mediate some of the molecular
              mechanisms underlying the regulation of plant growth and development by BRs.
              The P.I. will test this hypothesis by performing the following two objectives:
              OBJECTIVE 1: TRIP-1 protein levels will be monitored under a variety of
              conditions, in both wild-type and BR mutants, and the effect of BR on
              translation initiation will be examined. The possible nuclear localization of
              TRIP-1 protein, in addition to its role in the eIF3 complex, will also be
              studied. OBJECTIVE 2: Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry will be
              used to identify in vivo phosphorylation sites of TRIP-1 and their dependence
              on an active BRI1 receptor kinase. This project should increase our
              understanding of BR signal transduction and the role that this hormone plays in
              controlling plant growth and development. Given that BRs are found throughout
              the plant kingdom, greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms of BR
              action could have practical impact on generating crop plants with altered
              growth properties. 
