Title       : SBIR Phase II: Fabrication of Photonic Band Gap Structures Embedded in Low
               Temperature Co-fired Ceramic for Millimeter Wave Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0110399

Award Number: 0110399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny Eliyahu deliyahu@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WaveBand Corporation
	      375 Van Ness Avenue, Suite 1105
	      Torrance, CA  90501    310/212-7808

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9165,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
              new materials engineered for microwave electronics.   As microwave applications
              expand, including portable wireless devices,  and as digital integrated circuit
              speeds and clock rates increase to the millimeter wave (MMW) range, the need
              arises for low-loss elements of microwave/MMW interconnects (EMIs) with
              properties uniform over a broad range of frequencies and environmental
              conditions.  A new technique is now sought to embed EMIs based on Photonic Band
              Gap Structures (PBSs) in ceramic substrates at an early stage of fabrication. 
              PBSs will reduce radiative losses in devices fabricated using the Low
              Temperature Co-fired Ceramic On Metal technique by preventing radiation leakage
              and by minimizing undesired scattering.  The result will be improved
              performance, without increasing manufacturing costs.  Phase I designed,
              fabricated, and tested PBS-based EMIs, wherein, cross waveguides with low cross
              talk were successfully tested.  Phase II will automate the design and
              production of devices that include PBS EMIs.  The technology will be
              demonstrated through the design and fabrication of a MMW antenna based on
              PBS.

A PBS will lead to quite new applications: frequency-band controlled
              filters, perfect channel-drop filters, point-defect resonant cavities,
              line-defect ninety-degree waveguide bends, waveguide intersections with low
              crosstalk, and others.  The new technique will be employed in high-volume
              production items for applications such as automotive radars, avionics, as well
              as in a variety of broadband wireless communication devices.

