Title       : Systematic Transposon Mutagenesis of the Maize Gene Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0110143

Award Number: 0110143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1990821            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen martiens@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lincoln D. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Lucito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Richard McCombie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The maize genome probably contains between 50,000 and 100,000 genes clustered in
              hypomethylated gene rich regions.  We have developed a new method for purifying
              these regions, and we will explore its use in identifying gene function.  This
              will be accomplished by sampling gene-rich portions of the genome that are
              chemically distinct from the gene poor regions, and then displaying them on
              microarrays (DNA chips).  These microarrays will then be queried using
              representations of the DNA corresponding to mutated genes from a large
              population of maize plants that carries transposable elements (jumping genes). 
              We have previously developed one such population (the Maize Targeted
              Mutagenesis population) with prior funding from the Plant Genome Research
              Program.  By using computational methods, we will combine the data from the two
              different resources to create an index of maize gene function, represented by
              maize seed corresponding to each mutated gene.  We anticipate making thousands
              of entries into this index, allowing maize geneticists to systematically
              determine the functions of indexed genes.
