Title       : Gene Targeting in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0110035

Award Number: 0110035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1564877            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary N. Drews Drews@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Doug Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent G. Golic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genome sequencing projects are providing a wealth of knowledge about the genes
              carried in plant genomes.  The ultimate goal of these projects is to understand
              the function of each of these genes.  However, DNA sequence information
              typically only hints at potential function, and laboratory experiments are
              needed to characterize the details of gene action.  The most powerful approach
              to characterizing gene function involves the analysis of mutant organisms. 
              Thus, there is a pressing need for the development of methods that can use DNA
              sequence information to make directed modifications of plant genomes.  The most
              desirable technique would give the ability to make a variety of directed
              modifications, and not be limited to functional knockouts.  One such technique
              is gene targeting via homologous recombination, which is widely used in yeast
              and the mouse.  However, a widely usable method for targeted modification of
              higher plant genes is not yet available. 

The goal of this project is to
              produce a gene targeting methodology based on homologous recombination for
              higher plants.  In this procedure, three constructs are introduced into the
              genome.  The first and second are chimeric gene constructs that enable
              regulated expression of the Cre Recombinase and I-SceI genes.  The third
              construct is a modified target gene placed between two loxP sites.  The
              modified target gene contains an I-SceI recognition sequence inserted into the
              middle of the gene.  In plants harboring all three constructs, expression of
              the Cre Recombinase and I-SceI genes is induced, these enzymes catalyze the
              formation of a broken-ended extrachromosomal DNA molecule in the nucleus, and
              homologous recombination between the extrachromosomal DNA molecule and the
              target gene generates two tandem copies of the target gene.  This gene
              targeting procedure can be used to inactivate a target gene or to introduce
              modifications into a target gene.   

To expedite development of a basic gene
              targeting procedure, Arabidopsis will initially be used as the test system. 
              Its short generation time and small size will allow rapid technology
              development and testing.  Furthermore, its small genome may increase homologous
              recombination frequency.  The method to be used in these experiments provides
              the ability to produce an almost unlimited variety of genetic changes.  Because
              the enzymes that carry out homologous recombination have been highly conserved
              throughout evolution, the methods we develop in Arabidopsis are very likely to
              work in a broad variety of species including commercially important crop
              plants.  Thus, the methodology developed by the proposed experiments should
              benefit future efforts to improve crop yield and quality.

