Title       : Collaborative Research: Human Capital and Income Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0110131

Award Number: 0110131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74131              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Moro amoro@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal studies inequalities between "groups", broadly defined. Our
              particular line of inquiry asks to what extent "informational externalities"
              can provide a credible theory for such inequalities. We briefly mention a few
              other potential applications, but the proposal is focused on: (1) Cross country
              income differentials in a world with free trade; (2) Statistical discrimination
              in the labor market.
In the first part of the proposal we introduce
              imperfectly observable human capital investments in an otherwise standard
              competitive trade model. We are interested whether ex post inequalities can
              arise between ex ante identical countries. We propose a model where this is
              possible because of interactions between straightforward price effects and the
              informational externality. Citizens in a nation specializing as a low human
              capital country are worse off than citizens in the country specializing as a
              high human capital country, but the situation is self-enforcing because
              incentives to invest are lower in the low human capital country. Incentives are
              bad because 1) with few investors someone who "looks good" is more likely an
              individual with low human capital that got a "lucky draw", 2) the possibility
              to import goods intensive in human capital from the other country makes human
              capital less valuable compared to a situation where countries don't trade. In
              our research we will investigate how these effects interact and whether the
              model provides a rationale for specialization, as well as explore a number of
              secondary implications of the model.
The second part considers statistical
              discrimination. Here, informational externalities belong to mainstream theory,
              but there is reluctance in the empirical literature to take the idea seriously.
              We believe there are two reasons for this. First, models of statistical
              discrimination have been (fairly) criticized for assuming away most any
              contractual solution to the information problem. We therefore propose to
              investigate how a richer set of admissable contracts and/or possibilities of
              learning affect an otherwise standard model of statistical discrimination. Our
              preliminary analysis suggests that, in a competitive market with learning where
              workers cannot commit to stay with a firm, there is an interesting free-riding
              problem in information acquisition that may force the firms to use "proxies"
              even if better information could be acquired. Hence, ex post learning is not
              sufficient to dismiss statistical discrimination. We will also consider ex ante
              contracts (without learning). Discrimination based on "irrelevant"
              characteristics is still possible and the setup is in a sense more appealing
              than the standard model, because discrimination can now arise in a unique
              equilibrium. The second major reason for the skepticism is, we think, that it
              is not clear what exactly would be evidence of statistical discrimination. We
              propose to deal with this by designing a model that "nests" the two major
              explanations for racial differences, statistical discrimination and racism.

