Title       : A Radiation Hybrid System for the Genetic and Physical Mapping of the Corn
               Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0110134

Award Number: 0110134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3081245            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Phillips phill005@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard W. Rines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The large and complex genome of corn has impeded integrated mapping and
              sequencing efforts. The anticipated isolation of all the corn genes, however,
              indicates the pressing need for efficient mapping systems and/or a reduction in
              genome complexity. This research addresses the need by developing
              multifunctional genetic materials that include the ability to rapidly
              physically map DNA sequences to chromosomes and chromosome segments of 1 Mbp or
              less. These materials coupled with microarray technology will allow the mapping
              of thousands of sequences in a single set of experiments. The complete set of
              oat-corn chromosome addition lines has been recovered. Hybridization of
              sequences to DNA of the 10 additions allows placement of sequences to
              chromosome including duplicated sequences or multigene families. Radiation
              hybrid (RH) lines are then produced by gamma irradiation of the addition lines.
              The research will focus on obtaining fertile lines for all 10 addition plants
              and on creating RH mapping panels for all 10 chromosomes. Preliminary data
              indicates the feasibility for efficient physical mapping of genes (ESTs and
              known genes) to chromosome and chromosome segment, and the identification and
              mapping of duplicated sequences. The ESTs isolated at Stanford University will
              initially be mapped. An RH physical map will complement other corn physical
              mapping systems by providing a scaffold at the subchromosomal fragment level.
              The specific objectives of this renewal are to (1) recover a complete set of
              fertile oat-corn addition lines and characterize the phenotype, cytology,
              chromosome stability and transmission of the addition and RH lines; (2) produce
              RH mapping panels for all 10 individual chromosomes for both low and high
              resolution mapping; (3) enable high-throughput mapping of ESTs to chromosomal
              regions for candidate gene discovery and comparative genome studies.

