Title       : Molecular Interactions and Functions of LeAGP1, a Modular Plasma Membrane
               Arabinogalactan-Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0110413

Award Number: 0110413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan M. Showalter showalte@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia J. Kieliszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arabinogalactan proteins (AGPs) are highly glycosylated hydroxyproline-rich
              glycoproteins unique to plants. Associated with the plasma membrane by a
              glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor, AGPs also occur freely soluble in the
              extracellular matrix, intercellular spaces and as exudates. The involvement of
              AGPs in virtually all aspects of plant growth and development is of
              considerable biological interest. Their putative roles in adhesion, guidance,
              cell signaling, nutrition, cell expansion, embryogenesis, and membrane
              protection yield interesting speculations and promising leads. However,
              definitive assignment of a precise biological function for any of these
              glycoproteins remains elusive; this is due in large part to problems associated
              with their purification. Only recently has it become possible to purify a
              single AGP in sufficient (i.e., bulk) quantity to enable not only structural,
              but functional analyses. This success emerged during the tenure of the previous
              NSF grant and involves expression of LeAGP1 as a fusion protein tagged with
              green fluorescent protein (GFP) in transgenic plant cell cultures. LeAGP1 is a
              major AGP in tomato and is putatively GPI-anchored to the plasma membrane,
              consistent with the prediction of a putative GPI-anchor addition sequence from
              the LeAGP1 gene as well as from localization of LeAGP1 to the plasma membrane
              in protoplasts with the LeAGP1 antibody and in cultured plant cells with
              GFP-labeled LeAGP1. This project seeks to exploit the LeAGP1 transgene and its
              glycosylated product to test specific hypotheses relating AGP form to function
              within the context of the following objectives: 1. Verify that LeAGP1 is a
              GPI-anchored (i.e., glypiated) AGP by purifying and biochemically
              characterizing membrane-bound LeAGP1. 2. Determine whether
              hydroxyproline-glycosylation is species-specific by expressing the LeAGP1
              transgene in tomato cell cultures. Glycosylation data will be determined and
              compared to that already obtained from transgenic tobacco cells. 3. Determine
              the molecular size and shape of LeAGP1 by transmission electron
              microscopy/rotary shadowing, circular dichroism, and molecular modeling and
              relate it to that inferred from the primary sequence and to plasma membrane
              loading data. 4. Evaluate plasma membrane loading and turnover of LeAGP1 in the
              context of its potential dynamic, structural role at the cell surface using
              biochemical and microscopic analyses. 5. Elucidate the molecular interactions
              and functions of LeAGP1 by a) testing for binding partners in regenerating
              protoplasts and in bead assays using immobilized LeAGP1 and soluble fragments
              of cell wall components, b) determining whether exogenous LeAGP1 affects the
              survival or growth of cultured cells, protoplasts, and pollen, and c)
              characterizing the second generation of transgenic tomato plants expressing the
              LeAGP1 antisense gene in order to determine whether the antisense genotype is
              linked with the altered growth phenotype as was observed in the primary
              antisense tranformants. Focusing on a single, purified AGP and subjecting it to
              hypothesis-based testing in the context of these objectives will advance our
              structural understanding of AGPs and provide a viable route to pinpoint precise
              biological interactions and functions for AGPs.
