Title       : "A Supramolecular Approach to Structure and Reactivity of Organic Molecules"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0110655

Award Number: 0110655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $982959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Turro turro@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9183,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project has as its objectives the exploration of supramolecular chemistry
              with special emphasis on supramolecular photochemistry. One facet of this
              exploration involves the changes in properties of molecules when they are
              contained within -- and interact with the interior surface of -- zeolites. An
              extension of this concept to the area of radical polymerization draws upon the
              analogy of the chain-end radical being contained within a polymeric vessel.
              Electron spin resonance and other spectroscopic techniques will be employed to
              charactersize these radicals and to measure their rate constants of addition to
              monomers. These investigations will provide knowledge concerning the crucial
              polymer chain propagating steps, which are of fundamental importance to
              critical issues in the field of free radical polymerization. Starburst
              dendrimers will be employed as probes inside DNA and liposome supramolecular
              containers, giving insight on the ability of some dendrimers to assist in the
              transfection of DNA into cells.

With this Award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program continues its support of the research and
              educational activities of Professor Nicholas J. Turro of Columbia University.
              Professor Turro's research is in the area of suprameolecular chemistry, wherein
              smaller molecules are contained within or otherwise interact with larger
              molecules with attendant alterations in their properties. These principles are
              likely to have important practical consequenses in the areas of polymer
              chemistry as well as DNA transfection technologies. In addition, one is able to
              gain knowledge about the properties of molecules as discrete, individual
              entities. These studies provide important multidisciplinary educational and
              training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students of chemistry as
              well as for postdoctoral associates.




