Title       : RUI: An Investigation of the Mechanism Producing Rhythmic Beating in Cilia and
               Flagella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0110024

Award Number: 0110024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $631280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Lindemann lindeman@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1144,1164,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Flagella and cilia are self-contained biological machines that convert chemical
              energy from ATP into useful mechanical work. If biologists are to understand
              how a flagellum works, they must have reliable information about the mechanical
              properties of a flagellum, and the forces that it produces. The goal of this
              project is to gather some of this vital information and incorporate it into a
              model of flagellar mechanics that can be described computationally. 

To
              accomplish this goal, Dr. Lindemann has developed a unique set of tools that
              will aid him in this endeavor.  He can measure small forces using a method
              based on force-calibrated glass microprobes. The technique has allowed him to
              measure the stall-force produced by a beating bull sperm flagellum. The stall
              force is valuable information because it tells us a great deal about how dynein
              works while it is harnessed in the confines of the intact axoneme. He has also
              measured the torque generated by a rat sperm flagellum in response to calcium,
              and the passive stiffness of both rat and bull sperm flagella. All of these are
              new and useful pieces of information that help to describe the mechanical
              behavior of flagella. Much of the planned activity in this project is directed
              at collecting needed information by applying the force measurement technique to
              novel experimental protocols. In addition, adaptations will be incorporated
              into an Atomic Force Microscope to improve the sensitivity of the technique.
              This will allow the PI to make finer measurements than heretofore possible.
              

The P. I. has developed a detailed computational model of the mechanics of
              the axoneme, called the Geometric Clutch model. The Geometric Clutch model is
              the only computational model to be specifically and successfully adapted to
              simulate the mammalian sperm axoneme. The Geometric Clutch model has so far
              been very effective at simulating, and even predicting, the behavior of bull
              sperm flagella. The computer model provides a framework that can be used to
              build a more complete representation of the mechanics of the axoneme. The data
              from force measurement experiments will be used to incorporate more accurate
              values for the active and passive elastic forces into the computer model. In
              turn, the model will be used to simulate the behavior of a flagellum. When
              experimental results and computed simulation are in agreement, the model often
              provides a means to understand the mechanism behind the observed result. The
              computed model provides the ability to compare experimental data and theory;
              this is a valuable tool in the process of understanding how the axoneme
              works.

Experimental model systems have assumed immense importance in
              biological research. The Chlamydomonas model system, with its large collection
              of mutant strains, has provided a priceless resource for studying the
              flagellum. Because of this there has been a remarkable period of growth in our
              knowledge of the molecular components of cilia and flagella. The mouse model is
              rapidly becoming a second resource for mutations affecting flagellar function,
              especially for mammalian sperm studies. Dr. Lindemann's research program has a
              well-established base of experience with mammalian sperm. He will develop a
              computer model specific to the mouse sperm axoneme as has been done with bull
              sperm and Chlamydomonas. A working model of the mouse sperm axoneme will
              position Dr. Lindemann's laboratory as the only research program that can both
              do experimental measurements on mouse sperm and also examine the results in a
              theoretical framework. Molecular discoveries are latent opportunities for
              understanding the axoneme, but only if there is a way to quantitate their
              effect on function. This project provides the tools to do this, in both of the
              prevailing experimental model systems.

The work will be done in the context
              of a predominantly undergraduate university environment.  Undergraduates will
              be actively involved in the research, and will receive interdisciplinary
              training in physics, biomechanics, molecular biology, cell biology, and
              computational modeling.  

