Title       : The Role of Two Novel cGMP Binding Proteins in Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0110810

Award Number: 0110810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Smith smith@bbri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston Biomed Res Inst
	      64 Grove Street
	      Watertown, MA  024722829    617/926-8040

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Chemotaxis is the movement of cells up a chemical gradient.  In
              Dictyostelium discoideum, chemotaxis is used under growth conditions to find
              bacteria as a food source, and under starvation conditions to promote
              aggregation of cells so that fruiting bodies may be formed.  The basic
              mechanisms by which cells detect chemoattractants are conserved between
              Dictyostelium and mammalian cells, and the cellular machinery that drives cell
              migration is also conserved.  Migration up a gradient involves the asymmetric
              remodeling of the cytoskeleton during the first minute after stimulation, and
              therefore requires that the activities and localization of key cytoskeletal
              components be tightly regulated in time and space.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to understand the signaling pathways that control remodeling of the
              cytoskeleton during processes such as chemotaxis.  The experimental
              tractability of Dictyostelium, coupled with its relative simplicity, make it an
              excellent model organism in which these fundamental signal transduction
              pathways can be worked out in detail.  The general strategy is to focus on the
              observation that formation of an intracellular peak of cGMP is essential for
              chemotaxis in Dictyostelium cells.  The hypothesis is that key cGMP-binding
              proteins in the cell directly or indirectly activate cytoskeletal components
              after treatment with chemoattractants.  Despite the well-established importance
              of cGMP in signaling in chemotaxis, to date no cGMP-binding proteins have been
              purified or cloned in Dictyostelium.  Two candidate cGMP-binding proteins have
              recently been identified by analyzing data from the Dictyostelium genomic
              database.  Single and double gene disruption strains for these cGMP binding
              proteins will be engineered by homologous recombination, and the hypothesis
              that they play a central role in chemotaxis will be tested by filming cells as
              they respond to a micropipet filled with chemoattractant.  The identification
              of cGMP binding proteins in Dictyostelium and determination of their role in
              chemotaxis will be a major advance in understanding how signaling during this
              process works.  The project also provides the opportunity for undergraduate
              students to participate in independent research. 

