Title       : Genomic Imprinting in Viviparous Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0110930

Award Number: 0110930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. O'Neill moneill@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel J. O'Neill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Higher organisms contain two copies, or alleles, of every gene, one inherited
              maternally and the other inherited paternally, and for most genes both copies
              are expressed. Having two copies of every gene, known as diploidy, is thought
              to protect organisms from the deleterious effects of recessive mutations.  For
              imprinted genes, however, only one copy is expressed.  Which copy of an
              imprinted gene pair is to be expressed is determined by which parent it was
              inherited from.  In other words, some genes are expressed only when inherited
              maternally and some only when inherited paternally.  About forty genes have
              been identified in mice, humans and other mammals that show imprinted patterns
              of expression, and there is evidence to suggest that there may be 200 or more
              imprinted genes in the mammalian genome.  Because silencing of one allele of a
              gene pair abolishes the protection against recessive mutation, it is difficult
              to explain why such a system of gene expression exists and how it evolved.  Of
              several evolutionary theories proposed to explain genomic imprinting, only one,
              the conflict model, has been broadly supported by molecular genetic, population
              genetic and embryological evidence.  The conflict model posits that genomic
              imprinting is the outcome of a conflict between parents over their relative
              contributions to developing offspring.  In mammals, the mother is the sole
              source of nutrients to gestating young.  In polygamous breeding animals, the
              genes transmitted by fathers will evolve mechanisms, or imprints, to take
              advantage of the mothers exclusive resource input to his genetic offspring. 
              This puts the mothers genes at a disadvantage since focussing resources on the
              offspring of one father compromises her output to the offspring of her other
              mates and may reduce her reproductive output altogether.  Maternally
              transmitted genes have, therefore, evolved mechanisms to counteract the
              imprinted genes transmitted paternally. The conflict model predicts the general
              rule that growth-enhancing genes are paternally active and maternally silent,
              and that growth-suppressing genes are maternally active and paternally silent. 
              This type of imprinted gene expression is peculiar to mammals, which are all
              viviparous, and in all of which developing embryos are supported by a placental
              connection with the mother.  An essential test of the conflict model is to
              search for imprinted genes in animals that have evolved viviparity and
              placentation independent of mammals.  This project investigates whether a genus
              of viviparous fish, Poeciliopsis, has evolved genomic imprinting in the context
              of parental conflict.  This work promises not only to test the evolutionary
              model, but also to provide a greater insight into the molecular mechanisms
              underlying imprinted gene expression and the function of imprinting in
              embryonic development.
