Title       : Dissertation Research: Analysis of Ancient mtDNA from California's Central
               Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0110612

Award Number: 0110612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11625              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Smith dgsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ancient DNA is a valuable tool with which to test hypotheses relating to
              population movements and expansions in prehistoric times. Advances in molecular
              biological techniques, including the automation of the Polymerase Chain
              Reaction (PCR), has made it possible to examine mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
              extracted from ancient human remains.  This provides an opportunity to directly
              investigate genetic material from prehistoric peoples.  

Archaeological and
              linguistic evidence suggest that prehistoric population movements in North
              America were widespread and common. Consequently, many contemporary Native
              American populations occupy a different geographical region from their
              ancestors and assessing relationships between ancient and modern populations is
              difficult without genetic information.  In this project, ancient and modern DNA
              from populations in the Central Valley of California will be used to test
              specific hypotheses regarding the peopling and population structure of the
              region. Linguistic evidence suggests that a Penutian speaking population began
              replacing Hokan speaking populations in California Central Valley approximately
              4000ybp. While archaeological and linguistic data suggest substantial
              interaction among the peoples of California, the Great Basin, and the Columbia
              Plateau, the genetic data obtained through ancient DNA studies in these regions
              will provide insight into the association between cultural similarities and
              biological relatedness. 

Migrations in prehistoric California have also been
              tied to the spread of technology in the last 3000 years. DNA extracted from
              these prehistoric human remains can be used to model the speed and timing of
              migrations of hunter-gatherer populations, and to examine the demographic
              consequences of a shift in resource acquisition practices. This information
              bears directly on modeling the timing and mode of the initial peopling of the
              Americas.





