Title       : Piecemeal Microautophagy of the Nucleus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0110972

Award Number: 0110972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453872             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Goldfarb dasg@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proteolysis plays fundamental roles in cell homeostasis, cell cycle control,
              regulation of transcription, and development.  Lysosomal/vacuolar autophagy and
              the proteasome pathway handle the bulk of cellular proteolysis.  Although
              proteasome function has been characterized in considerable detail, very little
              is known about the molecular mechanism of autophagy.  Autophagy delivers
              proteins, RNAs,  lipids, carbohydrates, and entire organelles to the
              lysosome/vacuole where they are degraded by soluble acid hydrolases.  Autophagy
              occurs by at least two morphologically distinct mechanisms that are conserved
              between yeast and mammals.  In macroautophagy, cytoplasm and organelles are
              enveloped by double membrane vesicles called autophagosomes, which fuse with
              the vacuole membrane to release autophagic bodies into the vacuole lumen for
              degradation.  During microautophagy, bulk cytoplasm and organelles are
              sequestered into invaginations of the vacuole membrane which are released into
              the lumen by homotypic membrane scission.  
It was recently discovered that
              nonessential portions of the yeast nucleus are degraded in the vacuole by a
              novel form of receptor-mediated microautophagy called Piecemeal Microautophagy
              of the Nucleus (PMN).  PMN occurs in the physical context of Nucleus-Vacuole
              (NV) junctions, which are formed though physical interactions between Vac8p in
              the vacuole membrane and Nvj1p in the nuclear envelope. The first
              morphologically distinguishable phase of PMN is the development of convex
              bulges in NV junctions.  Bulges develop into blebs that become increasingly
              engulfed by the vacuole until they remain attached to the nucleus by narrow
              tethers.  PMN blebs detach from the nucleus by scission of vacuolar and nuclear
              membranes and are released as PMN vesicles into the vacuole lumen.  Finally,
              PMN vesicles are degraded by soluble vacuolar hydrolases and the products
              either stored in the vacuole or recycled to the cytoplasm.  
PMN is gradually
              derepressed during asynchronous growth as nutrients become limiting.  The
              nutritional control of PMN is mediated by the TOR signaling pathway and a
              recently described gene, PMN1/Yih1 .  Cells remain viable during PMN because
              chromosomal DNA is excluded from blebs and vesicles.  Nuclear components
              targeted for PMN, including nuclear pore complexes and the pre-ribosome rich
              portion of the nucleolus, are packaged into PMN blebs.  PMN represents the
              first case of selective autophagy where both the vacuole receptor (Vac8p) and
              the cargo ligand (Nvj1p) are known. These findings provide a facile genetic,
              cellular, and biochemical model system for elucidating the molecular mechanism
              of selective microautophagy. The aims of this project focus on genes that are
              both conserved in humans and central to elucidating the molecular mechanism and
              physiological control of PMN:
1.  PMN-mediated degradation of nuclear pore
              complexes (NPCs). This aim will test whether PMN functions to degrade and
              recycle excess or dispensable nuclear components. The targeting and degradation
              of specific PMN cargo and the rates of synthesis and degradation of NPCs in
              growing and starving cells will be characterized.  It will be determined
              whether specific nucleoporins are removed from the NPC prior to their delivery
              into PMN blebs.  For example, Mlp1p and Mlp2p normally link yeast chromosomes
              to the nucleoplasmic face of the NPC.  Because chromatin is excluded from PMN
              vesicles, it will be determined whether Mlp1p and Mlp2p remain associated with
              telomeres and do not accompany the NPC into PMN blebs. 
2.  Regulation of PMN
              by Pmn1p/Yih1p.  Pmn1p/Yih1p is a Nvj1p interacting protein as determined by
              two-hybrid assay.  Also, PMN1 is necessary for the repression of PMN in rich
              medium, where it is likely to potentiate TOR kinase signaling.  PMN1/Yih1 is
              conserved in mammals, although its function is not known.  Experiments will be
              performed to elucidate the molecular mechanism by which Pmn1p/Yih1p  controls
              PMN.  These include intracellular localization studies, analysis of how
              PMN1p/Yih1p levels are controlled, determination of the physical basis by which
              Pmn1p/Yih1p interacts with Nvj1p, and assays to determine how Pmn1p/Yih1p
              controls the degradation of Nvj1p.  

The project will contribute to the
              integration of research and education through the participation of
              undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, and through the utilization
              of the project as a pedagogical organizing tool in a course taught by Dr.
              Goldfarb.


