Title       : RUI: Tissue-Specific Gene Regulation in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0110238

Award Number: 0110238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig T. Woodard cwoodard@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Steroid hormones control a wide range of physiological and developmental
              processes in higher organisms, acting in conjunction with receptor proteins to
              regulate the stage- and tissue-specific transcription of target genes.  The
              study of steroid receptor genetics and biochemistry has led to enormous
              advances in our understanding of how steroids activate gene transcription. 
              Remarkably, a single hormone appears to be capable of inducing extremely
              different responses, depending on cellular and temporal context. Although much
              is understood about how steroid receptors control transcription in cultured
              mammalian cells, little is understood about how these effects on gene
              expression result in the dramatic stage- and tissue-specific developmental
              changes associated with steroid hormone action.  This project makes use of the
              fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, to examine how steroid-induced changes in
              gene expression control specific cellular responses during development.  Pulses
              of the steroid 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone) trigger genetic regulatory
              hierarchies that direct both destruction of tissues by programmed cell death,
              and morphogenesis (the formation of structures).  This project focuses on the
              roles of nuclear receptor beta-FTZ-F1 and the ecdysone receptor in controlling
              the stage- and tissue-specific expression of a set of ecdysone-inducible
              "early" genes, including BR-C, E74A, E75A and E93.  In this examination of the
              molecular mechanism underlying these gene regulatory phenomena, particular
              attention is paid to the regulation of E93. E93 is precisely regulated by
              ecdysone in dying cells, where it induces a programmed cell death response.  In
              certain tissues, such as the larval salivary gland, the regulation of E93 by
              ecdysone depends on beta-FTZ-F1, which appears to provide E93 with the
              competence to respond to the hormone.  Goals of this project are to address how
              members of the nuclear receptor superfamily regulate the stage- and
              tissue-specific expression of E93, as well as BR-C, E74A, and E75A during
              development, and to shed light on the mechanisms by which steroid hormones
              elicit distinct biological responses.
