Title       : Linking Rice, Arabidopsis and the Grasses to Explore Natural Genetic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0110004

Award Number: 0110004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1356830            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. McCouch srm4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To date, the map-based cloning and characterization of genes from crop species
              has largely been limited to monogenic traits, such as those providing disease
              resistance, that are controlled by single genes causing clear phenotypic
              effects. Most agronomically-important traits, such as yield and yield
              components, however, are polygenic traits controlled by multiple genes and
              influenced by the environment. Over the past decade, the application of
              molecular markers and genetic linkage maps has allowed specific regions of the
              genome controlling polygenic traits, called quantitative trait loci (QTLs), to
              be identified in all of the major crop species. In spite of the wealth of
              positional information for these regions, however, few genes underlying
              quantitative traits have actually been cloned. As a result, many questions
              concerning the nature and function of these genes, as well as the molecular
              mechanisms behind the genetic variation of agronomically-important traits,
              remain unanswered. The genes underlying QTLs derived from a wild rice ancestor
              (O. rufipogon) that are associated with natural variation for flowering time,
              grain weight, and plant height in elite cultivated material will be identified
              and characterized. Three QTLs that map to rice chromosome 1, one of the first
              rice chromosomes to be completely sequenced, will be targeted. The specific
              objectives are to fine-map major QTLs for flowering time, grain weight, and
              plant height, then to isolate candidate genes that are located within those
              regions and, finally, to demonstrate phenotypic complementation via
              transformation with genes underlying the QTLs. The sequence variation from
              orthologs of the genes underlying the target QTLs in wild and cultivated Oryza,
              other grasses, and Arabidopsis will be compared to gain an evolutionary
              perspective and insight into functionally-important conserved domains. This
              work will generate significant new information about the identity and
              functional significance of genes associated with agronomically-important traits
              in the grasses and will test a multi-faceted strategy for rapid identification
              of genes underlying QTLs when genomic sequence is available in the target
              region.
