Title       : SBIR Phase II: Inversion of Geophysical Measurements for Fracture Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0110276

Award Number: 0110276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Research Inc
	      76 Olcott Dr
	      White River Junction, VT  050012313    802/296-2401

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
Program Ref : 1038,1266,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project considers an
              innovative method for detecting and quantifying natural fracture systems in
              rock.  The geometry of the fracture system controls the permeability of many
              oil and gas reservoirs and aquifers.  Both oil and gas and environmental
              applications require new tools and techniques to quantify the fracture
              geometry, thus allowing prediction of permeability.  During the Phase I
              research an inverse method was developed for fracture geometry from diverse
              geophysical measurements. This was accomplished by combining forward models
              relating fracture geometry to various anisotropic, stress-dependent properties
              including permeability, electrical conductivity, and seismic velocity with a
              maximum entropy regularization criterion. It was demonstrated that a relatively
              small number of geophysical measurements could be used to invert for a
              statistical description of the fracture geometry with some predictive power. 
              Following this proof of principle, in Phase II, this method will now be turned
              into an interactive tool for studying and understanding fracture system
              behavior for oil and gas and environmental applications. 

To accomplish
              this, the forward models will be refined, the inversion algorithm will be tuned
              for this specific problem, and the algorithms will be validated using case
              studies.  This new capability will likely provide many improvements to
              exploration, development, and reservoir performance activities by defining
              realistic input parameters for reservoir fluid flow simulators. It is in our
              national interest to develop new innovative and cost effective exploration and
              reservoir simulation technologies which will extend the useful lifetime of oil
              and gas reservoirs and extending the period of time that competitively priced
              oil and natural gas can be produced in this country.   
l
