Title       : SBIR Phase II: Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0110520

Award Number: 0110520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497215             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Broadley sbroadley@broadleyjames.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broadley-James Corporation
	      19 Thomas
	      Irvine, CA  92618    949/829-5524

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              long-lived, stable reference electrode that dramatically improves
              potentiometric measurements, such as pH, redox, and other ion-specific
              measurements.  The new reference electrode exploits recent developments in
              microfluidics and nanotechnology to stabilize the liquid-junction potential, a
              source of error and a cause of frequent sensor calibration and maintenance.
              Stabilizing the liquid-junction potential of the reference electrode opens a
              new realm of potentiometric sensor design and application. The technical
              feasibility of this innovative electrode was demonstrated in the Phase I
              project.  Testing in a variety of environments showed variations less than 0.5
              mV in the reference electrode potential over an 8 hour period and response
              times less than 60 seconds, compared to potential variations up to 20 mV and
              response times of over an hour for conventional reference electrodes.  The flow
              of electrolyte through the junction was less than 0.1 l per minute, or 50 ml
              per year of continuous operation.  The Phase II project will develop assembly
              processes, more robust structures, and develop and build sensors for
              field-tests.

The potential commercial application reduction in sensor
              calibration and sensor replacement which would save the US process industries
              approximately $240 million per year in sensor costs and labor expenses. Exports
              of US manufactured sensors with this technology will significantly increase as
              foreign process industries seek similar cost savings.  Furthermore, this
              reference electrode can serve as a basic building block in microfluidic
              sensors, estimated to be a multi-billion dollar industry in the next decade.
