Title       : Modulation of Calcium Signaling in Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0110409

Award Number: 0110409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Thayer thayer@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Modulation of Calcium Signaling in Neurons

Nerve cells convert electrical
              signals into changes in calcium ion to trigger
biochemical responses. Only
              during stimulation or under pathological conditions
are calcium levels
              elevated. Under normal conditions the intracellular calcium
concentration is
              kept very low by a complex series of pathways that pump calcium
out of the
              cell or into organelles. The objective of this proposal is to study
              the
regulation of three calcium regulatory processes. 1) Calcium is removed
              from the
cell by pumps embedded in the cell-surface membrane. The mechanism by
              which
a particular genetic variation of the calcium pump is modulated by
              a
neurotransmitter-activated pathway will be determined. 2) The mitochondrion
              is
an intracellular organelle that participates in cellular energy metabolism
              and also
takes up large amounts of calcium. The possibility that mitochondria
              act as
calcium sinks to create calcium microdomains will be examined. 3) When
              internal
stores of calcium are depleted calcium influx pathways are activated
              to refill the
store. How this refilling pathway controls calcium release from
              the store will be
determined. To achieve these goals neurons will be grown in
              culture (in a dish),
and studied individually with optical and
              electrophysiological instrumentation.
Calcium acts as an intracellular
              messenger that triggers processes ranging
from gene expression to the release
              of neurotransmitters and hormones. Thus,
fluctuations in calcium trigger
              adaptive changes in neurons and play an essential
role in cell-to-cell
              communication. This work will increase our understanding of
how neurons
              process information at the molecular and cellular level, and may
reveal new
              targets for drugs.

