Title       : Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in Streptococcus pneumoniae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0110311

Award Number: 0110311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Morrison damorris@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genetic transformation is a naturally occurring, inducible gene replacement
              process that is relatively simple and very efficient; yet the mechanism of this
              natural bacterial system for 'gene therapy' is not understood. Competence for
              genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus pneumoniae) occurs during
              a brief period of highly specialized protein synthesis, coordinated among all
              cells of an actively growing culture. During a period of approximately 10-20
              minutes, the competent cells can transport DNA strands into the cytoplasm and
              direct them so as to replace homologous genes in the chromosome very
              efficiently. Central elements of the coordination mechanism are a secreted
              17-amino-acid peptide pheromone, a two-component regulatory system that senses
              the peptide pheromone signal, and a putative accessory sigma factor. To
              identify genes involved in the pheromone sensing and DNA-processing mechanisms
              and to determine their roles, this project relies on standard genetic
              techniques and the efficient gene replacement provided by the natural
              transformation process itself, in combination with molecular methods in vitro,
              recombinant DNA cloning using new vectors in pneumococcus, and DNA microarray
              gene expression analysis. To establish the genetics of the system, gene
              disruption mutations are made by combining DNA cassettes obtained by polymerase
              chain reaction synthesis followed by direct insertion into the pneumococcal
              chromosome. The project will identify and determine the function of genes of
              this natural transformation system in two broad areas: (a) genes allowing
              cell-to-cell communication for regulation of this pathway in response to a
              measure of population density, and (b) genes of the pathway that transports
              extracellular DNA into the cell and processes it for genetic recombination.

