Title       : Mechanism of ATP-Driven DNA Packaging in Bacteriophage T4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0110574

Award Number: 0110574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venigalla B. Rao Rao@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The mechanism by which double stranded DNA viruses translocate DNA into a
              preformed virus coat and organize it into a structure that has a density as
              high as a DNA crystal is a fascinating, unsolved, biological problem.  In
              bacteriophage T4, an E. coli lytic virus, a 56 mm long DNA molecule is packaged
              within an icosahedral capsid that is approximately 0.115 mm long and 0.085 mm
              wide. Genetic and biochemical studies suggest that an ATP-powered DNA packaging
              "machine" constituted by the prohead portal protein and two nonstructural
              packaging/terminase proteins drives DNA packaging.  This project addresses one
              of the central questions of the DNA packaging problem, i.e., which component of
              the packaging machine consumes the ATP and couples it to DNA translocation?  
              It is hypothesized that the large terminase subunit gp17, which possesses two
              consensus ATP binding sites and exhibits an ATPase activity, is the
              translocating ATPase in phage T4.  This hypothesis will be tested by a novel
              combinatorial mutagenesis paradigm.  Mutant libraries consisting of all
              possible codon combinations will be constructed at the signature residues of
              the consensus ATP binding sites in gp17.  The mutations will be transferred
              into phage T4 genome by a site-specific marker rescue strategy.  A collection
              of novel mutants exhibiting null, plaque-size, and temperature sensitive
              phenotypes will be generated.  Selected mutants will be analyzed by molecular
              and biochemical approaches to test the linkage between the putative ATPase
              centers and DNA translocation.  The predictions of a rotatory model for DNA
              translocation will also be tested. These approaches are broadly applicable to
              analyze functional sites in other terminases and ATP-triggered biochemical
              machines, and serve as an exciting model for training undergraduate and
              graduate students. 
