Title       : Geminiviruses and Plant Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0110536

Award Number: 0110536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin LINDA@BCHSERVER.BCH.NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the E2F transcription factors are key
              regulators of cell
division and differentiation in animals. Related proteins
              have been identified in plants, but little is
known about their functions. In
              animals, much of our knowledge of pRb and E2F is from studies
of DNA tumor
              viruses and their tumor antigen proteins. These viral proteins interact
              with
under-phosphorylated pRb (the form associated with cell cycle arrest and
              differentiation) and
disrupt pRb/E2F complexes, leading to altered host gene
              expression and cell cycle reentry.
Recent experiments suggested that
              geminiviruses use a similar mechanism to alter cell cycle
controls in plants.
              The overall goals of this research are to analyze host gene expression
during
              geminivirus infection and to use these important plant viruses as tools to
              study how pRb
and E2F regulate plant gene expression. The first aim is to
              develop an Arabidopsis system for
studying geminivirus-mediated host induction
              and pRb interactions. This system will combine
geminiviruses with Arabidopsis
              genetic and database tools to study pRb and E2F function in
plants. The second
              aim is characterize the global changes in Arabidopsis gene
              expression
associated with geminivirus infection using gene profiling
              technology. The third aim is to
generate transgenic plants that express wild
              type and mutant viral proteins that differ only in their
pRb binding
              capacities. Comparison of the expression profiles of these lines will provide
              insight
into the identities of plant genes controlled by pRb and E2F.
              Together, these experiments are
likely to identify genes whose products are
              associated with the cell division cycle,
endoreduplication, differentiation,
              and disease in plants. 

The studies represent a unique opportunity to study
              the dedifferentiation process and the return to the cell division cycle in
              intact mature tissues of a higher eukaryote.  They have the potential to
              uncover plant-specific components of these two important processes and  may
              have a profound impact on agriculture by providing insight into strategies for
              altering plant growth.
