Title       : Function of an Unconventional Myosin in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0110342

Award Number: 0110342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray H. Gavin rhgavin@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Gavin's laboratory has identified a novel unconventional myosin, Myo1p, in
              the model organism Tetrahymena thermophila, a ciliated protozoan. Approximately
              2.7 kb of MYO1 have been cloned and sequenced thus far.  To uncover the
              functions of Myo1p, targeted gene disruption was used to create a Tetrahymena
              strain that lacked a functional MYO1 gene. Transformed MYO1 cells had a reduced
              rate of food vacuole formation, and the macronucleus frequently failed to
              elongate properly during amitotic cell division resulting in grossly unequal
              segregation of DNA to progeny. 

In order to test additional hypotheses for
              Myo1p function in endocytosis and nuclear segregation, a full-length MYO1
              sequence will have to be acquired and new reagents developed. This one-year
              project involves the completion of MYO1 cloning and sequencing and the creation
              of expression constructs for GFP-actin, GFP-tubulin, and GFP-Myo1p fusion
              proteins. PCR-based library screening of both genomic DNA and cDNA libraries
              will be used to complete the cloning and sequencing of MYO1.  Screening is in
              progress and will be continued over the next year.  In addition, RACE will be
              used to confirm the 5' and 3' ends of the cloned MYO1. Two different approaches
              involving standard recombinant protocols will be used to create GFP constructs
              for expression in Tetrahymena.  In one approach, GFP-tagged genes (MYO1, actin,
              or tubulin) will be linked to pVGF-1, a rDNA-based replicative vector.  Another
              approach for creating GFP constructs that will be used is to insert a GFP
              tagging construct at the 5' end of the gene sequence of interest.

The
              functions and structure-function relationships of conventional myosins, such as
              skeletal muscle myosin, have been the subject of intense study for many years,
              and are reasonably well understood.  In contrast, the various unconventional
              non-muscle myosins have only recently begun to attract serious research
              attention, and our understanding of the roles they play in the life and
              functionality of different types of cells is only slowly beginning to emerge. 
              This project is expected to add to both the knowledge base of unconventional
              myosins and to our understanding of the biology of single-celled organisms such
              as the ciliated protozoan used in these studies.  
 
	




 






              


