Title       : Fine-Scale Genetic Mapping and Sequence Analysis of Genes Involved in Honey Bee
               Stinging Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0110842

Award Number: 0110842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $529306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Hunt ghunt@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fine-scale mapping and genetic analysis of genes involved in honey bee stinging
              behavior.

ABSTRACT

	The genetic architecture (numbers of genes and their
              effects) of behavioral traits is an important consideration for the field of
              behavioral ecology, yet little is known on this topic.  The honey bee may be
              useful in this regard because it is becoming recognized as a model organism for
              behavioral and behavioral genetic studies.  As a behavioral genetic model, the
              bee has the advantages of ease of culture, social behavior, haploid males, and
              the highest recombination rate ever reported for a metazoan.  The high meiotic
              recombination rate facilitates the construction of detailed genetic maps and
              cloning genes based on their positions on genetic maps because genetic distance
              is directly related to crossover rates.  The proposed project seeks to study
              the role of specific genes and pheromonal communication in honey bee defensive
              behavior.  Previous studies identified and mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL)
              that mark the positions of genes that influence a colony-level behavioral
              trait, the numbers of stings that bees deposited in a behavioral assay.  QTL
              that influence alarm pheromone production were also identified.  Two of the
              "stinging" QTL were subsequently found to influence the guarding and stinging
              behavior of individual bees, thus confirming the QTL effects on behavior.  One
              of the two confirmed QTL also may have an influence on alarm pheromone
              production.  A QTL that influences levels of an unknown alarm pheromone
              component that correlated with colony stinging response mapped close to this
              defensive-behavior QTL.
	The proposed research would further characterize QTL
              effects on individual and colony behavioral phenotypes and seek to identify
              specific components of behavior that are influenced by each gene.  In addition,
              crosses with haploid males would allow for further genetic dissection to
              pinpoint the location of genes more precisely and ultimately obtain the
              sequence of these genes.  These crosses would generate lines of bees, each of
              which is descended from a different haploid male.  The haploid fathers will
              differ from each other in key regions near the QTL.  The next step in the
              proposed research is to identify large bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
              clones of honey bee DNA that span the region containing the QTL.  For example,
              if the gene influencing the behavioral trait can be pinpointed to 5
              centimorgans of genetic distance, this represents about 250 kilobases (Kb) of
              honey bee DNA.  This 250 Kb region can be spanned by just a few BAC clones
              because the current honey bee BAC library has average clone sizes of 113 Kb. 
              Sequencing and bio-informatic analyses would then be used to identify candidate
              genes for these QTL.

