Title       : Seri Dictionary and Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0110676

Award Number: 0110676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Marlett steve_marlett@sil.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Stephen Marlett and his colleague
              Mary Moser will conduct two years of linguistic research on Seri, an indigenous
              language in northwestern Mexico used by under 700 people. One goal of this
              research is to complete the first comprehensive dictionary of Seri. The
              dictionary will include a brief description of the Seri grammar for both
              native-speaker and outsider use. The project will also produce a corpus of
              interlinearized texts. These texts will be based on materials edited by Seri
              associates and published for the language community as a contribution to the
              preservation of culturally-important literature. They will be presented with
              practical spelling, phonological spelling, interlinear Spanish and English word
              glosses, and free translation in Spanish and English. They complement the
              dictionary and grammar by showing the words in literary context. The groundwork
              for this research includes extensive fieldwork, circulation of drafts of the
              work, and personal interaction with three generations of members of the Seri
              people. Researchers will now verify thousands of lexical entries and their
              accompanying illustrative sentences. Experts will be consulted in the areas of
              ichthyology, ornithology, herpetology, and botany. The dictionary and
              interlinearized texts will be in Seri, Spanish, and English. The inclusion of
              Spanish will make the work useful to Seri speakers, as well as to non-Seri
              Spanish speakers in Mexico. The inclusion of English expands the audience to
              international linguists and anthropologists doing research on the area's
              ecology. The researchers have worked closely with native Seri authorities and
              other members of the Seri nation at all stages of the dictionary and grammar
              preparation, to ensure completeness, usefulness, appropriateness, and
              accessibility. 

The significance of this research is twofold. First, the
              Seri language is the sole surviving language of a linguistic family within the
              putative Hokan stock. Little information is available about other now-extinct
              languages that may have been closely related to it. The dictionary will support
              more historical and comparative linguistic research. The Seri people were still
              living by traditional hunting and gathering in the mid-twentieth century.
              Therefore, study of their language is as significant for the field of
              anthropology as it is for the field of linguistics. Second, this project's
              dictionary, grammar, and translated texts will be available to the Seri
              community in a format that is supportive of language maintenance efforts and
              bilingual education. These works will also aid (English- and Spanish-speaking)
              researchers who increasingly work with Seri associates in ecology and related
              fields, but who are handicapped by the language barrier. An important
              additional result of the project is the training that some key Seri men and
              women will receive in editing and processing Seri language materials. This will
              benefit the Seri people for years into the future.

