Title       : Structure of Extracellular Quorum Sensing Molecules from Dimorphic Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0110999

Award Number: 0110999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Nickerson knickerson1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey L. Atkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick H. Dussault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project uses the medically important dimorphic fungus Candida albicans to
              study general mechanisms of shape determination in fungi. It extends the
              bacterial concept of quorum sensing to more complicated organisms such as the
              fungi. The project explores how single celled fungi determine how many of their
              kind are present at a certain location.  That is, are enough cells present to
              have achieved a threshold or quorum?  For Candida albicans, the consequences of
              quorum sensing are that the fungi  exhibit different growth patterns depending
              solely on their initial cell  densities; they grow as single celled, budding
              yeasts at high cell  densities and as long filaments at low cell densities.
              Each cell releases  low levels of a specific signaling molecule and then senses
              the  extracellular concentration of that molecule. This project focuses on
              whether quorum sensing is a general phenomenon in all dimorphic  fungi and aims
              to elucidate the chemical structures of the molecules which are secreted and 
              detected. The long term benefits from this project could include the 
              development of novel anti-fungal drugs, designed not to kill the fungus but
              instead to restrict its growth to the yeast morphology. There is a dire need of
              effective anti-fungal antibiotics and a novel class of anti-fungal drugs would
              greatly benefit the treatment of both animal and plant diseases.

