Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Proteasomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0110593

Award Number: 0110593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Belote jbelote@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulated protein degradation is important for normal cell function, playing a
              key role in such diverse processes as growth control, metabolic regulation,
              embryonic development, and cell cycle progression.  Targeted protein breakdown
              is also important for protecting cells against the potentially deadly effect of
              accumulated damaged or malformed polypeptides. Thus, an understanding of how
              cells selectively identify unwanted proteins and target them for destruction
              has fundamental importance for the study of development, cellular metabolism,
              and cell fate determination.  An essential component of this pathway is the
              proteasome, a large, multi-subunit complex that acts as the proteolytic
              "machine" that removes abnormal polypeptides and short-lived regulatory
              proteins from cells.  Recent work, using the tools of biochemistry and cell
              biology, has revealed much about the physical and biochemical properties of
              proteasomes, but many aspects of their biological function remain unclear. As
              an approach toward learning more about their role during development, a genetic
              and molecular study of Drosophila proteasomes is being undertaken. This project
              is focused on two major questions: (1) what is the role of the
              ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in specific developmental processes, and (2) are
              there structurally distinct cell-type specific proteasomes that have
              specialized functions? To address the first question, a mutational approach is
              being pursued. A number of dominant proteasome mutants have been isolated, and
              are being used to disrupt proteasome function in vivo, so that their effects on
              specific biological processes can be examined. For the second question, a
              reverse genetics approach is being used. Several proteasome subunit genes that
              are expressed exclusively in male germ cells have been isolated by molecular
              cloning methods. A combination of molecular, cell biological, and genetic
              approaches are being used to investigate the importance of proteasome-mediated
              protein degradation in spermatogenesis, and to address the functional role of a
              "sperm-specific" proteasome in this process.


