Title       : Collaborative Research: Developing Methods to Study Age-Related Changes in the
               Physiology of Forest Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0110021

Award Number: 0110021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Greenwood greenwd@umenfa.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0110021  Michael Greenwood, University of Maine
0110142  Barbara Bond, Oregon
              State University
 
Trees continue to increase in size and complexity over
              life spans that may last many centuries, and each year the growing regions of
              their shoots produce new foliage and reproductive structures.   As they grow
              older and larger, forest trees appear to grow more slowly, produce thicker
              foliage and more reproductive structures. These changes are likely to be
              associated with age-related declines in the growth rates of forest stands,
              which occur before the mid-point of the lifespan of important timber species. 
              Although similar patterns of age- and size-related change in the morphology and
              physiology of foliage have been described for numerous species, the mechanisms
              governing these changes are virtually unknown. Possible explanations for these
              phenomena range from decreased photosynthesis due to increased resistance of
              water flow to a genetically controlled ageing process that slows growth and
              photosynthesis.  Processes regulating maturation, ageing and senescence are
              fundamental to biology, and some of these processes are probably unique to
              large, long-lived trees. A more complete understanding of the basis for this
              decline is necessary to model and accurately predict the growth of forests over
              time.

Reciprocal grafting of shoots between trees of different ages offers
              great potential as a tool to distinguish among explanations for changes in
              growth behavior. In this approach, shoots from old growth trees are grafted
              onto juvenile and young-mature trees, and shoots from juvenile and young-mature
              trees are grafted into the crowns of old-growth trees. The extent, direction
              and time-course of changes in the growth, morphology, and physiology of foliage
              produced by the grafted shoots will provide insight into the mechanisms
              governing age-related change. This study will attempt reciprocal grafting on
              two species of long-lived trees, red spruce and Douglas fir.  These species are
              adapted to substantially different climatic regimes, so a comparative study
              will provide insights into the universality or variability of processes
              associated with age-related changes in tree growth. 

