Title       : SGER: Molecular Analysis of Connexin pI Variants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0110137

Award Number: 0110137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot L. Hertzberg ehertz@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Covalent modification of proteins is a well-established mechanism by which
              their structure and properties are altered to accommodate biological function. 
              Principals elucidated for soluble proteins apply to integral membrane proteins
              as well, although many underlying molecular features in this class of proteins
              are less well established than for soluble proteins.  The vast majority of
              plasma membrane integral membrane proteins are glycosylated and most are
              phosphorylated, modifications that introduce anionic groups.  Hence, even when
              analyzed successfully by techniques such as isoelectric focusing and
              two-dimensional electrophoresis, integral membrane proteins often exhibit pIs
              significantly more acidic than those anticipated based upon their primary
              structure, now mostly deduced from the sequence of their cDNAs.  Recent
              evidence from Dr. Hertzberg's laboratory has demonstrated that several
              connexins, unglycosylated integral membrane proteins comprising gap junctions,
              have pI variants far more acidic than can be accounted for by phosphorylation
              or other known modifications.  The modification altering the charge of these
              proteins does not significantly alter their mass as detected by relatively
              inexact methods such as SDS-PAGE.  Furthermore, it appears as though connexin
              modification occurs during its trafficking and is likely to occur at distinct
              cytoplasmic compartments through which connexins pass on their way to assembly
              into gap junctions in the plasma membrane. Establishing the underlying
              molecular mechanism responsible for alteration of connexin pIs is the key focus
              of this project.  Mass spectrometry has emerged as the method of choice for
              elucidation of the molecularbasis of protein covalent modification and
              determination the modified residues. While notable progress has been made in
              recent years in the biochemical analysis of membrane proteins, including
              crystallographic analysis of a few, their manipulation for many types of
              analyses is limited by their insolubility in organic solvents or requiring the
              use of detergents incompatible with subsequent analyses. In the case of
              connexins, these difficulties are even more profound: success in their initial
              isolation and characterization was dependent on their insolubility in
              detergents. This property has compounded the difficulty of their analysis by
              state of the art techniques such as mass spectrometry. Preliminary experiments
              have established approaches to peptide purification and mass spectroscopic
              analysis that will serve as the basis for analysis of the modification(s)
              altering connexin pIs.  This project is driven by efforts to identify and
              characterize the (novel?) low molecular weight covalent modification of
              connexins, a line of exploratory research that will have significant
              implications for understanding of the structure and function of membrane
              proteins.  It may be that this modification, which preliminary experiments
              indicate is not likely to be restricted to connexins, has been overlooked
              because the presence of pI variants of other membrane proteins would have been
              attributed to phosphorylation or the presence of acidic sugars (e.g. sialic
              acid).  Identification of the modification altering connexin pIs will permit
              evaluation of its role in trafficking, assembly and function of gap junction
              channels.  Depending upon the position of the negative charges, models of the
              structure and function of selectivity filters, regulatory sites and the
              channels themselves may require rethinking.  Hence, studies undertaken as part
              of this project may prove to be of general significance in proteome analysis.

