Title       : CAREER: Research and Educational Advances in Optimal Groundwater Remediation
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a9734076

Award Number: 9734076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Minsker minsker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Minsker  9734076  The objectives of this research are to: 1) develop improved 
              methods for solving field-scale groundwater remediation  design problems; 2)
              improve access to optimal groundwater  remediation design tools by
              practitioners and students; 3)  use active learning techniques to improve
              education of  students at all levels; and 4) teach graduate students how  to
              develop and apply coupled optimization and simulation  models.    Multiscale
              optimization methods will be developed to improve  the computational efficiency
              of an optimal control model for  aerobic in situ bioremediation design
              developed in previous  work. This will enable accurate modeling of
              heterogeneous,  field-scale sites. A hybrid genetic algorithm will be 
              developed to address difficulties with local optima and to  allow fixed costs
              to be considered in an efficient manner.  Once the multiscale method and hybrid
              genetic algorithm with  the best computational efficiency have been identified,
              an  integrated model for field-scale in situ bioremediation  design will be
              developed that will incorporate multiscale  methods into a hybrid genetic
              algorithm.    Undergraduate research assistants will program graphical  user
              interfaces to facilitate use of the design models  developed in this research
              by students and practitioners  from industry. The models will then be used as
              the core for  an educational game to teach students the utility of optimal 
              design tools for designing cost-effective remediation  solutions. The game will
              be played in undergraduate and  graduate courses and in outreach programs using
              a contest  format between small student teams. A new graduate course on 
              coupled optimization and simulation modeling will also be  created to teach
              students the complexities associated with  developing and applying such models.
              The course will serve  as a forum for presenting research results and
              developing  improved methods.  ***
