Title       : CAREER: Theory and Application of Hybrid Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9734285

Award Number: 9734285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216300             (Estimated)
Investigator: X. Rong Li xli@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9734285
Li
Hybrid estimation, as powerful robust adaptive approach, has found
              great success recently in solving many problems compounded with structural
              and/or parametric uncertainty, ranging from fault detection and isolation to
              target tracking and recognition, and from biomedical signal processing to
              complex system decomposition.  The bottle-neck problem currently exists with
              hybrid estimation is that existing techniques are not cost-effective enough for
              most real-world hybrid estimation problems, which involve a large set of modes.
               The most serious barrier for the further development of hybrid estimation is
              associated with the fact that existing techniques are confined to a fixed
              structure.  In other words, existing hybrid estimation has a fundamental
              limitation, inherent to the fixed structure, in that it cannot handle
              effectively problems involving more than just a few modes, which is,
              unfortunately, the case for most real-world problems.  This limitation stems
              from the fundamental assumption of the existing techniques that the system mode
              at any time can be represented accurately by one of a small and fixed set of
              models that can be determined a priori.  As a result, existing hybrid
              estimation with a fixed structure has arrived at such a stage that great
              improvement can no longer be expected within its fixed structure. 
              Nevertheless, existing research effort is confined almost entirely to this
              fixed structure.  In this proposal, an investigation of the theory and
              application of hybrid estimation techniques is proposed.  The theoretical
              research proposed includes the development of several promising and
              complementary variable structure algorithms that are highly cost-effective,
              uncomplicated and general enough to be applicable to most hybrid estimation
              problems, and some work toward the development of a unified theory of hybrid
              estimation.

The technical approach that will be undertaken for the proposed
              research is to use variable structure in hybrid estimation:  The set of models,
              rather than the models themselves, may be made adaptive based on measurement
              sequences, which carries valuable information about the system mode currently
              in effect.  This is a promising new direction for improving significantly on
              the existing techniques, which was initiated by the PI recently.  Its great
              potential has been demonstrated by the recent development of such an algorithm
              by the PI that is uncomplicated, generally applicable, and significantly more
              cost-effective than the state-of-the-art fixed structure hybrid estimators. 
              This project is expected to have a significant impact on the theoretical and
              applied research in estimation, decision and identification, and their
              application areas.  In the short term it will advance significantly the
              state-of-the-art hybrid estimation techniques, and in the long term, it will
              provide insight and thrust to future investigation in stochastic systems
              theory, random signal processing and statistical inference.

Education and
              human resource development are integrated components of the proposed career
              development plan.  The primary education objective of this plan is to train
              students to develop ability, knowledge, and skills for scientific inquiry and
              technological discovery and invention, hence preparing them well for their
              pursuit of an engineering career.  This is achieved by the following: 1)
              Provide students opportunities to participate in advnced research projects
              under innovative and close guidance of the PI; 2) Develop new graduate and
              undergraduate courses for better educating and training students; 3)
              Disseminate results from the proposed reseach by textbook writing to reach out
              to more students.
*** 

