Title       : CAREER: Efficient Solution of Discrete Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9734172

Award Number: 9734172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sebastian Ceria ceria@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9734172  Ceria  This research will develop and implement new efficient
              algorithms for the solution of a wide variety of practical business and
              engineering decision problems. Examples include routing trucks, trains and
              buses in transportation and distribution networks, designing fiber-optic
              telecommunication networks for the transmission of voice, data, audio and
              video, planning and scheduling industrial machines in factories and scheduling
              crews in airlines.  Each of these problems can be formulated mathematically as
              mixed-integer programs, namely, an optimization problem with a linear objective
              function in decision variables that are required to be either continuous or
              integer and which must satisfy a finite set of linear constraints. This
              particular class of problems is of enormous relevance in the area of Management
              Science and Operations Research, not only because of its wide applicability to
              real industrial problems, but also because their efficient solution has
              challenged researchers for the past fifty years. In spite of important
              breakthroughs in the design of efficient algorithms and computer technology,
              practitioners continue to formulate mixed-integer programming problems that
              cannot be solved adequately with existing algorithms. This research will focus
              on two general methodologies: approximate solution procedures and  exact
              algorithms. The approximate procedures are designed to obtain near-optimal
              solutions with a measure of the amount the solution deviates from optimality
              for very-large scale problems. The exact algorithm is a robust mixed-integer
              programming solver based on a branch-and-cut algorithm that uses disjunctive
              cutting planes.  The results of this research will be implemented into a
              software package that will be made available to the large community of users.
              The software development will be performed in a flexible computer environment,
              allowing for runs on networks of  computers. Consequently, implemented
              algorithms will efficiently solve large-scale mixed-integer probl ems without
              any particular mathematical structure. Moreover, the new theoretical
              developments will provide a foundation for determining general mathematical
              properties of these problems.  The new theory should allow for further
              development of increasingly efficient algorithms.  ***
