Title       : CAREER: Experimental and Numerical Modeling of Coastal Boundary Layer Processes
               Induced by Shoaling and Breaking Surface Gravity Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9734109

Award Number: 9734109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Cox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS-9734109    Principal Investigator:  Cox   
              This CAREER grant is for the  study of breaking waves.  Wave breaking is the
              dominant process in the surf zone, but our understanding of the effects of wave
              breaking on the cross-shore wave transformation, undertow, and bottom boundary
              layer processes is rudimentary.  The design of coastal engineering structures,
              predictions of nearshore wave and current conditions for amphibious landing,
              beach renourishment projects, and predictions of the suspension and transport
              of sediments all require a clear understanding of these processes.    The study
              will focus on time-dependent and time-averaged fluid motion in the bottom
              boundary layer under shoaling and breaking waves in order to develop a new
              turbulent boundary layer model in the nearshore zone.  The methodology will
              employ a hybrid approach of numerical modeling and laboratory experiments.  The
              numerical modeling will consist of a time-dependent boundary layer model to
              second order with a one-equation turbulence closure scheme and will include
              pressure gradient effects due to the wave setup.  In parallel with the
              development of the numerical model, detailed laboratory measurements will be
              made of the flow in the bottom boundary layer under breaking waves for the
              realistic case of irregular waves breaking over a barred beach.  The data will
              be used to guide the development of the model by assessing the relative
              importance of each of the five terms in the turbulent kinetic energy transport
              equation and for the empirical coefficients used in the numerical model.  It is
              emphasized that this type of detailed data is non-existent for the surf zone
              and that many surf zone models employ empirical coefficients that were obtained
              for steady flow conditions without wave breaking.  Nevertheless, it essential
              to include the effects of the wave generated turbulence introduced into the
              bottom boundary layer inside the surf zone.  In addition to studying the
              processes on short time scale s (on the order of the wave motion), an existing
              time-averaged surf zone model will be improved significantly using the same
              data set so that this model can be incorporated with confidence into practical
              sediment transport models on longer time scales (on the order of several
              hundred to several thousand wave periods, representing a large storm event).  .
