Title       : CAREER: Research in Nonlinear Numerical Optimization and Practicums for
               Computational Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a9734044

Award Number: 9734044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia J. Torczon va@cs.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many scientific and engineering numerical optimization  problems are both
              computationally expensive and difficult to  solve for analytical reasons.  Not
              surprisingly, for such  problems there are also significant issues in the 
              integration of the software that describes the system being  optimized.  These
              difficulties are often intertwined.  The research that will be done will look
              at  analytical and algorithmic issues that arise in  the solution of such
              difficult numerical  optimization problems.  Specifically, the work  will
              evolve along two complementary lines: the  further development and analysis of
              pattern  search methods for nonlinear optimization, and  the design and
              analysis of techniques for using  approximation models to optimize systems
              defined  by computationally expensive functions. Both  these lines of research
              include a strong effort  in software development and experimentation. 
              Practical experience working on numerical  optimization problems from science
              and  engineering reveals issues and  techniques that are not covered well in
              the  current computer science curriculum and yet  would serve students well in
              any  multidisciplinary computational setting.  The  course development will
              draw upon existing  knowledge and software tools in computer science  and
              computational mathematics to design new  courses---practicums, in effect---that
              will  teach students more about how to understand,  maintain, enhance, and
              optimize existing  scientific software.  The emphasis will be on systematic
              analysis and  testing with an eye toward performance  programming.  Fundamental
              to this approach is  the belief that students should be taught how to 
              experiment in a systematic, scientific fashion  to analyze and reason about
              extant, complex  computer programs.
