Title       : PECASE: Toward a Unified Theory of Social Evolution: Reproductive Skew and
               Aggression in Social Wasps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9734181

Award Number: 9734181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381848             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Kern Reeve hkr1@CORNELL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Increasing complexity is a central theme of evolution.  The most recent step in
              this trajectory is the transition from solitary to social life.  This
              transition resulted in enormous consequences; it can be said that nearly all
              land ecosystems are dominated by social species.  It is of great importance,
              then, to understand how sociality evolved.  Historically there have been two
              bodies of theory that apply;  one deals with the evolution of sociality within
              kin groups  and the other with sociality among nonrelatives.  The "reproductive
              skew" theory addressed in this research has the potential to provide a general
              theory of social  evolution that is relevant in both situations.  Skew theory 
              holds that a dominant individual within a society must provide incentives to
              subordinate individuals in order to secure their cooperation and assistance. 
              Ecological factors  combined with the genetic similarity among individuals
              dictate the payoffs for cooperation and therefore define the  optimal
              "reproductive skew" (the degree to which one or a  few individuals co-opt
              direct (production).  This research  will continue the development of the
              theory and test it with an ideal study species, a social wasp, Polistes
              fuscatus.  Investigations of the social wasp in nature will measure the 
              ecological and genetic similarity factors, along with  observation of
              reproductive skew to determine if there is a  quantitative agreement with the
              predictions of optimal skew theory.      This project also involves a large
              educational component designed to provide tomorrow''s behavioral scientists
              with both theoretical and empirical skills.  In addition, a major  new Web site
              will be created to better enable students to  communicate with theorists and
              empirical behavioral biologists.  The study of sociality using insect models
              has provided pivotal contributions to the field, including kin-selection
              theory.  Kin-selection theory changed the way we  think about social animals,
              solved a dilemma that had  existed since Darwin''s time and changed the way
              that some anthropologists think about human sociality.  This research  has the
              potential to develop an even more general theory of  how social behavior
              evolved and holds considerable promise for broad application.
