Title       : CAREER: An Integrated, Adaptive Modeling Strategy for Multidisciplinary Design
               of Electronic Packages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a9734349

Award Number: 9734349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ganesh Subbarayan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9734349  Subbaryan  The worldwide electronics market is expected to reach $1.2
              trillion by the year 2001.  The US electronics industry, with the highest
              worldwide revenue, has grown by leaps and bounds, surpassing the traditional
              manufacturing industries such as automobiles, chemicals and textiles.  The
              electronics industry is increasingly the indicator of the nation's economic
              health and vitality.    As the future electronic systems increase in
              complexity, incorporating high-speed digital data processing elements together
              with optical and/or microwave/mm wave communication elements, the need for
              system oriented integration will increase.  This, according to the National
              Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, will require an integrated simulation
              framework from IC to system for cost-effective design.  Package design is
              expected to be a critical fimction of this framework, since package complexity
              is driven as much by systern-level application needs as by device technology. 
              Many curricular reforms will also be necessary to ensure that future design
              engineers possess integrated, systern-level design skills.  The priority,
              therefore, in curriculum reform is to instill synthesis skills and
              interdisciplinary, team-oriented problem-solving skills.    In the present
              proposal, a design framework based on the methods of nonlinear optimization is
              developed for integrated, multidisciplinary design of electronic products. 
              Although this framework is expected to be valid at all levels from system down
              to the device, its demonstration is based on two "real-life," commercially
              available electronic packages.  This integrated optimization of the existing
              packages will be carried out in active collaboration with the manufacturers.   
              The fundamental idea behind the design strategy is to partition the design
              problem at any level of hierarchy into three tasks and then to recursively
              ca-rryout these tasks starting at the system level.  In the first task,
              adoptively accurate approximations to design functions in the  electrical,
              mechanical, and thermal domains are built using artificial neural network
              models.  These models are later used in the second task to decompose the
              overall op on problem into simpler subproblems.  Strategies for overall
              optimization are considered in the last task.    A broad range of educational
              activities that are closely tied to the above three design tasks are proposed. 
              A sample of these activities at undergraduate level include demonstrations of
              modem concurrent engineering practice to freshmen, design space exploration
              using neural net function surfaces for juniors, and analysis of electronic
              packages by multidisciplinary teams of senior level students.  At a graduate
              level, an electronics packaging certificate course for practicing engineers, a
              course on modeling of electronic packages, and an advanced optimal design class
              are planned.    The integrated, multidisciplinary design strategy proposed here
              do not appear to have been considered for electronic systems in previous
              research.  Clearly such novel strategies are critical for the continued success
              of the vitally important electronics industry.  The activities proposed here
              enable the building of "virtual systems" for cost-effecfive design of future
              electronic products by multidisciplinary teams of engineers possessing strong
              synthesis skills.  ***
