Title       : Photochemistry of Molecular and Supramolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9734941

Award Number: 9734941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick D. Lewis lewis@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiments address a number of issues particularly germane   to
              excited-state processes and chemistry.  The quantum efficiencies of   the
              luminescence and the photochemical reactions of aminoarenes and aryl   amides,
              which have recently been shown to be sensitive to the position of   the amino
              substituent, will be correlated with precursor structure to   provide insights
              into structural relaxation of the excited state, and how   that relaxation
              influences subsequent photophysical and photochemical   processes.   A separate
              measure of the electronic influence on excited   state behavior will be
              achieved by measuring the photocyclizations of the   amino-substituted
              stilbenes, while new information regarding photoinduced   electron transfer and
              intramolecular charge-transfer states will be   provided through studies of
              novel donor-acceptor pairs.           With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research of Professor Frederick
              D. Lewis of the Department   of Chemistry at Northwestern University.   
              Professor Lewis' research   will provide unique insights into the structural
              changes that accompany   electronic excitation and how these changes, separate
              from concurrent   electronic changes, influence the subsequent reactivity and
              relaxation of   intramolecular charge-transfer states.  The research will
              introduce   undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students to steady-state
              and   time-resolved photochemical techniques, and their application to  
              elucidating fundamental excited-state processes.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
