Title       : CAREER: Structural Basis of Transcription Termination in Thermophilic Eubacteria
               and Hypertext Curriculum for Advanced Undergraduate Biology Organized by
               Function and System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9734466

Award Number: 9734466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9734466  Friedman  The project is designed to begin to elucidate the structural
              basis of transcription termination.  Transcriptional termination appears to
              result from multiple weak interactions among various factors and between them
              and the RNA polymerase.  Two proteins that have been identified as being
              critical for proper transcription termination are nusG and rho.  E. coli rho is
              known to be a helicase that unwinds the RNA transcript from the transcription
              bubble at rho-dependent termination sites, while nusG acts as an adaptor
              between rho and the RNA polymerase.  The nusG homolog from T. maritima has been
              demonstrated to be readily cleaved by proteolysis into two fragments.  The
              structures of both fragments will be determined by x-ray crystallography.  At
              the same time, expression systems for the T. maritima rho protein will be
              constructed from presently available clones.  Crystallization experiments of
              this protein will also be conducted, both with the intact protein and protein
              proteolytically cleaved to separate the RNA-binding domain.  Finally, potential
              interactions between the T. maritima nusG and rho proteins will be investigated
              to determine if they also show the same interaction which is seen in their E.
              coli counterparts.  If this interaction is seen, crystallization trials on a
              complex of the two proteins will be initiated.    On the education side of this
              CAREER proposal, a new set of hypertext-based curriculum materials will be
              developed.  These materials will be designed to present biology in a "vertical"
              direction, focusing on the connections between different levels of organization
              within a biological function or organ system.  The vertical organization of the
              curriculum material should help communicate to under-graduate students how
              molecular structure underlies biological processes.  It should also provide
              upper-level biology undergraduates with an alternative view of their biological
              knowledge, thereby solidifying what they have been taught in their introductory
              classes.   This combination of research and educational projects will help
              further integrate structural biology into the mainstream of biology.  The
              research component will bring a new area of  biological research under
              structural investigation, while the education component will help integrate our
              present knowledge of structural biology into the undergraduate curriculum.
