Title       : Combinatorial Optimization Involving Multiple Objectives: Approximation
               Algorithms and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1998      
File        : a9734936

Award Number: 9734936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sekharipuram S. Ravi RAVI@CS.ALBANY.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is an investigation of combinatorial optimization problems  involving
              multiple objectives.  Such problems arise in a variety  of application areas
              including communication networks, very large  scale integrated systems,
              facility location and management of  hazardous materials.  For many such
              problems, even optimizing one  objective is often computationally intractable.
              Motivated by the  practical importance of these problems, the focus of this 
              research is on developing efficient algorithms that produce  solutions which
              are near-optimal with respect to all the  objectives.  The major goals of the
              proposed research include  identifying classes of multiobjective optimization
              problems from  various application areas, developing efficient approximation 
              algorithms for the problems and evaluating their performance  through
              analysis/experimentation, developing a software library  of multiobjective
              approximation algorithms that can be used by  researchers and practitioners,
              and obtaining insights into the  intrinsic difficulties encountered in
              developing approximation  algorithms for multiobjective problems.  Both
              graduate and  undergraduate students will be encouraged to participate in this 
              work.  The results obtained will be incorporated into seminar  courses suitable
              for graduate and advanced undergraduate  students. A number of practical
              situations require a careful  analysis of constraints and objectives. For
              example, a business  organization may want to upgrade the communication network
               interconnecting its branches so that information can be exchanged  among the
              branches at a faster rate. Often, only a limited budget  is available for the
              upgrade. It is of interest to the  organization to obtain the best possible
              upgrade whose cost is  within the available budget.  Such situations involving 
              constraints and objectives arise in a number of contexts  including determining
              appropriate locations for facilities (such  as hospitals, fire stations, etc.)
              and management of  hazardous  materials. Ma thematically, the problems arising
              in these contexts  can be expressed as optimization problems involving multiple
               objectives. However, computing the best solutions to such  problems is often
              infeasible.  The focus of this research is on  developing procedures that can
              quickly compute solutions which  are close to the best solutions with respect
              to all the  objectives.  The research will investigate problems from a number 
              of application areas. One of the goals of this research is to  develop a
              library of software procedures that can be used by both  practitioners and
              researchers.
