Title       : CAREER: Understanding Strong Correlations in Real Materials with Scalable High
               Performance Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9734041

Award Number: 9734041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shiwei Zhang shiwei@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9734041  Zhang  This is a CAREER award which integrates research and  education
              in computational materials physics.  The research  will address long-standing
              questions on electron  correlations in high temperature superconductors. 
              Intense  theoretical effort to understand these materials has been  hampered by
              the lack of effective computational algorithms.  Such algorithms are essential
              in order to solve model  systems to compare with experiment and guide the
              selection  of analytic approximations.  Among such model systems the  Hubbard
              model, believed to contain the gross features of  electron correlations in high
              temperature superconductors,  has received an unprecedented level of attention.
               Yet many  basic questions remain open on its properties.  By  developing new
              algorithms for scalable high-performance  computing, we will perform accurate
              computations of electron  correlations in this and related models.    The
              objective in education is to incorporate computing into  the curriculum in a
              seamless way.  High-performance  computing impacts more than research and
              presents enormous  opportunities.  To fully take advantage, students must be 
              adequately prepared with skills in computation.  By  curriculum development,
              outreach and mentoring, and cross-  disciplinary collaboration, the gap in
              computational science  in the William and Mary curriculum will be filled and 
              students will be involved in state-of-the-art computational  physics research. 
              %%%   This is a CAREER award which integrates research and  education in
              computational materials physics.  The research  will address long-standing
              questions on electron  correlations in high temperature superconductors. 
              Intense  theoretical effort to understand these materials has been  hampered by
              the lack of effective computational algorithms.  Such algorithms are essential
              in order to solve model  systems to compare with experiment and guide the
              selection  of analytic approximations.  Among such model systems the  Hubbard
              model, believed to contai n the gross features of  electron correlations in
              high temperature superconductors,  has received an unprecedented level of
              attention.  Yet many  basic questions remain open on its properties.  By 
              developing new algorithms for scalable high-performance  computing, we will
              perform accurate computations of electron  correlations in this and related
              models.    The objective in education is to incorporate computing into  the
              curriculum in a seamless way.  High-performance  computing impacts more than
              research and presents enormous  opportunities.  To fully take advantage,
              students must be  adequately prepared with skills in computation.  By 
              curriculum development, outreach and mentoring, and cross-  disciplinary
              collaboration, the gap in computational science  in the William and Mary
              curriculum will be filled and  students will be involved in state-of-the-art
              computational  physics research.  ***
