Title       : CAREER: Maintaining Constraints in Real-Time Data Management Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9734463

Award Number: 9734463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nandit R. Soparkar soparkar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Distributed computing applications, such as groupware and manufacturing
              automation, have concurrently executing processes that access common shared
              data. The applications require maintaining the consistency of shared data and
              correctness of executions, and also, have demanding real-time performance
              requirements. This research examines, designs, and implements, a system based
              on time-constrained transaction-oriented distributed computations. Consistent
              executions are maintained using modified database concurrency control, and
              improvement of performance is addressed using techniques from real-time data
              management. Building on existing research results, the system incorporates
              several correctness and efficiency criteria, and is flexible to changes and
              scale-up. Learning from on-going large-scale efforts in the application areas,
              the approach is tested by implementation of substantial functionalities for the
              target domains. Real-time scheduling algorithms are incorporated into a
              main-memory data management system, and the primitives for distributed
              concurrency control using synchronization protocols are implemented across
              multiple instances of such systems. This approach is to be empirically compared
              in terms of functionality and performance against the systems already
              available. The complementary education plan includes fostering off-line group
              study and learning by doing hands-on work. Students, organized into self-study
              groups, examine facets of the research problems, and obtain broad guidelines
              from information technology tools. Also, the research problems are assigned as
              project work which fosters a hands-on approach to learning. In the long term,
              this research and educational dissemination will influence the design and
              development of large-scale real-time distributed applications using database
              and transaction technologies.
