Title       : CAREER: Anisotropic Femtosecond Spectroscopy of High-Tc Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9734131

Award Number: 9734131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Andreas Schroeder andreas@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9734131  Schroeder    This is a CAREER Award which will investigate the
              fundamental  properties of intrinsically anisotropic high-TC cuprate 
              superconductors using powerful, sophisticated, and  polarization-sensitive
              time-resolved ultrafast spectroscopic  techniques. An ultrabroadband
              femtosecond terahertz (THz) probe  pulse (generated by optical rectification of
              a 50fs optical  pulse) will be used to spectrally time resolve the far-infrared
               transient response of high-TC superconductors induced by an  optical pump
              pulse through the change in the reflectivity  produced by the perturbed complex
              conductivity. Since the  spectral extent of the linearly polarized THz probe
              pulse  includes the superconducting gap 2A, this technique will be used  to
              monitor directly the optically-induced perturbations to the  anisotropic order
              parameter A, the pseudogap in under-doped  materials, and transient inter- and
              intra-plane coupling between  Cu-O layers and chains using untwinned Yttrium-
              and Barium-based  cuprate crystals. In addition, to aid the understanding of
              the  time-resolved THz spectra, two-photon excited-state  angle-resolved
              photoemission spectroscopy will be employed to  determine the relevant
              characteristics (lifetime and momentum) of  the optically-coupled unoccupied
              states above the Fermi level.  All measurements will be performed as a function
              of TITC to  elucidate temperature dependencies. The results from these 
              carefully designed ultrafast spectroscopic measurements should  have a great
              impact on our understanding of the unique properties  of high-TC
              superconductors in a manner parallel to that provided  by similar femtosecond
              optical techniques in semiconductor  physics. The educational component will
              involve both  undergraduate physics majors and students from Chicago area high 
              schools in research in the investigators laboratory that is  connected to the
              goals of the project.  %%%  This is a CAREER Award which uses sophisticated
              optical methods  to study high temperature superconductor s. The discovery in
              1986  of copper-oxide-based ceramic materials, which exhibit zero  electrical
              resistance at liquid nitrogen (-3 F) (rather than  liquid helium (-450 F))
              temperatures, has ignited technological  interest in superconductivity as a
              means of dramatically reducing  energy distribution costs, developing efficient
              high-speed  levitating transportation, and making ultrafast electronic 
              switches. However, despite a decade of exciting research into the  properties
              of high-temperature superconductors (HTSCs), a  definitive experiment leading
              to a clear understanding of the  physical mechanism responsible for
              superconductivity in these  unique materials has not been forthcoming. The goal
              of this  research program is to exploit the sub-picosecond (shorter than 
              one-thousand-billionth of a second) temporal resolution provided  by today's
              laser technology to study the fundamental physical  processes occurring in
              HTSCs. Specifically, ultrashort pulses of  far-infrared radiation will be used
              to monitor the response of  HTSCs in an effort to time-resolve the mechanism
              responsible for  superconductivity in these ceramic materials. These ultrafast 
              optical investigations will open a new regime of study for  superconductivity
              in which radiation is used to monitor directly  the electronic dynamics of the
              superconducting state. The results  from these novel spectroscopic studies
              should have a significant  impact on our understanding of the unique properties
              of HTSCs  which, in turn, may lead to the development of superconductors 
              operating at even higher temperatures. Indeed, similar ultrafast  optical
              techniques have already improved our understanding and  design of everyday
              semiconductor devices. The educational  component will involve both
              undergraduate physics majors and  students from Chicago area high schools in
              research in the  investigators laboratory that is connected to the goals of the
               project.  ***
