Title       : REU: Automated Acquisition of Domain Knowledge and Language Patterns, with
               Application to Language Metadata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a9734807

Award Number: 9734807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois C. Boggess lboggess@cs.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia E. Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9150,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The system developed in this project maps World Wide Web documents to Library of
              Congress subject headings. It contrasts with systems which accomplish
              classification of Web documents through voluntary classification by the public
              at large. This project is designed to automatically classify Web documents into
              subject headings of the Science (Q) and Technology (T) portions of the Library
              of Congress classification system, after being trained and tested on several
              thousand documents previously classified by library scientists and experienced
              document analysts. The system is an extension of a system which employs
              machine-learning methods combined with natural language processing and
              information retrieval techniques to produce descriptive phrases for journal
              articles in the domain of physical chemistry. The earlier system generated more
              than 80% of index phrases produced by trained document analysts with expertise
              in the domain. The current project establishes that these methods can be scaled
              up to address a much larger problem domain. In doing so it also addresses
              issues relevant to all of natural language processing and information retrieval
              (e.g., efficient use of contextual cues, and reduction of errors due to
              encountering vocabulary which is unknown to the system). Success in the project
              will significantly advance concept-based classification and demonstrate its
              applicability to the vast problem of finding information in the largely
              unclassified "library" that is the World Wide Web. It will provide an
              electronic equivalent to the physical phenomenon of library patrons going to
              those shelves which correspond to their favorite or most-used call numbers.   
              http://www.cs.msstate.edu/artificial_intelligence/kudzu.html
