Title       : CAREER: Mechanisms of Intercellular Communication in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9734072

Award Number: 9734072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Bejsovec   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The secreted signaling molecule, Wingless (Wg) and its vertebrate homologues,
              the Wnt family, play critical roles in generating embryonic positional
              information and in regulating cell proliferation. Recent work in this
              laboratory has revealed that active cellular transport of the Wingless
              signaling molecule is essential for specification of cell fates in the
              embryonic epidermis of Drosophila. A mutant form of Wg that shows restricted
              movement away from the cells that produce it is associated with a reduction in
              the diversity of cell fates normally specified by Wg signaling. Thus, lateral
              movement of Wg through cells in the epidermal epithelium is functionally
              important for cell fate specification. This planar form of transcytosis is very
              different from known instances of transcytosis, which occur in an apical-basal
              or basal-apical direction across a polarized epithelium. Understanding the
              mechanism of this novel intercellular transport is essential to the study of
              Wg/Wnt biology. The specific goals of this proposal seek to: (1) identify
              structural features of the Wg protein, and of Wnt proteins in general, that are
              required for transport; (2) explore the cellular machinery responsible for
              effecting the movement of Wg by perturbing the endocytic process both in vivo
              and in vitro; and (3) characterize genetically and molecularly two new genes
              that appear to be involved in Wg protein transport during development. 
              

This research work has inspired the development of demonstration materials
              for stimulating interest in biology in pre-college, undergraduate and graduate
              educational settings. Drosophila mutant strains are commonly used for
              demonstrating genetic principles, but they can also provide dramatic
              illustrations of basic developmental and cell biological phenomena such as
              pattern formation and endocytosis. A major goal of the proposed education plan
              is to develop and popularize their use for these purposes in the classroom.
              Specific goals include improving several fly strains for easier manipulation by
              educators, writing a set of instructional materials to present and explain the
              cellular phenomena at increasing levels of sophistication, and piloting the use
              of these demonstration materials in an advanced undergraduate cell biology
              course at Northwestern University.

