Title       : CAREER: Genetic Analysis of Neurotransmitter Release Mechanisms in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9734125

Award Number: 9734125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo Pallanck pallanck@genetics.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-34125 PALLANCK. This is a CAREER award that has both a research and
              educational component.  In his research, Dr. Pallanck will investigate the
              mechanisms of regulated release of neurotransmitters at neuronal synapses.  He
              will use the powerful genetic and molecular approaches to available in the
              fruit fly Drosophila to define cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in
              this process.  Neurons communicate with each other and with targets such as
              muscle cells with neurotransmitter signaling molecules, which are released when
              small vesicles inside the synaptic terminal fuse with the outer membrane of the
              cell.  Recent biochemical work has identified candidate molecules that are
              involved in recruiting vesicles to the cell membrane at precise locations,
              promoting fusion, and allowing the vesicle to reform when cell membrane is
              pinched off towards the inside of the cell.  Dr. Pallanck's research will ask
              which of these steps are carried out by which of the previously identified
              molecules, and whether there are components of the release apparatus that
              remain unidentified by the previous biochemical studies.  In previous work, Dr.
              Pallanck and his collaborators has identified in Drosophila two different forms
              of one of the key candidate release molecules, N-ethylmaleimide-Sensitive
              Fusion protein (NSF).  One goal of the current research is to test the
              hypothesis that multiple NSF proteins are involved in the targeting, fusion,
              and/or recycling of synaptic vesicles.  Molecular, electrophysiological and
              anatomical studies as the electron microscope level will all be employed in
              these studies.  To address the second goal, Dr. Pallanck's laboratory will
              carry out classical genetic screens to identify novel components of the
              vesicular release apparatus.  The properties of neurotransmitter release appear
              to be similar at synapses in all animals, and to share mechanisms with the
              vesicular release of other substances such as hormones.  Thus, the results from
              this study will contribute to a general understanding of this process.
	Dr.
              Pallanck's educational objective is to incorporate a research perspective into
              the undergraduate genetics curriculum at his university.  He will be teaching
              the core genetics course taken by most undergraduate biology majors, and will
              use this forum to emphasize the experimental basis of scientific knowledge and
              to introduce students to current research opportunities in his department.  He
              will also serve as undergraduate research coordinator, and will develop an
              undergraduate research seminar course.  Through these three avenues, Dr.
              Pallanck will be instrumental in preparing undergraduate students for a career
              in research at a critical stage in their educational development.

