Title       : CAREER: Enhanced Approach to Geophysical Imaging of Geotechnical Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9734000

Award Number: 9734000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Luke bluke@ce.unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research and educational activities that will enhance
              the application of geophysics in characterization of geotechnical sites.  This
              will be accomplished through three activities:  *  informing, teaching, and
              training future and present engineers about the utility, methods, advantages,
              and drawbacks of geophysics in engineering;  *  developing an engineering
              geophysics test site appropriate for an urban area in the arid West, for
              purposes of both teaching and research; and,  *  enhancing a geophysical
              technique involving seismic surface waves to address lateral variability in
              geotechnical systems.  No geotechnical site is truly homogeneous, yet current
              the models currently applied to interpret results are based on this assumption.
              The Principal Investigator will work alongside students and collaborators in
              academics and private industry to perform experimental and analytical research
              to determine the extent to which this assumption is valid.  In the process,
              methods will be developed to characterize the variability of a site through
              interpretation of the surface wave data, including development of a modified
              Spectral-Analysis-of-Surface-Wave (SASW) method that incorporates areal
              coverage.  Applications for this technique in practice include establishment of
              lateral and vertical extent of hard inclusions of calcrete and cemented
              deposits in desert alluvium, and detection and delineation of buried inclusions
              such as man-made tunnels and natural cavities.  The educational component of
              this project includes introducing middle-school girls to the concept of
              geophysics; developing coursework in engineering geophysics for both
              undergraduate and graduate students; and laying the groundwork to develop a
              continuing education course in engineering geophysics for practicing engineers.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
