Title       : CAREER: Multicast for the Masses: Scaling the Internet Multicast Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9734515

Award Number: 9734515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven McCanne mccanne@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    Over the past few years, the principal investigator has designed, 
              implemented, and deployed a number of applications and application-level 
              protocols that utilize IP Multicast for large-scale, multiparty 
              remote-conferencing over the Internet Multicast Backbone or Mbone.  In the
              current incarnation of the MBone tools, a separate application handles each 
              media (e.g.,for audio,for video, and for whiteboard) and together these tools
              comprise a flexible multi-party communication system that scales to roughly
              1000 participants.  This NSF CAREER proposal builds upon this previous work on
              the MBone tools  with a new emphasis on massive scalability. A principal goal
              is to design new end-to-end protocols complemented by new network services that
              will facilitate multi-party communication systems that scale to millions of
              hosts.  At this extreme, ``multicast for the masses''becomes a reality.  If
              successful,the traditional infrastructures for mainstream mass media ---e.g.,
              analog cable networks and over the air radio broadcasts ---can be replaced by
              integrated packet-switched networks running highly scalable multicast
              protocols.      The proposed approach for achieving this thousand-fold 
              improvement in scalability is multifaceted.  Initially,  the investigator will
              design minimal but powerful extensions to the  IP Multicast service model that
              will provide end hosts with more flexible  mechanisms for exploiting the
              underlying network topology.  In the current Internet architecture, network
              topology is  deliberately hidden.  While this has led to robust protocols  and
              robust networks, it places fundamental scaling  restrictions on end-to-end
              multicast protocols.  Instead, the  proposed work will investigate whether  a
              properly modified IP Multicast service model  can enable new end-to-end
              protocols that scale  to the extreme degree proposed herein.      One
              particularly promising extension to IP Multicast   is a new forwarding  service
              called subtree multicast or subcast.  Subcasts provide the topol ogically-aware
              network localization  that end-to-end protocols require in order to scale
              gracefully.  Whereas a normal multicast packet is sent to every receiver in a 
              target multicast group, a subcast packet is sent only to a well-defined,
              localized subset of the group. Leveraging subtree multicast, the proposed work
              aims to overcome many of the scaling limitations in current end-to-end
              multicast protocols,  and in particular, seeks a new, subcast-based design for
              the local recovery component  of modern reliable multicast transport protocols.
              But, more generally, subcasts hold the promise to have far-reaching impact on a
              number of end-to-end multicast protocols  (e.g., announce/listen protocols like
              RTCP, session directory protocols, multicast address allocation schemes,
              congestion control probes as RLM, and distributed voting algorithms like
              SCUBA),and the proposed work will investigate the integration of subcasts into
              these existing protocols as well as new ones.      Research prototypes based on
              subcast technology  will be fielded in real, ``production'' environments and
              integrated to the extent possible into the proposed educational activities. To
              this end, the investigator will develop on-line curricula  that utilizes an
              experimental webcast system to deliver course content over the  network, for
              example, to students in their dormitories, homes, or offices. The resulting
              applications and tools will also be deployed in a ``distance-learning
              classroom'', currenty under development at U.C. Berkeley, which houses classes,
              seminars, and research group meetings. To realize this ambitious goal, the
              proposed project will integrate artifacts and infrastructure from the MASH
              multimedia networking project at U.C. Berkeley and other similar efforts in the
              network research community that are investigating and building new multicast
              applications  and protocols.
