Title       : Applying Learning Theory to Networking Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9734940

Award Number: 9734940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Goldman sg@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on applying results developed by learning  theory
              researchers to real-life problems.  Such application-based  theoretical work is
              important so that the learning models and  problems studied capture as best
              possible the needs of real-life  problems.  Working to apply theoretical
              techniques to real  problems creates a better understanding of the real-world 
              problems and thus can help direct the future theoretical work,  facilitating
              the transfer of results from theory to practice.  Many networking protocols (as
              well as other system control  algorithms) utilize one or more tunable
              parameters, e.g.  thresholds and window sizes.  Frequently the methods used to
              set  or adjust the values of the parameters are ad hoc and are based  on
              certain assumptions about the operating environment, e.g.  assuming a
              particular distribution on the traffic patterns in a  communication network.
              This project will develop framework based  on formal learning methods for
              automatic parameter tuning in  system control algorithms to study if better
              performance can be  obtained. One such networking application this project will
              study  is that of dynamically adjusting delays of acknowledgements in  the TCP
              protocol.  Delaying  acknowledgements has two main advantages.  First, it
              allows a  single acknowledgement for more than one packet.  Second, if a  data
              packet is being sent in the opposite direction, then we can  piggy-back the
              acknowledgement too much can increase the latency.  Most TCP implementations
              used today employ some sort of  acknowledgement delay mechanism. This project
              investigates  several schemes to dynamically adjust acknowledgement delay, 
              including ones based on the Weighted Majority (WM) algorithms and  ones based
              on the Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (EWMA)  algorithm.  These schemes
              will be contrasted based on efficiency  and efficacy , as well as proving
              theoretical results about them  in terms of how well they respond to "volatile"
              TCP connections.  That is, if the connecti on occasionally switches from sparse
              data  transmission (where the goal might be to minimize latency, as in  the
              case of an interactive application) to dense data  transmission (where the goal
              might be to minimize the number of  acknowledgements and latency is not as
              important, as in the case  of a file transfer) and back again.  Simulation
              results will be  used to supplement the theoretical results. Applying learning 
              theory results to this problem and other networking problems will  then provide
              guidance in defining new theoretical learning models  that better model
              real-life scenarios.  This project will also  carefully develop and study such
              new learning models.
