Title       : CAREER: Analytical Modeling for Demanufacturing Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9734310

Award Number: 9734310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Ann Stuart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9734310  Julie Ann Stuart   This research focuses on the development of
              strategies for "product take-back centers" receiving a variety of discarded
              products.  To improve the profitability and efficiency of product take-back
              centers, decision tools will be developed for the strategic production planning
              decisions and for the operational grouping and scheduling decisions.  The goal
              of the strategic decisions for take-back production planning models will be to
              reduce staging inventory and increase frequency of outgoing shipments.  Mixed
              integer programming models will be developed to represent the linear quantities
              of take-back products and the integer quantities of outbound truckload
              shipments.  The goal for the grouping algorithms will be to assign take-back
              products to processing groups in an effort to improve outbound shipment value
              while considering additional inventory and material handling expenses.  The
              focus of the scheduling heuristics for demanufacturing will be to decrease the
              cycle time for outbound shipments.  The performance of these new decisions
              tools will initially be tested using simulation models since incoming product
              characteristics vary considerably.  In addition, these new models will be
              validated with case studies in U.S. take-back centers.    This research will
              contribute to the establishment of a methodological foundation for
              demanufacturing planning and operations modeling.  If successful, the results
              of this research will improve take-back center profitability that may lead to
              the increase of product take-back processing.  The increase of product
              take-back processing will divert many tons of discarded products from landfills
              and increase the supply of materials for reuse in new products.  Grouping
              strategies to improve the quality and value of outbound materials may also
              increase the possibilities for materials reuse.  Furthermore, the challenges
              and approaches for materials reuse, product design for demanufacturing,
              demanufacturing planning, and sustainability will be  communicated to
              undergraduate and graduate students, researchers, and practicing engineers
              through innovative learning modules for existing and new university courses,
              presentations, papers, and workshops.***
