Title       : CAREER: An Internet-Based Multimedia Approach to Teaching Developmental
               Neurobiology with Integrated Research on Neuronal Migration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9734550

Award Number: 9734550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Phelps pphelps@physci.lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1096,1187,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9734550  PHELPS      Dr. Phelps' Early Career award contains both educational
              and research components related to the field of developmental neurobiology. 
              The educational aim is to build an internet-based multimedia learning system
              for a new undergraduate course on developmental neurobiology, in collaboration
              with Dr. Gambhir and colleagues at the Crump Institute for Biological Imaging
              at UCLA.  During nervous system development, many complex tissue movements
              occur that are difficult for students to understand using the typical
              2-dimensional drawings from textbooks, yet they come alive when presented as
              3-dimensional animations.  Designing colorful animations depicting these
              complicated tissue movements is an important goal of this project.  An
              additional focus is to incorporate data from scientists working  in the field
              of developmental neurobiology.  For example, time-lapse video microscopy
              demonstrating observations of living neurons will be used in classroom
              presentations to introduce students to exciting new research techniques. 
              Students are able to review class presentations over the web, and utilize
              interactive quizzes as study aids.  Such evaluation tools will help the
              students, but also will provide the teachers with information about the
              effectiveness of this new internet-based learning system.   The aim of the
              research component is to determine what structures and/or molecules guide the
              unique migration of a group of chemically defined neurons during early spinal
              cord development.  The neurons under study, called the "U-derived" cells, use
              acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter and can be identified by both
              immunological and histochemical methods.  Between embryonic days 15 and 16,
              U-derived cells migrate from their initial ventral locations to their final
              destinations within the dorsal and central parts of the spinal cord.  These
              cells migrate in a direction perpendicular to the radial pathways utilized by
              most other neurons.  To determine the structural and/or molecular cues that 
              guide this unique migration, Dr. Phelps will attempt to block the migration
              experimentally.  Dr. Phelps uses an organotypic slice culture system that has
              been shown to support normal migration of U-derived cells and maintains
              relatively normal intercellular relationships between neurons and their
              environment, yet is accessible to both chemical and surgical manipulation,
              which would not be possible the whole embryo.  A variety of different
              experiments are designed to disrupt this cell migration in culture.  Results
              from these experiments will determine if the dorsal migration of the U-derived
              cells is guided by structural cues, such as early forming axons, and/or by
              molecular cues such as different types of adhesion molecules.
