Title       : CAREER: Regulation of Purine Nucleotide Biosynthesis in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9734170

Award Number: 9734170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronda J. Rolfes rolfesr@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9734170 Rolfes Regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional level is
              important to cells in order to link extracellular conditions with metabolism.
              The ADE genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae provide an excellent model
              system to learn about the fundamental mechanisms that eukaryotic cells use to
              regulate gene expression in response to extracellular conditions. The
              regulation of the ADE5, 7 gene uses regulatory schemes that are conserved in
              higher eukaryotic cells, namely, multiple regulatory circuits to control gene
              expression, a common DNA element that binds multiple transcription factors, and
              combinatorial control arising from the specific interactions of different
              transcription factors at specific promoter elements. The objectives of this
              research are to characterize the molecular interactions between the positive
              transcriptional activators BAS1 and BAS2 with DNA, determine domains for
              transcriptional activation and protein-protein interaction, and characterize
              chromosomal mutants and dosage-dependent suppressors to identify additional
              regulatory components in a signal transduction pathway linking extracellular
              conditions to the transcriptional activators. The results of these experiments
              will lead to a deeper understanding of the precise mechanisms used to regulate
              this locus. The insights gained from this study will shed light on the
              regulation of gene expression in other eukaryotic cells. Science education is
              an integral part of modern life. The fruits of science are visible in the
              advances made in medicine, agriculture and technology. Since the impact of
              science in society is great, a deeper understanding of what science is and how
              it works is important for students of today. The ultimate in education in the
              sciences is achieved via substantial research experience. At the undergraduate
              level, this type of involvement in science is difficult to achieve because it
              requires a major investment of time for both the student and faculty member.
              The objectives of the education plan  are to develop a significant nexus of
              research and undergraduate education in the laboratory, enhance the research
              orientation of a course in genetics, direct the development of a concentration
              in molecular biology within the biology major, and participate in special
              programs aimed at increasing student access to, and awareness, of research
              opportunities.  Purine nucleotides are essential components of cells, composing
              DNA and RNA, participating in energy transfer and serving as signaling
              molecules. Cells maintain pools of purine nucleotides to participate in these
              different reactions. Maintenance of nucleotide pools is essential for ce!ls,
              and several human disorders arise from the disruption of these pools, including
              the syndromes severe combined immunodeficiency (SCIDS) and Lesch-Nyhan. The
              results of this study will provide an understanding of how S. cerevisiae
              regulates the synthesis of purine nucleotides. Understanding how these
              regulatory mechanisms work in yeast provides a model for purine regulation in
              human cells.
