Title       : CAREER: An Energy-Subtraction Compton Scatter Camera for Medical Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9734276

Award Number: 9734276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Valentine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5345,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                  9734276  Valentine  The research component
              of this project involves the development  of a novel medical imaging camera
              based on reconstruction of  gamma-ray events which underwent an initial Compton
              scatter  interaction.  The unique camera design, which has been termed the 
              Energy-Subtraction Compton Scatter Camera (ESCSC), could  revolutionize medical
              imaging while using existing technologies.  The clinical implementation of this
              design may enhance  sensitivity by a factor of over 100, while maintaining or 
              improving spatial resolution, as compared with existing clinical  single photon
              emission computed tomography (SPECT) cameras.  Furthermore, significant
              clinical implications of the improved  sensitivity realized by the ESCSC
              include: shorter imaging times  (resulting in reduced motion blur, faster
              patient throughput, and  greater patient comfort); reduced patient/worker
              radiation  exposure; more effective diagnostic imaging for patients  undergoing
              subsequent cancer therapy; and very likely reduced  cost both for the initial
              capital investment and in terms of  maintenance and staffing.  Additionally,
              the proposed system  would be more compact, more portable, and less cumbersome
              to  operate than current cameras.  To implement this design,  fundamental
              shifts in data acquisition and analysis over current  imaging systems are
              required.  To produce a clinical ESCSC  design, it is proposed to: 1) optimize
              all aspects of the camera  using simulations, along with experimental data; 2)
              characterize  components to optimize performance; 3) develop an optimal data 
              acquisition scheme; and 4) develop image reconstruction  algorithms.    The
              education component of this project involves developing two-  and
              three-dimensional animations illustrating radiation science  and technology
              topics and will be used in part to convey the  significance of medical imaging
              research to all audiences.  More  specifically, a) the interactions of
              radiation with matter, b)  the response o f most radiation detectors, and c)
              the behavior of  complex electronic systems, such as the proposed ESCSC, can be
               much better comprehended by an audience when animations are used  to simulate
              the process(es). Consequently, the objectives of the  educational aspect of
              this proposal are to develop the expertise  necessary to produce two- and
              three-dimensional animations and  interactive computer exercises, then to use
              them in: 1) the  undergraduate and graduate radiation detection and measurement
               curricula; 2) junior high and high school teacher workshops,  which are aimed
              at helping these educators effectively teach  their students about radiation
              science and technology; 3) an  introductory course in medical imaging to be
              developed; and 4)  presenting the results of this and other research projects. 
              In  addition, these animations could be very useful in helping to  improve
              patient understanding about the medical procedures they  are considering or
              have been recommended to have.  ***
