Title       : Engineering Glycoforms on Proteins and Cells by Chemoselective Ligation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9734430

Award Number: 9734430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn Bertozzi bertozzi@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research will be the development of strategies for  
              engineering homogeneous glycoforms on proteins and cells using the   principle
              of chemoselective ligation.  For gycoprotein engineering, a   three-step
              process is envisioned.  First, recombinant expression of   O-linked
              glycoproteins in the presence of an oligosaccharide elongation   inhibitor
              yields truncated glycoproteins with single GalNAc residues at   the O-linked
              sites.  Second, an aldehyde group is introduced onto   truncated glycoproteins
              using galactose oxidase.  Third, synthetic   oligosaccharides functionalized
              with complementary reactive groups are   ligated onto the truncated scaffold,
              affording glycoproteins with   rationally designed, homogeneous glycoforms. 
              The focus of the   educational activities involves course and web site
              development.  With   this Faculty Early Development (CAREER) award, the Organic
              and   Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and  
              educational activities of Dr. Carolyn Bertozzi  of the Department of  
              Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley.   Professor Bertozzi   
              will focus her research efforts on  developing strategies for   engineering
              homogeneous glycoforms on proteins and cells using the   techniques of
              synthetic chemistry, recombinant expression and metabolic   engineering.  This
              approach will be used to investigate glycoproteins   involved in leukocyte
              activation and cell-cell interactions essential to   the inflammatory response.
                Course and curriculum development will be   stressed in the educational
              efforts supported by the award.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
