Title       : CAREER: Querying Heterogeneous and Multimedia Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9734548

Award Number: 9734548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis Papakonstantinou yannis@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project focuses on several crucial requirements of upcoming information
              management systems: integrated access to heterogeneous sources, data
              warehousing, and multimedia data. It also integrates education and research. As
              part of the educational component of this project, UCSD's database curriculum
              is being reshaped to provide students with hands-on experience, basic
              principles, and exposure to research challenges in the above areas. The
              research enhances the state of the art in two areas: the integration of very
              large numbers of Internet sources and the extraction and querying of semantic
              information from video data. In the area of data integration, query processing
              algorithms are developed and integrated into the TSIMMIS mediator system; they
              use knowledge of data replication to avoid retrieving redundant/replicated data
              and enhance the availability and efficiency of the system. A new cost-based
              optimizer is developed for high performance in browsing of partial results. The
              optimizer is provided with probabilistic information on source data overlap and
              develops plans for efficient delivery of partial answers. In the area of video
              data, the COMIX system is developed. COMIX is customized by users with SQL-like
              actions and queries that assist COMIX in extracting semantic information orders
              of magnitude faster than by a brute-force approach. COMIX introduces novel
              query processing optimizations which exploit the sequentiality, fuzziness and
              continuity of the video data. In the upcoming era where the Web and the digital
              TV signal will enter every living room, the proposed version of the TSIMMIS
              mediator system will allow the user to search the vast volumes of Web data in a
              manner that exploits redundancy and replication of Web data, rather than being
              impeded by it (as is currently the case.) Then the COMIX system will be a step
              towards "smart VCRs", which will be screening the digital TV signal and
              extracting information of interest to the user.    
              http://www-cse.ucsd.edu/~yannis
