Title       : Quantum Gravity and Relativistic Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9734871

Award Number: 9734871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Price rprice@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karel V. Kuchar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9734871
Price
The relativistic astrophysics portion of the program
              consists of closely related projects, combining numerical and analytic
              approaches, all directed towards understanding black hole collisions.  The
              motivation of this work comes from three directions.  First, black hole
              collisions are an example of quintessentially nonlinear phenomena in
              relativistic gravitation.  Second, black hole collisions are one of the most
              likely (and certainly the most exciting) sources of gravitational waves that
              will be detectable with forthcoming gravitational wave observatories.  Third,
              black hole collisions are a testing ground for the development of numerical
              relativity on supercomputers.  This work supports that development by providing
              tests of results, by pointing to interesting cases for computation, and by
              suggesting approximation schemes that may be useful in a computational
              approach.

Another set of problems under study aims at understanding the
              canonical quantization of Einstein's theory.  Black holes are again at the
              center of attention, now at the submicroscopic scale.  Specific projects
              include studying the effects of quantum gravity on formation of naked and
              covered singularities, mass inflation inside black holes, and horizon formation
              in the high-frequency limit in which zero-rest-mass fields can be described by
              null dust.  Another main area of research is more fundamental and general; its
              goal is to clarify the connection among diffeomorphism invariance, constraints
              and observables.  Specific projects include the representation of spacetime
              diffeomorphisms by canonical transformations and the study of Kretschmann-type
              observables in canonical gravity.
***

