Title       : CAREER: Photocrosslinkable Polymers for Fracture Fixation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9734236

Award Number: 9734236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristi S. Anseth anseth@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5345,9120,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9734236  Anseth  Treatment of bone fractures through fixation requires the  use
              of materials with sufficient strength to allow fixation,  good tissue/material
              compatibility, and facile molding (into  potentially complex shapes) for easy
              placement by the  surgeon.  In addition, controlled degradation is imperative 
              to restore optimum bone function upon healing.  The material  must initially
              re-establish the mechanical integrity of the  bone and subsequently degrade to
              allow new bone ingrowth.  Hence, degradable polymeric materials provide an
              important  alternative to widely-used metallic implants.  Degradable  polymers
              eliminate the need for a second surgery and, if  carefully designed, can
              release compounds to accelerate  healing or prevent infections.  The research
              component of  this CAREER plan targets the development of a new class of 
              high-strength, surface-eroding, photocurable (i.e., react  upon exposure to
              light) polymers for orthopaedic  applications such as fracture fixation.  In
              particular, the  rationale for this work is driven by three key hypotheses:  i)
               photopolymerization allows in vivo curing, which will  provide great
              flexibility for the placement and handling of  implantable polymers for
              surgeons; ii) crosslinking of  polymers will provide an effective tool to
              control the  physical and mechanical properties of materials without  major
              modifications to the backbone chemistry, which can  alter biocompatibility; and
              iii) surface-eroding  polyanhydrides networks, which degrade in a controlled 
              fashion and maintain the structural integrity of the  polymer, will be
              advantageous for orthopaedic applications.  The educational component of this
              CAREER plan is intimately  linked with the research plan.  Special
              opportunities for  undergraduate research (e.g., senior thesis projects) and 
              incorporation of team-oriented research projects in advanced  elective courses
              will be developed.  Outside of education  through research, new courses will be
              developed to examine  engineering aspects o f the human body and the use of 
              engineering skills to address medical problems.  Finally,  the University of
              Colorado has completed its Integrated  Teaching and Learning Laboratory (ITLL).
               This facility is a  national model for future directions in engineering 
              education, and the integrated learning approach (addressing  learning styles
              and cross-departmental teamwork) will be  incorporated and piloted in a new
              polymer courses.  ***
