Title       : Computational Complexity Theory and Circuit Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9734918

Award Number: 9734918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Allender Allender@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The final goal of research in complexity theory is to classify  the complexity
              of real-world computational problems by providing  lower bounds on the
              resources required to solve them.  To date -  in spite of impressive lower
              bounds for restricted types of  circuits  - almost the only useful progress
              toward this goal has  come via the tool of reducibility which allows to show
              that a  problem is complete for a complexity class.  Thus the complexity  class
              has become the fundamental object of study in complexity  theory, and the basic
              questions in the field concern the  relationships among complexity classes. 
              Until these  relationships are clarified, many important activities in 
              computing ( in particular: public-key cryptography) will rest on  uncertain
              conjectures. Many of the most important complexity  classes can be
              characterized in terms of boolean circuits of  restricted size or depth, etc. 
              Recently, it has become apparent  that arithmetic circuits are also very useful
              in this regard.  The relationships between Booleau and arithmetric circuit 
              complexity are still only poorly understood, although there has  been
              significant progress on this front recently.  This project  will work to
              clarify these relationships further, and will seek  to exploit the algebraic
              characteristics of arithmetic complexity  classes to devise new approaches to
              prove lower bounds. Most of  what we know about the complexity of real-world
              problems comes  from the surprising fact that the overwhelming majority of such
               problems are complete for well-studied complexity classes, under  very
              restrictive reducibilities.  Recent progress has shown that  these sets are
              actually isomorphic to each other, under very  simple isomorphisms.  Up to now,
              the work on isomorphisms has  been primarily of theoretical interest.  This
              project will work  to see if the isomorphism theorems can be used to derive 
              practical information about the complexity of real-world  problems. More
              generally, this project will attempt to clarify  the rel ationships among
              complexity classes, and the various  notions (nondeterminism, unambiguity,
              symmetry, Boolean and  arithmetic circuits, etc.) that define models of
              computation  characterizing important complexity classes.
