Title       : CAREER: Identifying Binding Sites on Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9734484

Award Number: 9734484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. Shoichet b-shoichet@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shoichet  9734484  CAREER: Identifying Binding Sites on Proteins    1. Technical
                  tip1 The fundamental goal of this study is to understand how protein
              structure determines function through identification of ligand binding sites on
              protein surfaces, using beta-lactamase AmpC as a model system. The experiments
              are designed to characterize mutant enzymes with substitutions made in known
              binding sites, measuring the changes in their thermodynamic stability. 
              Residues positioned to interact with substrates or inhibitors are also examined
              for the stability effect.  The aim is to test a "stability-function" hypothesis
              which may provide the basis of a new tool to dissect and predict the structures
              of proteins.  The didactic program is built around this research as it
              integrates into the requirements of graduate and professional education. 
              Through the design of a new biochemistry and a new pharmacology course,
              graduate students will be introduced to current questions in protein
              structure-function, and trained in the biophysical and biochemical techniques
              necessary to investigate these questions.      2. Non-technical     A key
              question in Biology is how the structures of proteins determine their
              functions. A simple constraint on the structure and organization of protein
              binding sites may suggest just such a general method for predicting what sorts
              of ligands they will recognize.  Proteins use highly functionalized clefts to
              bind ligands and catalyze reactions.  These clefts do not appear to be
              optimized for protein stability.  This study is designed to remove known
              binding sites by residue substitution, testing significant stabilization of a
              protein by certain surface alterations.  The establishment of such
              relationships would have broad applicability to structure-function studies,
              offering a new tool to dissect the structures of proteins and predict what they
              will and will not work upon. The didactic program is built around this research
              as it integrates biophysical and biochemical techniques and pr inciples into
              the requirements of graduate and professional education.       tip1 Yes, this
              is really the Project Summary Form. The "Project Summary" is in the header and
              the NSF Form # is in the footer along with the page number.     If you want to
              print out the description of what the Project Summary should include, choose'
              print hidden text' in the print window.
