Title       : CAREER: Building Knowledge Infrastructure for CollaborativeDesign
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9734006

Award Number: 9734006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Jin yjin@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funds for a CAREER award with goals to explore a theory
              for collaborative design, develop a knowledge infrastructure to support
              collaborative design, and create new courses to teach principles of design and
              collaboration.  A new organizational decision-making framework will be
              developed to characterize collaborative design that views collaborative design
              as a set of individual decision-making processes that interact with each other
              through coordination links.  Based on the organizational decision-making
              framework, an agent-based knowledge infrastructure will be developed to support
              collaborative design.  Unlike the conventional Internet-based information
              infrastructure, the knowledge structure will function as a knowledge media that
              acquires, stores, and applies knowledge to support designers' decision-making
              and coordination processes.  The new courses to be developed include two
              academic courses, Engineering Information Modeling and Design Theory and
              Methodology, and an industry-oriented short course, Emergent Technologies for
              Collaborative Engineering.  The theoretical exploration and technology
              development described above will provide important insights and materials for
              the courses.  The experiences gained from the courses will, in turn, provide
              important feedback to the research as well.       If successful, this research
              will contribute to knowledge by integrating ideas and literature of engineering
              design, collaborative work, and organization theory and by identifying coherent
              links among the design, coordination and organizing processes.  The knowledge
              infrastructure represents a novel technology direction beyond the connectivity
              of the Internet and will impact on future development of collaboration support
              technologies.  The new courses address the future requirements for mechanical
              engineers and aim to respond to the requirements by combining theory of design
              and collaboration, together with information technologies and add them into
              engineering design curriculum.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
