Title       : CAREER: Origins of Organized Activation in the Chordate Heart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9734406

Award Number: 9734406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Gourdie gourdier@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The research component of this award advances understanding of the embryonic
              development and ancestry of the beating heart.  The education goal of this
              grant is to provide young people interested in science first-hand experience of
              project work in a professional research environment.  Special emphasis has been
              placed on getting local High School and minority students from the Charleston
              low country curious about the process of scientific discovery.  Dr. Gourdie's
              earlier research work uncovered an unrecognized relationship between the
              embryonic development of two essential heart tissues---coronary blood vessels
              and the cardiac conduction system.  In essence, it was determined that during
              embryonic life, laying down of the conductive wiring of the heart is dependent
              on the development of its coronary vascular plumbing.  To build on this, he
              plans to focus on paracrine factors secreted by developing blood vessels, and
              how these might influence gene expression in cells destined to become part of
              the conduction system.  Particular consideration will be given to understanding
              downstream effects on gap junctions and connexin expression---myocardial cell
              membrane components central to specifying and electrically integrating
              different functional compartments of heart muscle.  Evolutionary antecedents of
              the processes under investigation will also be studied in the heart of the
              marine protochordate Ciona intestinalis.  Uniquely,  although the tiny,
              tube-like heart of this animal is only one cell layer thick, it possesses many
              characteristics in common with hearts from advanced chordates (e.g. Humans). By
              funding integrated academic programs such as this, the NSF underpins the
              intellectual autonomy necessary for development of innovative teaching and
              research.
