Title       : CAREER: Low Temperature Deposition of Thin Metal Films from Supercritical Carbon
               Dioxide Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a9734177

Award Number: 9734177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Watkins watkins@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Watkins - 9734177    The demands of present and future
              microelectronic and optoelectronic device fabrication place stringent
              requirements on metal deposition schemes.  These include high film purity, low
              temperatures and rapid, controllable deposition rates.  The PI postulates that
              these objectives can be met via Chemical Fluid Deposition (CFD), a new approach
              to metal deposition that involves the chemical or thermal reduction of soluble
              organometallic compounds in supercritical carbon dioxide at low temperatures
              (40-80oC) to yield continuous films on inorganic or organic substrates.    CFD
              exploits the unique, and adjustable, physicochemical properties of SCF
              solvents, which lie intermediate to those of liquids and gases, to circumvent
              the limitations of both vapor and liquid phase techniques.  In CFD, precursor
              transport and reduction occurs in solution at significantly lower temperatures
              and higher reagent concentrations than those of vapor phase techniques such as
              chemical vapor deposition (CVD).  While CFD is a solution-based process, the
              "gas-like" transport properties of the SCF and its miscibility with gaseous
              reducing agents such as hydrogen, render the process unencumbered by issues of
              poor mass transfer and poor deposition rates associated with liquid phase
              reductions.  Preliminary experiments demonstrate that high-purity, continuous
              platinum and palladium films can be deposited from SCF solution onto silicon
              wafers and other inorganic substrates at temperatures up to 170oC below those
              employed in CVD.    The research program will focus on the deposition of thin
              films from carbon dioxide solution by the hydrogenolysis of
              dimethylcyclooctadine platinum (II) and the deposition of copper films by
              reduction of copper(II)bis(hexafluoroacetylacetone) and
              copper(II)bis(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate).  The precursors were
              chosen to facilitate a direct comparison of film quality and reduction kinetics
              in CFD to those of existing techniques and the potential utility of the m etal
              deposits in microelectronics copper and catalytic platinum devices.    The
              educational portion of the work are to: (1) train graduate students who will
              work at the interface of engineering and materials chemistry, (2) provide
              undergraduates with opportunities for research experience, (3) develop a
              two-course series in materials processing that addresses the interests of
              students and is reinforced by the expanding materials research efforts in the
              Department of Chemical Engineering, and (4) incorporate research problems and
              active learning principles into the classroom and assist in the implementation
              of interactive teaching tools across the curriculum.
