Title       : CAREER: Integration of Economic and Environmental Assessment of Advanced
               Materials Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9734054

Award Number: 9734054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline A. Isaacs jaisaacs@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9734054  Isaacs   With the increasing importance of commercialization and
              liabilities of materials, attributes other than technical performance are
              becoming significant for characterizing the success and performance of
              materials: the manufacturing cost and the environmental consequences of using
              the material. The objectives of this interdisciplinary research project are to
              develop modeling tools that (1) aid in assessing the commercial potential and
              process economics of existing and developmental technologies, and (2) identify
              environmental life cycle effects. Working with industrial partners, the initial
              phase of the research concentrates on development of process-based technical
              cost models in the powder metallurgy industry, simulation of manufacturing
              costs and development of environmental metrics. Analyses will be performed to
              identify economic and technical parameters that are necessary for successful
              implementation of advanced materials. In later phases of the project, analyses
              will be extended to more advanced powder processing of materials, such as
              magnetic, ceramic and composite materials.  Results from this work are expected
              to provide critical information about performance, economic and environmental
              tradeoffs that influence the implementation and competitive positions of
              alternative manufacturing technologies. Students working on this collaborative
              project will synthesize a relevant, meaningful manufacturing experience by
              participation in the graduate cooperative education program with the industrial
              partners. Research results will also be used to develop case-based interactive
              courses that raise the environmental literacy of undergraduate and graduate
              engineering students.   The ultimate goal of this research plan is to develop a
              sustainable and balanced effort among interdisciplinary education, case-based
              research and industrial co-op experience. The nature of this research
              encourages technology transfer, strengthens the knowledge-base of all
              participants in the partnership, and im pacts societal needs by aiding in
              assessment of economically viable, environmentally beneficial solutions to
              technological problems.
