Title       : Feedback Coupling Between Flow and Reactions in Heterogeneous Porous and
               Fractured Media:Computational and Experimental Studies (CAREER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  2001   
File        : a9734404

Award Number: 9734404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harihar Rajaram hari@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9734404  Rajaram    An integrated research and education plan is proposed in the
              specific area of reaction-transport-flow coupling in porous and fractured
              media.  The research plan focuses on computational and experimental studies of
              the dissolutional growth of fissures in soluble rock and the impact of
              precipitation/dissolution reactions on permeability of porous and fractured
              media.  The educational plan involves the development of observational
              components relevant to education in fluid mechanics and hydrology, and
              curriculum development relevant to the graduate program in hydrologic sciences.
               Feedback coupling between fluid flow and chemical reactions is important in
              the context of several geological processes such as conduit and cave formation
              in karst, and engineering applications such as "acidization" to increase
              permeability for oil recovery.  Although reaction-flow coupling has been
              examined previously, a systematic study of the influence of geologic
              heterogeneity on the nonlinearly coupled dynamics is only beginning.  A
              preliminary study carried out by the P.I. and a graduate student indicated that
              random variations in the fissure aperture accelerate conduit growth in calcite
              by up to an order of magnitude.  The objective of the proposed research is to
              quantify the influence of heterogeneity on the dynamics of flow-reaction
              coupling in porous and fractured media, based on controlled experiments and
              computational studies.  Experiments will be carried out in fractures cast with
              plaster-of-paris.  Surfaces with measured roughness will be used to assemble
              the fractures.  High-resolution aperture measurements (through collaboration
              with Dr. Robert J. Glass, Sandia National Laboratories) will accompany
              dissolution experiments.  Computational studies will focus on topical systems
              such as karst evolution, dissolution of gypsum and anhydrite, deposition of
              quartz veins in fractures and the growth of carbonate concretions.  The studies
              on carbonate concretions will support the work of Drs. Matt  Davis
              (EAR-9725194) and Peter Mozley (EAR-9726416).  The data on concretion growth
              history and orientation  obtained from their work will be employed to evaluate
              different hypotheses on concretion growth.  Continuing educational activities
              include development of an interactive undergraduate fluid mechanics course and
              a bench-top watershed module to be used for qualitative and quantitative
              visualization.  Proposed module development activities focus on simple
              experiments to illustrate the impact of heterogeneity on flow and transport
              processes in porous and fractured media.  Curriculum development involve a new
              integrative course on reactive transport modeling, to serve as a core course
              for the graduate program in hydrologic sciences.  The course will provide an
              integrated perspective on reaction-transport interactions in atmospheric,
              oceanic, surface and groundwater systems, emphasizing the unifying aspects
              across different media.  The relationship between spatial/temporal scales of
              interest and the types of models used will also be a theme.  The course will
              include a field component on experimental modification of water quality in
              small streams (through collaboration with Dr. Diane McKnight) and experimental
              studies.
