Title       : Bifunctional Free Radical Initiators and Azoxyalkane Cyclizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9734878

Award Number: 9734878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Engel engel@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is three fold.   First, azo and perester   containing
              bi- and tri-functional free-radical initiators will be   synthesized and
              examined as  precursors to star polymers, and block   copolymers containing
              functional groups at the block interfaces.  Second,   the radical chemistry of
              molecules containing an azoxy group will be   examined with a specific emphasis
              on determining, depending on the   position of azoxy group, the mechanisms of
              intramolecular cyclization and   ethylene evolution.   Lastly, the mechanism by
              which halogens form   complexes with azoalkanes and 1,2-dialkylhydrazines will
              be elucidated   and the radical chemistry of the resulting adduct examined.  
              Graduate   and postdoctoral students will be introduced to the free radical  
              chemistry of the aforementioned organic molecules, and free radical  
              polymerization.  With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program   supports the research and educational activities of Dr. Paul Engel of
              the   Department of Chemistry at Rice University.   Dr. Engel will focus his  
              research on the synthesis and characterization of organic molecules  
              containing two or more azo or perester groups.   Activating these groups   with
              either heat or light leads to highly reactive sites referred to as   free
              radicals.   By positioning the azo or perester groups within the   molecule,
              and thereby defining the sites at which the free radicals are   generated, Dr.
              Engel will examine the mechanism by which two sites within   the same molecule
              couple to form a cyclic molecule, and the mechanisms by   which sites on one
              molecule react with another molecule to propagate the   formation of the
              radical, and the subsequent growth of polymers with new   molecular shapes and
              composition.   Dr. Engel's educational activities   involve training graduate
              and postdoctoral students in the synthesis of   molecules containing azo and
              perester groups, their activation to form   free radicals, and the
              characterization of the subsequent chemistry of   these reactive intermediates.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
