Title       : CAREER: Molecular Transport Theory for Nanoporous Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9734153

Award Number: 9734153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Auerbach auerbach@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                CTS-9734153 Auerbach    Most environmentally friendly technologies rely on 
              separations that remove pollutants from benign materials. Zeolite  molecular
              sieves, consisting of regularly spaced, molecular-sized cages  shown below, are
              ideally suited for these separations. Although much is  known about zeolites,
              no simple theory exists for accurately predicting  how molecules diffuse
              through them. This is because of the difficulty in  modeling infrequent event
              dynamics coupled with strong  adsorbate-adsorbate interactions. Furthermore,
              zeolites are ignored by  the single most important class in physical science:
              freshman chemistry.  To address these issues, the Principal Investigator will
              develop novel  educational techniques and molecular transport theories aimed at
               accelerating material and process screening of emerging chemical 
              technologies.     The mobility of many hydrocarbons in industrially important 
              zeolites is exceedingly sluggish, precluding the use of straightforward 
              molecular dynamics simulations, and hence requiring modeling techniques 
              specialized for infrequent events. Previous transition state simulations  of
              diffusion in zeolites were performed at low loadings, so that 
              adsorbate-adsorbate interactions could be neglected. These conditions  are
              irrelevant to industrial processes, which are carried out at  essentially full
              hydrocarbon loading. To model transport in zeolites  under industrial
              conditions, the Principal Investigator will develop a  hierarchy of three new
              techniques with varying accuracy and speed. An  accelerated molecular dynamics
              algorithm that adds a novel boost  potential for reducing site-to-site
              activation energies will predict  essentially exact diffusivities provided that
              the boost avoids  transition states. A lattice Monte Carlo simulation will be
              developed  that includes a new treatment of activation energies modified by 
              adsorbate-adsorbate interactions. Finally, a completely analytical  theory will
              be derived that synthesizes for the first time fluctua ting  activation
              energies with the mean field theory of fluids. This new  hierarchy provides the
              opportunity of choosing a model based on the need  for speed or accuracy in
              process optimization. These models will be  incorporated into a freshman
              chemistry module entitled: "Zeolites in  Industry," involving new Web-based,
              interactive software that mimics the  physical and chemical properties of these
              systems.     This research will impact science and society on many levels. 
              First, incorporating zeolite science and technology into freshman  chemistry
              will excite and inform thousands of students about real-world  benefits of
              industrial chemistry and engineering. Second, this novel  combination of
              chemical reaction dynamics and mean field theory will  yield the first truly
              molecular theory for transport in zeolites,  elucidating how the competition
              between host-guest and guest-guest  interactions controls these transport
              processes. This will guide and  complement new diffusion measurements, and will
              accelerate screening of  new chemical processes. Third, when applied to
              aromatic separations and  hydrofluorocarbon separations in large-pore zeolites,
              these calculations  will help guide scientists and engineers in choosing
              optimal zeolite  Si:Al ratios, zeolite channel structures, temperatures and
              pressures for  carrying out efficient and cost-effective separations.
