Title       : PECASE: Rapid Tooling with Laminated Dies and Molds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9734231

Award Number: 9734231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Walczyk walczd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9734231  Walczyk  Metal tooling made of a laminated construction offers
              advantages over tooling made by more conventional methods (e.g., CNC machining)
              in terms of tooling accessibility, reduced die geometry limitations, quicker
              fabrication with hard tool materials, easier incorporation of sensors for
              process control, and more flexibility with conformal cooling passages.  The
              research objectives of this CAREER project are to first identify the various
              manufacturing processes that can benefit from a laminated tooling construction.
               Once all of the tooling requirements are established, a structural/thermal
              model for clamped and bonded laminated tools will be developed and
              experimentally verified.  The aim of this model is to give a tooling designer
              the means to predict the structural/thermal behavior of a laminated tool
              subjected to various loads, pressures, and temperatures.  Next, an efficient
              technique will be developed for creating kinematically and dynamically
              desirable trajectories for abrasive waterjet or laser cutting of laminations
              based on a solid or surface CAD model of the tool.  An algorithm will also be
              developed for varying lamination thicknesses based on geometrical constraints
              of the tool (e.g., vertical walls) and/or manufacturing process requirements. 
              Methods for improving the accuracy and quality of abrasive waterjet or
              laser-cut lamination beveled edges will also be investigated.  Finally, methods
              for bonding laminations into a solid die (e.g., with adhesives) and ways of
              automating this procedure will be developed and experimentally verified.  The
              education part of this project will be on enhancing and developing
              undergraduate and graduate courses  in the design of mechanical elements and
              systems including the consideration of rapid tooling, fixturing and assembly. 
              The development of a comprehensive set of design tools, fabrication procedures,
              predictive models is important to the science and technology base of rapid
              tooling. Industry can use the case studies to develop  laminated tooling.  The
              potential proliferation of laminated tooling within US industry can lead to
              significant savings in the cost and lead-time of tooling development.
