Title       : Dynamics of Equilibrium Liquids, Supercooled Liquids, and Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9734893

Award Number: 9734893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans C. Andersen hca@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hans Andersen is funded by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to continue his studies of the dynamics and equilibrium   of
              liquids, supercooled liquids and glasses.  Andersen will develop and   use
              three types of statistical mechanical methods for the study of the   kinetic
              theory of dense supercooled fluids: 1) a formulation of the   Martin, Siggia,
              Rose (MSR) approach applied to the classical dynamics of   particle and spin
              systems; 2) molecular dynamics simulation studies of   dense, low temperature
              and slightly supercooled atomic liquids; and 3)   simulation of the time
              dependence of kinetic spin models designed to   elucidate mechanisms for
              relaxation and structural change in highly   supercooled liquids and glasses. 
              The major objectives of the research   are: 1) to provide critical tests of the
              derivation and accuracy of the   extended mode coupling theory and a greater
              understanding of the physical   content of the theory; 2) to develop a basis
              for kinetic theory that is   an alternative to the use of projection operators
              or the four-point   function of Mazenko; and 3) to understand how to
              incorporate such   phenomena as formation of frustration-limited domains,
              secondary   relaxation, and inhomogeneous relaxation into kinetic theory. 
              Molecular   dynamics simulations will be used to study liquids and slightly  
              supercooled regimes, and more schematic spin models will be used at lower  
              temperatures where the relevant time scales are longer.  Glasses are
              technologically important materials made from a variety of   components, both
              organic and inorganic, both small molecular weight   substances and polymers. 
              Examples include ordinary materials such as   window glass and food containers,
              as well as high-tech materials for   telecommunications, optoelectronics, and
              solid electrolytes.  As   nonequilibrium materials, their properties depend on
              how they are made,   which usually involves preparation of a high temperature
              liquid followed   by various cooling and processing steps.  The preparation of
              such   materials to achieve optimal performance is guided largely by empirical 
               observations, but Andersen's research seeks an understanding of the   dynamics
              of these materials and their corresponding liquids on a   molecular level which
              can be useful in the design of rational processing   procedures.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
