Title       : CAREER: Surface and Interface Properties of Antiferromagnetic Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9734051

Award Number: 9734051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lederman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9734051  Lederman    This   is   a   CAREER   Award  to  an  EPSCOR   grantee.  
              Model  antiferromagnets  will  be used to study  surface  and  interface 
              magnetic  excitations and surface magnetic ordering phenomena  of  artificial 
              heterostructures. There is  much  interest  in  these  materials because they
              have simple structures and therefore  they  can  be understood theoretically
              and their behavior modeled by  a  computer. The results will significantly
              contribute to our  basic  understanding of low-dimensional magnetic systems, 
              and  will  be  used  to  understand  more complex systems  that  have 
              important  technological    applications.   A   novel    waveguide-thin-film 
              spectroscopy  will be employed to probe the magnetic excitations.  Additional 
              information  regarding the antiferromagnetic  surface  long  range order will
              be obtained from magnetic measurements  of  ferromagnetic  overlayers and
              neutron reflectivity  measurements.  The  educational objective of this
              proposal is to develop science  outreach and recruiting programs in the State
              of West Virginia to  prepare  students for the technology-based economy of the
              twenty-  first  century. The educational portion of this project  will  be 
              composed  of  three  parts: 1) integration of  collaborative  and  hands-on 
              activities into the physics curriculum at West Virginia  University;  2)
              participation in science outreach and  recruiting  programs  in  the State of
              West Virginia; and 3)  involvement  of  undergraduate physics students directly
              in the research program.  %%%  This  is  a  CAREER  Award  to an EPSCOR 
              grantee.  The  research  objective of this project is to study the magnetic
              properties  of  interfaces  between  model  magnetic  materials.  There  is 
              much  interest  in these materials because they have simple  structures  and 
              therefore  they  can be understood theoretically  and  their  behavior  modeled
               by a computer. The results will  significantly  contribute to our basic
              understanding of very small magnets,   and  will  be  used  to  understand more
               complex  systems  that  have  important  applications in magnetic storage and 
              magnetic  sensor  applications.  The educational objective of this proposal  is
               to  develop science outreach and recruiting programs in the State  of  West 
              Virginia  to  prepare  students  for  the  technology-based  economy  of the
              twenty-first century. The educational portion  of  this  project will be
              composed of three parts: 1) integration  of  collaborative and hands-on
              activities into the physics curriculum  at West Virginia University; 2)
              participation in science outreach  and  recruiting  programs in the State of
              West Virginia;  and  3)  involvement  of  undergraduate physics students
              directly  in  the  research program.  ***
