Title       : CAREER: A Stochastic Approach to Designing Affordable, Environmentally
               Acceptable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a9734234

Award Number: 9734234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitri N. Mavris dimitri.mavris@aerospace.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research goal under this grant is to develop a probabilistic, decision-based
              methodology for the design of affordable, environmentally acceptable systems. 
              Affordability is defined as the ratio of benefits derived from a system over
              the cost of achieving those benefits.  The research is characterized by
              activities in three important areas: modeling techniques that encompass the
              entire life cycle of a system; procedures for modeling, assessment, and
              mitigation of a variety of uncertainties (which may vary in time); and
              algorithms for the identification of key economic and environmental parameters
              that lead to robust design solutions.  These three areas are critical to
              computing probabilistic estimates of system feasibility and viability early in
              the design/development cycle.  Demonstration and validation of research results
              will occur via a joint effort with industry, through an application study
              focused on the combined engine/airframe design of a High Speed Civil Transport
              aircraft.  Such an application contains all the relevant issues addressed in
              the new design methodology: an emphasis on affordability, significant economic
              uncertainty, and environmental challenges such as excessive community noise and
              emissions of oxides of nitrogen.  If successful, this research would assist
              design engineers and decision makers in responding to the new paradigm in
              design, where affordability and environmental compliance are primary
              objectives. Designers will benefit from the developed and demonstrated
              techniques for linking these key objectives to elemental design parameters and
              associated uncertainties.  Further, the proposed methods are applicable in
              almost any setting in a wide variety of fields.  In addition, a plan for
              integration of the methods developed under this research into a newly formed
              graduate design curriculum to teach students the fundamentals of probabilistic
              design and mitigation of uncertainties within the context of affordability is
              presented.  The intent is to better prepare engineering graduates for the
              challenges which await in the new century.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
