Title       : CAREER: Integrated Teaching and Research on Molecule and Cell Biophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9734178

Award Number: 9734178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Marko jmarko@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9162,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9734178  Marko    This is a CAREER award integrating research and education 
              which is jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials  Research, Physics,
              Molecular and Cellular Biology and the  Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities.  The grant involves
              teaching  and research on the application of condensed matter physics  to
              problems in molecular and cell biology.    In the past fifty years biology has
              largely become based on  the physical science of organic molecules.  This 
              understanding has largely been the domain of (bio)chemistry.  However, with the
              advent of new tools that allow us to  manipulate large protein, RNA and DNA
              molecules, biochemists  and biologists are being faced with a new class of
              problems  related to the physical chemistry of huge macromolecules.  There has
              been tremendous progress in our understanding of  the statistical physics of
              large molecules in the past two  decades.  However, even the basic ideas from
              polymer science  are largely unknown to biologists, and even to most 
              biochemists.  Further, while in principle useful, much of  polymer statistical
              mechanics is ill-adapted for application  to biopolymers.  Most of polymer
              physics is aimed at  homopolymers or large-block copolymers subject to
              relatively  weak physical interactions on the scale of kT; by contrast 
              biopolymers are almost always heteropolymers whose function  is defined by
              their sequence, and their functions often  involve interruption of chemical
              bonds characterized by eV  energies.    This research will attempt to fill the
              gap between polymer  science and molecular biology using a two-pronged teaching
               and research approach.  In the classroom, a cross-  disciplinary course will
              be developed aimed at  undergraduates in both physics and biology.  This course
               will be integrated with a laboratory which will provide  hands-on experience
              with measurements of motion and forces  at the sub-cellular level.  Lab
              projects will include  analysis of microtubule dynami c instability, study of 
              elastic response of vesicles, study of cell and organelle  motility in cell
              cultures, and physical properties of single  DNA molecules; they will all
              involve quantitative analysis  of video microscopy data.  This will introduce
              physics  students to exciting research possibilities which are  developing in
              the field of molecular biophysics, and at the  same time can provide some basic
              background in polymer  physics to biology students.    The research program
              complements the course development by  focusing on theoretical descriptions of
              test tube  experiments on biomolecules, and the extension of those 
              descriptions to activity of biomolecules in living cells.  The main interest is
              on the interaction of DNA molecules  with one another, and with enzymes which
              modify DNA  structure.  The long term goal is a theoretical  understanding of
              the enzyme systems which regulate the  structure and topology of prokaryote and
              eukaryote  chromosomes.  The main question is how do cells duplicate, 
              recombine and segregate their centimeter-long genomic DNA's  without fatal
              entanglements or breakages.  %%%  This is a CAREER award integrating research
              and education  which is jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials  Research,
              Physics, Molecular and Cellular Biology and the  Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Directorate Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities.  The grant
              involves teaching  and research on the application of condensed matter physics 
              to problems in molecular and cell biology.  ***
