Title       : Integration of Facility Layout, Process Planning, and Machining Center Selection
               Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9734815

Award Number: 9734815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46758              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahrukh A. Irani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant funds a one-year exploratory research effort to seek new
              strategies to simplify the material flow network that exists in a facility
              after it has implemented the best possible facility layout.  The research will
              evaluate algorithms that could automate the implementation of simplification
              strategies.  Such strategies assume that, when a facility layout is designed
              for a facility using a travel chart, several flows in the chart will be forced
              to occur between non-adjacent departments that do not share a common boundary. 
              Examples of strategies that could eliminate, simplify or reduce the
              non-adjacent flows include: change the part mix produced in the facility,
              eliminate the offending operations, modify the operation sequences of the
              parts, create cells to completely process one or more parts, replace one or
              more cells with multi-function machining centers, and merge two or more
              departments.  This research will evaluate string clustering and matching
              algorithms used in non-engineering domains such as genetics and biology to
              implement these strategies.       If successful, the benefits that could result
              from this research include reduced material flow between non-adjacent
              departments, the ability to make machining equipment purchases based on logical
              grouping of dissimilar machines into cells, and the ability to eliminate flows
              between non-adjacent departments in the layout.  These benefits would lead to
              more efficient manufacturing of many products.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
