Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Impact of Particle Transport in Soils on Filter
               Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9734804

Award Number: 9734804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30057              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lakshmi N. Reddi reddi@ce.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9734804  Reddi    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lakshmi Reddi, 
              Department of Civil Engineering, Kansas State University,  to pursue with
              Professor In-Mo Lee, Department of Civil  Engineering, Korea University, for 36
              months, a program of  cooperative research on the impact of particle transport
              in  soils on filter performance.  The present collaboration  will add an
              international cooperative dimension to Dr.  Reddi's research presently funded
              under NSF Grant No. CMS-  9713708.  This research addresses problems arising
              from the  fact that a number of soil structures need filters for  protection
              against erosion and piping which can damage  adjacent structures, and the fact
              that damage may result if  these filters become clogged.  The domestic (CMS)
              project  involves fundamental studies on physicochemical and  biological
              mechanisms of filter clogging.  A complementary  study being undertaken by the
              team at Korea University  focuses on particle mobilization in residual soils
              (and  filter clogging associated with this mobilization) and  field
              investigations on failed filters.    The broad objective of the cooperative
              research effort is  to link up the U.S. and Korean domestic studies in order to
               achieve a comprehensive and complete understanding of the  filter clogging
              mechanisms.  Specific objectives are: (1)  to exchange the experimental data on
              particle mobilization  from base soils and particle entrapment in filters; (2)
              to  share the data on field investigations; and (3) to  generalize and validate
              the filter design criteria in the  US domestic research project in light of
              field  investigations made in Korea.  Mutual benefit from the  collaboration is
              expected because results from the Korean  research will aid in validation of
              the theoretical and  laboratory investigations being undertaken in the United 
              States.  At the same time, both teams will benefit from the  theoretical
              treatment of data collected by the Korean team.  Thus, the collaboration will
              provide a unique opportunity  t o integrate two different perspectives of the
              problem,  one, a fundamental laboratory scale study, and the other, a 
              field-scale and practical study.  This project is relevant  to the objectives
              of  the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science  Program which seeks to increase the
              level of cooperation  between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through 
              the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and  techniques and
              through collaboration on problems of mutual  benefit.  This project will
              provide international training  and experience for a U.S. graduate student in
              an important  area of research.  Korean participation is supported by the 
              Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  ***
