Title       : CAREER: Isolation & Use of Arabidopsis thaliana L. Mutants for Elucidating
               Photomorphogenic Signaling Pathways and for Undergraduate and Graduate Student
               Instruction and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9734527

Award Number: 9734527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Short Timothy_Short@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9734527  Short  The importance of studying cellular and physiological processes
              in higher organisms has become increasingly apparent as a way to discover how
              living organisms respond to their surroundings, how malfunction of these
              processes affects the organism, and how manipulation of these systems can yield
              important benefits.  Light regulation of development and gene expression has
              been the target of intensive research because of light's importance in the
              control of numerous processes at all stages of the plant life cycle.  The
              research undertaken in this project examines the interactions among light,
              sugar availability, and developmental stage in controlling accumulation of the
              family of pigments called anthocyanins. Anthocyanins and their precursors have
              been implicated in protection from damaging ultraviolet light, defense against
              herbivores and pathogens, interaction with beneficial microbes, floral
              coloration, and pollinator attraction.  They have also been suggested as
              potential tools to reduce heart disease and some cancers.  In this study,
              control mechanisms for anthocyanin production are being examined with a
              combination of molecular, genetic, and physiological tools.  By studying
              responses to light and sugars in existing and newly isolated mutants, the
              signal transduction pathways for these gene regulation mechanisms will be
              investigated, with the goal of determining how the pathways are integrated
              within the plant cell to modulate gene expression.  These studies will be
              performed within the context of teaching graduate students state-of-the-art
              methods in physiology, genetics and molecular biology, allowing these graduate
              to mentor undergraduates and improve their teaching abilities, and using the
              isolated mutants as part of an introductory undergraduate course in molecular
              plant physiology.
