Title       : CAREER: The Fate of Hormones in the Aquatic Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9734130

Award Number: 9734130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Sedlak sedlak@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9734130  Sedlak  The objective of this research is to study the fate of  natural
              and synthetic hormones in three aquatic environments-  laboratory, wastewater
              treatment and natural river. Since  hormones interact with the endocrine
              systems of humans and  wildlife, the effect of endocrine disruptors must be 
              understood and reflected in environmental policies about  chemical use and the
              management of water resources and water  reuse. To date, most research on
              endocrine disruption has  focused on industrial chemicals, such as pesticides, 
              plasticizers and surfactants. However, trace amounts of  natural and synthetic
              hormones can cause endocrine  disruption and previous measurements of estrogen
              and related  compounds in urine suggest that these hormones could be more 
              important to endocrine disruption than other compounds found  in wastewater
              effluent.    To access the importance of wastewater effluent as a source  of
              endocrine disrupters, research will be conducted to  determine the
              environmental fate of estrogens. In the first  phase of this project, new
              analytical methods will be  developed for measuring estrogens at
              environmentally  relevant concentrations using enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
              assays (ELISAs) and gas chromatography. These methods will  then be used to
              assess the removal of estrogens during  wastewater treatment and their fate in
              a river that receives  significant discharges of treated wastewater.    A
              series of interactive demonstrations will be developed and  displayed at public
              forums to educate the public about  emerging water resource issues. To provide
              environmental  engineering students with the skills needed to address  problems
              associated with resource conservation and reuse, a  series of graduate-level
              courses will be developed. These  courses will consist of a lecture course, a
              laboratory  course and a graduate seminar that highlight the role that 
              environmental engineers can play in solving problems related  to the
              conservation and reuse of resources.
