Title       : CAREER: MEMS Post-Packaging by Localized Heating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9734421

Award Number: 9734421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liwei Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9734421  Lin  The objective of this CAREER development plan is for the applicant
              to become an excellent teacher and researcher in the area of
              Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) with initial research efforts in MEMS
              post-packaging by localized heating.  Elements of this plan include:      1. to
              develop MEMS post-packaging process with innovative approach of localized
              heating.  2. to develop MEMS educational cuff iculum with innovative student
              mentoring and outreach.    Research Plan:  MEMS has been recognized as one of
              the next generation technologies that are of critical importance to the economy
              and competitiveness of the US.  MEMS has emerged from IC (Integrated Circuit)
              technologies, where up to 95% of the manufacturing cost may come from the
              packaging process.  MEMS packaging is more difficult than the IC packaging due
              to its unconventional natural of "micro mechanical structures" which
              complicates the packaging issue.  It is desired to develop a versatile MEMS
              post-packaging process that can overcome the rigorous packaging requirements of
              wafer-level process, low temperature, hermetic sealing and rong-term stability.
               The objectives of this research are: (1) to develop a versatile MEMS
              post-packaging process for pre-fabricated MEMS wafers. (2) to develop an
              innovative approach of localized heating to be used in the proposed MEMS
              post-packaging process  All of the current MEMS packaging processes are case
              sensitive.  They either require high temperature for bonding such as fusion,
              anodic or eutectic bonding or they use low temperature process with
              non-hermetic grade bonding materials such as epoxy.  Localized heating provides
              a new approach to solve the bonding problem.  Since high temperature can be
              locally generated, hermetic and strong bonding can be achieved.  At the same
              time, the temperature outside the bonding area can be kept low.  Therefore, new
              bonding materials, better, faster and stronger bonding mechanisms may be
              explored by using the localized heating scheme.  In order to ch aracterize the
              optimal bonding conditions, theoretical and numerical analysis with experiments
              on electro-thermal characteristics, bonding mechanisms and micro fabrication
              processes will be investigated.  The micropackaged sensors will be gone through
              accelerated tests and monitored to determine long-term stability.  The
              optimized MEMS post-packaging process can be directly applicable for MEMS
              industry.    Educational Plan:  The CAREER educational plan includes three
              major parts: 1. New courses: Two new MEMS courses will be developed to
              strengthen the MEMS education at the University of Michigan and to integrate
              with the existing curriculum.  The first course is Introduction to MEMS for
              senior/graduate students and it focuses on basic micromachining technologies
              including design, simulation and manufacturing of MEMS.  The second course is
              Advanced MEMS for graduate students and it emphasizes on MEMS handson
              experiences including microfabrication processes and MEMS testing.  A complete
              MEMS educational curriculum for students majoring in Mechanical Engineering
              ftom fteshman to Ph.D. has been proposed in this CAREER Program. 2. Innovative
              mentoring and outreach: Six programs will be carried out at the University of
              Michigan for innovative student mentoring and outreach including "MEMS focused
              study group"; "MEMS Summer Camp"; "Industrial Internship"; "Student Exchanging
              Program"; "Unde?Wraduate MEMS Design Projects" and "Joint research projects".
              3. Laboratory development: A research/teaching laboratory will be established
              under the CAREER program at the Department of Mechanical Engineering and
              Applied Mechanics.  This laboratory is to complement the existing facilities at
              the Solid-State laboratory and will emphasize on the micro-electro-mechanical
              testing (MEMT) with initial efforts on MEMS post-packaging by localized
              heating.  ***
