Title       : CAREER: Semiflexible Macromolecules with Secondary Structure: A Theoretical
               Approach based on the Edwards' Hamiltonian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0132278

Award Number: 0132278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Carri carri@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division, Carri will conduct fundamental research in
              the field of theoretical physical chemistry of single macromolecules. 
              Specifically, he will construct first-principles models on the mesoscopic level
              to explain recent experimental results in the field of oligomers, copolymers
              and biopolymers.  Models will be constructed from first-principles using an
              appropriately designed Edwards Hamiltonian that will take into account not only
              the stiffness of the polymer backbone, but also the tendency to form secondary
              structures (alpha-helices and beta-sheets).  In the case of heteropolymers the
              effects of sequence distribution, stiffnesses of the different blocks, and the
              tendency to form secondary structures on the thermodynamic and mechanical
              properties of semiflexible copolymers will be explored.  The second goal of
              this project is to improve the education of young scientists and stimulate high
              school students to pursue a career in science.  The first objective will be
              achieved by developing a class suitable for graduate and senior undergraduate
              students in which the most important advances in theoretical physical chemistry
              of macromolecules will be explained and discussed.  The second goal will be
              accomplished by giving simple though challenging problems to senior high school
              students and freshmen and sophomore undergraduates, allowing them to explore
              the world of computer simulations of macromolecules.

Although initially
              studies of polymer elasticity were mostly useful in an industrial setting, they
              have proven more recently to be essential for understanding the function of
              biological macromolecules.  Unlike industrial polymers, biological
              macromolecules have complex arrangements called secondary and tertiary
              structures.  The full extent to which these structural arrangements determine
              the function of biological molecules has become clear only recently.  In this
              work Dr. Carri will extend the theory of polymer elasticity to include the
              effect of structure on the computations of elastic behavior of complex
              macromolecules.  This project is of critical value to allow for a quantitative
              study that will provide a deeper understanding of the physical properties of
              complex macromolecules like biopolymers as well as of carefully designed
              synthetic polymers that can form secondary structures.  Ultimately these
              studies will transform our understanding of biology and bring about a less
              descriptive and more quantitative description of the cell.  With respect to the
              education component, there is a strong need to have more polymer physics
              courses available for the non-polymer students as well as for those in polymer
              science.  Introducing more computer projects enables the students to visualize
              the physics, something that excites them.

