Title       : Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial H2O-Oxidation Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0132356

Award Number: 0132356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Burnap burnap@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Oxygenic photosynthesis is ultimately the source of the vast majority of
              biological energy that supports life on earth and is responsible for the
              generation of oxygen strictly required for respiration in all animals,
              including humans. Oxygenic photosynthesis depends upon a cluster of four
              manganese atoms, (Mn)4, associated with the catalytic site of H 2 O-oxidation
              of the membrane-bound photosystem II (PSII) complex. Recent advances in the
              determination of the molecular structure confirms that the (Mn)4) is
              sequestered within a region of the PSII complex formed by intrinsic and
              extrinsic proteins near the lumenal surface of the thylakoid membrane. Many
              outstanding questions remain and their mystery, in some cases, is only deepened
              by the newly available structure. The overall objective of this project is to
              connect the structure features of the cyanobacterial PSII H2O-oxidation complex
              (WOC) to the dynamical aspects of the assembly and function of the Mn cluster.
              Cyanobacteria are being used as the experimental model since the photosynthetic
              mechanism in these ubiquitous organisms is fundamentally similar to that found
              in higher plants and algae, but at the same time, more efficient methods for
              probing the photosynthetic process at the molecular level are available thereby
              shortening the time necessary to test the basic ideas of the research. The work
              combines molecular genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches to clarify
              the process of photoactivation, which is the sequential light- dependent
              assembly of the catalytic tetramer of Mn atoms that forms the core of the WOC.
              The research is facilitated by the development of His-tag purification methods
              and strains for the gentle isolation of highly active and pure
              detergent-solublized PSII complexes. The ability to produce large amounts of
              mutant and wild-type PSII particles and extrinsic proteins now permits
              systematic manipulations of the ions and proteins of the WOC to better
              understand its assembly and function. While most mutants are already produced,
              a few additional mutations are being made to perform site-specific labeling to
              probe structural rearrangements using a cysteine-scanning mutagenesis/chemical
              modification approach. The experiments are of benefit to parallel biophysical
              analyses (e.g. FTIR, EPR) by defining the compositional and kinetic properties
              of specific mutant His-tagged PSII particles and highlighting the best
              preparative procedures for isolating and analyzing them. Together, these
              efforts complement on-going developments in the crystal structure determination
              by considering the dynamical aspects concerning the mechanism of light-driven
              assembly and activation of the Mn cluster. 
