Title       : Orbital Order and Bond-Length Fluctuations in Narrow-Band Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0132282

Award Number: 0132282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Goodenough jgoodenough@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to study the novel physical properties encountered in
              transition-metal oxides at the transition from localized to itinerant
              electronic behavior and at orbital order-disorder transitions. The
              localized-itinerant electronic transition occurs where the dominant electronic
              energies change from intra-atomic to inter-atomic.  This transition is
              first-order, and where phase separation would occur at too low a temperature
              for atomic diffusion, a dynamic spinodal segregation on a small length scale is
              accomplished by locally cooperative bond-length fluctuations.  On lowering the
              temperature, ordering of the fluctuations may result in a charge-density wave
              that can be mobile or pinned.  Orbital order-disorder transitions occur at
              localized configurations having an orbital degeneracy that is removed by
              lowering the local site symmetry.  These Jahn-Teller distortions may be
              long-range cooperative and static or short-range dynamic to give another
              mechanism for bond-length fluctuations. Experiments have shown that the
              high-temperature superconductivity in the copper oxides occurs at a crossover
              from localized to itinerant electronic behavior. Colossal magnetoresistance in
              the manganese-oxide perovskites is associated with both a localized to
              itinerant electronic transition  and the stabilization in a magnetic field of
              orbital fluctuations over long-range cooperative orbital ordering because
              orbital fluctuations give isotropic ferromagnetic interactions whereas static,
              long-range-cooperative distortions give antiferromagnetic order.  Also, the
              importance of measuring on single crystals the transport and magnetic
              properties as a function of pressure as well as temperature allows fine tuning
              of the intraatomic versus interatomic interactions without changing the
              chemistry.  The suppression of the phonon contribution to the thermal
              conductivity by bond-length fluctuations with an eye on how this phenomenon
              might be useful for peltier cooling will be studied. This project has a very
              strong educational component that provides graduate and post-doctoral students
              an opportunity to learn how to synthesize and characterize both chemically and
              structurally polycrystalline and single-crystal samples.

 This class of
              transition-metal oxides exhibits magnetic, transport, thermoelectric power,
              specific heat, and thermal conductivity behavior that suggests significant
              potential for high impact applications such as high performance magnetic and
              electronic devices and solid state refrigeration. Students trained in these
              areas will compete very well for available industrial and academic
              positions.




	


