Title       : RUI: Proteinaceous Bioadhesive Structure Elucidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0132823

Award Number: 0132823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion P. Olivieri oliviemp@dyc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D'Youville College
	      320 Porter Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142011032    716/881-3200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to determine the molecular structure of
              proteinaceous domains that exhibit bioadhesive functionality.  Model peptides
              in the solvated adsorbed-state will be examined using a combination of
              biophysical techniques to monitor the conformational changes that occur upon
              substrate binding.  This project seeks to develop a protocol for structural
              elucidation of adsorbed molecules in solution.  Mussel adhesive protein, MAP,
              extracted from Mytilus edulis has provided information to create the initial
              model compounds.  Solid-state techniques, such as multiple attenuated internal
              reflectance infrared (MAIR-IR) spectroscopy, ellipsometry, contact angle
              analysis, combined with solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy and molecular modeling have already given some structural
              information, but have not been used to their fullest potential.  When
              warranted, these techniques, in addition to newly proposed "adsorbed-state" NMR
              spectroscopy, crystallization attempts for x-ray diffraction and cell
              attachment assays, will be employed.  The information would be compiled to
              create molecular models of the peptides in close approximation to a surface to
              view and better understand changes that occur upon substrate binding. 

The
              investigator has worked to combine research with teaching. The variety of
              courses the PI has taught at D'Youville College reflects her multi-disciplinary
              background (e.g., chemistry, biochemistry, mathematics and computer science). 
              Most of the PI's students are female non-science majors.  Although these
              students did not choose science as their major field of study, the scientific
              information, process and tools that they are exposed to have a significant
              impact on their overall education. Many of these students will be required to
              complete a Master's thesis or project.  Additionally, the school has increased
              the number of education students drastically.  These (K-12) pre-teacher's
              exposure to this project enhances not only their education, but of each of
              their students to follow. Exposure to this project may be the only opportunity
              D'Youville students have to witness basic research before they graduate.

