Title       : SBIR Phase II: Next Generation Component Software for Simulation-Based
               Econometric Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0132076

Award Number: 0132076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Zivot   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jiahui Wang  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Insightful Corporation
	      1700 Westlake Avenue N Ste 500
	      Seattle, WA  981093044    206/283-8802

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
     This SBIR Phase II research project proposes to develop user-friendly
              component software for classical econometric estimation and inference based on
              simulation methods, such as maximum simulated likelihood, method of simulated
              moments, and efficient method of moments.  In the last decade different
              simulation-based methods have been developed to tackle complex
              economic/statistical models which cannot be estimated by conventional methods
              such as Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) and Generalized Method of Moments
              (GMM). Although these simulation-based estimators have desirable theoretical
              properties, they have remained as research topics in academia and have not
              become useful tools for practitioners because of the lack of user friendly
              software.  Building upon the Phase I research and development, Insightful
              (formerly MathSoft) plans to study two classes of models: mixed logit models
              for discrete choice analysis which represent cross sectional and panel data
              problems, and models for term structure of interest rates which represent
              discrete time and continuous time structural models. Extensive Monte Carlo
              experiments will be used to explore finite sample properties of various aspects
              of simulation, estimation and forecasting, with an aim of improving and
              stabilizing the current algorithms.  The user-friendly component software will
              be developed using both object oriented S-Plus language and the state-of-art
              JavaBean technology, and it will provide intuitive graphical user interface.
 
                 The S-Plus functions of the technology proffered by Insightful for
              econometric estimation and inference will serve the purpose of quickly gaining
              a broad user base, while the JavaBeans can be used to develop custom
              applications.  The software will help economists and practitioners in other
              fields such as the financial industry, social sciences, and biotechnology to
              conduct flexible and extensible model estimation and inference.

