Title       : Exploring the Effects of Group Mood on Group Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0132258

Award Number: 0132258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice R. Kelly kelly@psych.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Social psychologists have recognized the importance of a group's emotional life
              for its performance, development, and health. Until recently, however,
              relatively little research attention has been paid to the role of affect in
              group performance. Over the past few decades, research on individual people has
              shown that moods and emotions have profound influences on many areas of
              cognitive functioning. For example, mood has been found to affect persuasion
              and person perception, and it appears to do so through influencing the
              processes of memory, attention, and type of information processing. In terms of
              information processing, positive moods lead to less systematic and greater
              heuristic processing of information, whereas negative moods lead to less
              heuristic and greater systematic processing of information. Recent group level
              models suggest that group mood will also have similarly important influences on
              group performance through its impact on the information processing abilities of
              groups. That is, group moods will also affect the heuristic and systematic
              processing qualities of the group interaction. The main objective of this
              project is to examine the effect of group mood on group decision making.
              Specific aims are to demonstrate that (1) group moods can be successfully
              manipulated in the laboratory, (2) group moods influence group decision making
              outcomes, (3) these differences occur through altering the way that groups
              process information, similar to how moods affect how individuals process
              information, and (4) these information processing differences can be assessed
              through the observation of group interactions, as well as through some
              self-report measures.

This research program provides training in small group
              experimental methods for several graduate students and up to fifty
              undergraduates. The results of these studies will form the empirical core of an
              understanding of how group mood affects group decision making. In the long
              term, this research program is intended to advance our understanding of
              affective influences on group performance in a wide variety of contexts,
              including work, friendship, and school groups, as well as experimental research
              groups.

