Title       : New Mexico EPSCoR Infrastructure Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0132632

Award Number: 0132632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Gosz jgosz@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The New Mexico EPSCoR project focuses on natural resource analysis and
              management and nanoscience.  The goal is to strengthen the infrastructure in
              these two focal areas and remove the barriers to competitive research and to
              related educational and economic development.  Improved computer connectivity
              and communication among New Mexico's institutions undergirds both focal areas.
              Six institutions will be participating:  University of New Mexico, New Mexico
              State University, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, Eastern New
              Mexico University, Western New Mexico University, New Mexico Highlands
              University, San Juan College, and Dine College.  In the Natural Resource
              Analysis and Management area, new faculty in remote sensing/hydrology and
              forestry in addition to new labs in environmental chemistry and spatial
              analysis will be featured in the new Institute for Natural Resource Analysis
              and Management.  In Nanoscience, the purchase of high-resolution microscopes
              and increased connectivity will contribute to the collaborations among the New
              Mexico campuses and between the campuses and the national laboratories.  The
              Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies, designed as a collaboration between
              Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories and the University of New Mexico,
              will participate in fostering research collaborations and providing nanoscience
              education.  The Master of Science for Teachers program at New Mexico Institute
              of Mining and Technology will introduce nanoscience and nanotechnology into the
              curriculum. 


