Title       : Idaho EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0132626

Award Number: 0132626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean'ne M. Shreeve jshreeve@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          
 
The Idaho EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement project
              invests in three research focus areas and implements a number of initiatives to
              strengthen statewide human resource development and train its 21st century
              workforce.  Idaho's three research universities, the University of Idaho, Idaho
              State University and Boise State University will collaborate in these
              endeavors.
 
The Idaho research universities will build nationally
              competitive teams in the following areas: 1) nanoscale materrials for
              electronics and sensor applications; 2) life at interfaces and the
              biocomplexity of extreme environments; and 3) neuro-fuzzy soft computing via
              silicon structures.  In the nanoscale materials area, research will focus on
              the ultimate suitability of various materials for device and sensor
              applications in electronics, optoelectronics and magnetics.  The research in
              life at interfaces and the biocomplexity of extreme environments will address
              biochemical and geochemical aspects of life at rock-water interfaces in extreme
              environments through an interdisciplinary combination of field, laboratory and
              modeling components.  Neuro-fuzzy soft computing via silicon structures will
              address theoretical and practical issues for developing enabling technology
              necessary for cost effective neuro-fuzzy computing systems.
 
The human
              resource development programs will add value to the project's research focus
              areas through the integration of research training and student education and
              through professional development of faculty.  A number of activities are also
              proposed for new and continuing collaborations with national laboratories and
              Idaho's private sector.  In addition, specific programs will address several of
              the issues challenging Idaho's workforce, including the recruitment and
              retention of members of underrepresented groups in research and
              education-related activities. 


