Title       : Dissertation Research Improvement Grants: Doctoral Dissertation Research:
               Menominee Metrical Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0132926

Award Number: 0132926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica A. Macaulay mmacaula@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Purnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Monica Macaulay and Thomas Purnell, Ms. Marianne
              Milligan will conduct fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will work
              with the remaining speakers of Menominee, an endangered language spoken on the
              Menominee Reservation in Wisconsin. Her dissertation emphasizes the metrical
              structure of Menominee, in particular the placement of accent and the pattern
              of long and short vowels. The topic is theoretically interesting because
              Menominee's metrical rules are very unusual. These rules have received several
              different theoretical analyses, one of which is used as evidence against
              certain current trends in linguistic theory. However, all analyses of Menominee
              metrical structure are based on the published works of American linguist
              Leonard Bloomfield, and so inherit various problems his work contains. First,
              while his grammar is considered one of the most comprehensive descriptions of
              an Amerindian language, it was completed after his death by another linguist.
              It is thus contradictory in places. Second, because Bloomfield used a
              standardized spelling system rather than phonetic transcription, his work does
              not show variation in pronunciation. Theoretical claims about Menominee require
              more accurate description of the data. This project's data will also be used in
              pedagogical materials for the tribe's language preservation programs. All
              materials recorded on audiotape will be transferred to CD for archiving
              purposes, distribution to tribal organizations, and acoustic analysis. 
              

This research is significant in two ways. First, it will extend research on
              Menominee metrical structure by providing both an accurate description and a
              theoretical analysis of the Menominee data. Understanding the unusual metrical
              structure of Menominee will not only add to our general understanding of human
              language, but the issues raised by these data may also affect current debates
              within linguistic theory. Second, the language teaching materials that this
              project will contribute to producing, such as tapes of stories with
              accompanying text, tapes of vocabulary items, and grammatical lessons, will be
              used in the tribe's efforts to retain the language and culture in the schools
              on their reservation.


