Title       : Modulation of NMDA Receptor Current by Protein Kinase C: Molecular and Synaptic
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0132732

Award Number: 0132732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Leonard leonard@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon T. Alford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Glutamate is the most abundant neurotransmitter that brain cells use to trigger
              electrical impulses in other brain cells they contact. At these sites of
              contact, called synapses, many vital processes take place. There are many
              different types of receptors for glutamate encoded by different gene families,
              which have different specific actions at synapses. The NMDA family of glutamate
              receptors is of particular importance because they can trigger changes in the
              level of sensitivity of synaptic connections between brain cells. Modulation by
              enzymes called kinases adds phosphate chemical groups to NMDA receptors causing
              marked enhancement of current passing through these receptors and enhancing
              signaling between brain cells. This modulatory effect has an important role in
              processes related to learning, development, and degeneration of brain cells.
              The identification of the sites on NMDA receptor subunits targeted by specific
              kinases will provide research tools for studying the physiological importance
              of NMDA receptor phosphorylation in brain cells. In the case of modulation by
              protein kinases of the C-type (PKC), the presence of these sites may also
              depend on the particular NMDA receptor family member present. In a particularly
              exciting example of the importance of NMDA receptor subtype, the NMDA receptor
              subunit that is more prevalent in young brains, NR2B, has been shown to give
              rise to more easily modifiable synaptic connections. Receptors that contain
              NR2B subunits pass larger calcium ion currents than other NMDA receptors. The
              present proposal hypothesizes that this difference is due to an increased
              sensitivity to PKC. Controlled expression of selectively mutated NMDA receptors
              in my laboratory has recently demonstrated that direct phosphorylation of 2
              specific serine amino acid sites (S1303 and S1323) by protein kinase C controls
              current amplification in NR2B receptors. This result motivates the aims of the
              proposal and: 1) challenges a previous viewpoint that kinase modulation of
              current must be entirely indirect via other proteins associated with NMDA
              receptors at the synapse, and 2) provides a starting point for elucidating a
              mechanism of direct kinase action. These studies uniquely focus on modulation
              of the NMDA current that itself triggers long-term synaptic changes in brain
              cells. 

