Title       : Chromosome Homeostasis: Identification and Functional Analysis of Chromosomal
               Replicons in the Amitotic Tetrahymena Macronucleus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0132675

Award Number: 0132675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey M. Kapler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Texas A&M U Sys HSC RF
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8615

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The regulation of replication initiation is poorly understood in eukaryotes,
              largely due to the difficulty in identifying cis-acting regulatory
              determinants.  A thorough genetic dissection of replicons (replication
              initiation sites and their cis-acting regulatory determinants) has been
              achieved in a limited number of experimental organisms.  Prior research on
              Tetrahymena thermophila focused on the 21 kb rDNA minichromosome, which is
              amplified 5000-fold during a single S phase in the developing macronucleus, yet
              is replicated just once during each subsequent vegetative cell division.  The
              goal of this new research project is to identify and dissect additional
              chromosomal replicons in Tetrahymena.  By comparing the genetic organization of
              replicons that are not amplified to the rDNA, insights into cell cycle control
              should be obtained.  These investigations will also serve as an entry point to
              explore how genic balance is maintained in the ciliate macronucleus, which
              lacks traditional mitotic segregation machinery.  The initial stage of the
              project involves the mapping of replication origins in small (~100 kb),
              non-rDNA macronuclear chromosomes by 2D gel electrophoresis, and cloning of DNA
              that spans these sites.  These regions will be subjected to comparative
              sequence and functional genomic analysis, to identify conserved elements and
              determine the physical and possibly functional relationship of replication
              origins to neighboring genes.  The genetic organization of these replicons will
              then be dissected using two complementary strategies.  The first approach will
              employ a novel method in which chromosome breakage sequence (Cbs) elements will
              be targeted to specific positions in the germline (micronuclear) genome. 
              Programmed DNA fragmentation at these Cbs sites in the developing macronucleus
              will be used to map the physical limits of the replicons under examination.  As
              a variation to this approach, marker rescue will be used to restore function to
              defective replicons.  In a complementary approach, restriction fragments from
              size-selected (100 kb) chromosomes will be inserted into an engineered
              selectable vector to generate plasmid libraries.  These libraries will be
              transformed into Tetrahymena to identify artificial minichromosomes capable of
              supporting autonomous replication.

DNA replication is a highly regulated
              process, assuring that chromosomes are duplicated once and only once per cell
              division.  Deviations from strict cell cycle control can result in selective
              amplification (over-replication) of small DNA segments.  The high degree of
              complexity of chromosomal replicons in higher eukaryotes, and the absence of
              natural or artificial minichromosomes in these systems has hampered research in
              this area.  The amenability of Tetrahymena to reverse genetic analysis will be
              exploited here to determine how complex eukaryotic replicons are organized and
              to explore how global cell cycle regulatory mechanisms can be differentially
              imposed upon replication origins.  A bonus of this project is the diversity of
              experimental approaches, which will provide students with unique learning
              opportunities at the interface of new (genomics) and more traditional
              (molecular genetic) technologies.

