Title       : NSF-EC: Tunable Mirrorless Lasing in Cholesteric Liquid Crystalline Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0132611

Award Number: 0132611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Palffy-Muhoray mpalffy@cpip.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bahman Taheri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1665,5980,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Liquid crystalline elastomers are a new class of soft materials, distinguished
              by the coupling between orientational order and strain, whose mechanical
              deformations give rise to changes in the dielectric tensor.  Cholesteric liquid
              crystal elastomers, due to their periodic structure, are photonic band-gap
              materials whose band structure can be altered by mechanical strain. Optically
              pumped cholesteric liquid  crystal elastomers exhibit distributed cavity
              effects, stimulated emission, and, above a threshold, mirrorless lasing at the
              band edges. The proposed work is to study, in conjunction with EC
              collaborators, the response of optically pumped helical cholesteric and other
              periodic liquid crystalline elastomers under mechanical strain. Participating
              graduate and undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience using the
              latest research techniques in laser physics and spectroscopy studying photonic
              band gap elastomers. In addition to gaining fundamental insights into the
              processes underlying the optical response of these materials, the proposed
              research will lead to mechanically tunable laser sources, switchable mirrors
              and tunable band-gap materials.

Liquid crystal elastomers are novel
              rubber-like materials that dramatically change their optical properties when
              mechanically deformed. This unique property can be used to produce exceptional
              properties not possible with other materials; for example, they can be used to
              produce mechanically tunable wavelength selective mirrors, and large area, thin
              film lasers. The planned research will focus on exploring and utilizing these
              unique properties and effects. The high-risk materials research that led to the
              recent discovery of tunable 'rubber band' lasers would not have been possible
              without public funding of basic research. The proposed work, to be performed in
              collaboration with European Community scientists already engaged in the study
              of elastomeric materials, is needed to ensure U.S. presence at the forefront of
              this materials science and technology area. The project will educate
              participating graduate and undergraduate students in the cutting-edge
              interdisciplinary areas of soft materials characterization, laser physics and
              photonics, and is expected to impact on a variety of technologies ranging from
              telecommunications to artificial muscles. 

