Title       : Development of High-Temperature Technique with Diamond Anvil Window Cells for
               use in Geophysical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0132270

Award Number: 0132270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Surendra K. Saxena saxenas@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guoyin Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0132270
Saxena

To obtain high quality data at physical conditions of Earth's
              core and mantle, we need to modify our present equipment and develop new
              techniques of heating our samples at ultra-high pressures and for measuring the
              temperature and pressure.  Funds from this grant will fully exploit the
              diamond-anvil techniques to study materials of geophysical importance at high
              to ultra-high pressures and temperatures. We will study the nature of the
              problems in laser heating as related to large temperature gradients (cool
              diamond to the hot sample), chromatic aberration (use of refractive optical
              elements, even chromatically corrected, results in the severe temperature
              errors that vary significantly with the chosen position of a spectral region)
              and poor knowledge of emissivity (wavelength dependent emissivity, needed for
              use of the Planck function). A combination of laser-heating systems, optical
              systems and methods for the determination of emissivity of several metals and
              oxides will be explored.  A new method of temperature determination using a
              digital imaging camera will also be tested. 
Additional developments will
              include: i) the use of moissanite (SiC) anvils at high pressures (~ 50 GPa) to
              reach temperatures close to 2000 K, ii) design of a cell that provides easy
              access to the sample for the electrical leads and still maintains all the
              benefits of the Mao- Bell design and is easily cooled with a good inert
              atmosphere around the diamonds, and iii) building of cells which can be both
              electrically and laser heated with in-situ x-ray diffraction of the heated
              sample at one bar or few bars of pressure to measure thermal expansion and
              melting temperatures of solids. We will attempt to provide a solution to the
              key problem of simultaneous measurement of pressure and temperature.
              
***




