Title       : Brain and Cognitive Effects of Learning a String Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0132508

Award Number: 0132508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gottfried Schlaug gschlaug@caregroup.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Winner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beth Israel Deaconess Med
	      330 Brookline Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02215    617/667-0808

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research has demonstrated structural differences in the brains of musicians
              compared to non-musicians.  However, it is not yet known whether these
              differences are inborn or develop through long-term stimulation during critical
              periods of brain development.  On the one hand, the brain may be capable of
              changes not only in functional brain networks, but also in structural
              components as a response to increased use.  On the other hand, the brains of
              musicians may be atypical prior to training, both anatomically and
              functionally.  If so, becoming a professional musician may be partly
              genetically predetermined.  Research has also demonstrated that music training
              in children results in long-term enhanced visual-spatial and mathematical
              performance.  The underlying neural basis of such enhancements is unknown. 
              Possible explanations include changes in arousal, mood, and priming of
              particular brain regions.  However, long-term changes in brain function or
              structure, such as strengthening of existing brain connections or the formation
              of new connections or even new cells and a more elaborate system of
              connections, might be induced by learning and practicing on a musical
              instrument.  This pilot longitudinal study will follow young children at the
              beginning of their music training over a period of three years and compare them
              to a control group of children matched in gender, SES, handedness, age, and
              overall IQ.

Using high-resolution MR images within subjects over time, the
              research will begin to answer questions such as the following:  Does the amount
              of instrumental practice correlate with structural brain differences and/or do
              levels of musical talent/skill predict structural brain differences either
              prior to or as a consequence of training?  Is visual-spatial and mathematical
              reasoning enhanced by music training?  If so, are these non-musical cognitive
              outcomes related to amount of time spent practicing, degree of improvement in
              reading music notation, and/or level of musical talent/skill?  Do gains in
              visual-spatial and mathematical reasoning, if found, correlate with structural
              brain enhancements over the course of musical training?

This research has
              potential far-reaching implications.  First, children often begin music study
              at an age when the brain is at a critical phase of development and maturation. 
              If structural brain changes or use-dependent brain growth occur, it would have
              important implications for early childhood education.  Second, the results
              might help to explain why certain children succeed and others fail in mastering
              musical instruments.  Third, demonstrating improvements in domains other than
              music as a function of music training would have strong implications for both
              general and music educational practice.  Fourth, this research will provide
              testable hypotheses about the neural basis of transfer effects.  Transfer is a
              key issue in educational theory, and has not only applied value but also
              theoretical value, since a demonstration of transfer helps us to understand how
              mental capacities are organized and related to one another.
