Title       : Cognition East and West: Attention, Categorization and Reasoning for East Asians
               and European Americans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0132074

Award Number: 0132074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Nisbett nisbett@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In previous research, the PI found that people of European culture tend to
              perceive and reason in a relatively analytic way; they focus their attention on
              an object, categorize it on the basis of its attributes, and apply rules to
              predict and explain its behavior. East Asians perceive and reason in a
              relatively holistic way; they attend to the object and the context
              simultaneously, they are attentive to relationships among events, and they
              predict and explain behavior on the basis of presumed relationships between
              object and context. Compared to East Asian participants, Western participants
              a) notice less about the context, b) are less skilled at detecting covariation
              among events, c) find it easier to separate objects from the contexts in which
              they are embedded, d) are more likely to mistakenly attribute behavior
              exclusively to the object while ignoring the role of contextual factors, e) are
              less susceptible to the hindsight bias (the "I-knew-it-all-along" error), f)
              more likely to organize objects and events in terms of rules and categories as
              opposed to relationships and similarities, and g) are more likely to apply
              logical rules to problems describing everyday situations. The origins of these
              differences probably lie in the different social systems characteristic of East
              and West. We find that Asian Americans resemble European Americans more than
              they do Asians. The proposed research will explore the breadth of the
              perceptual differences, including whether they extend to audition and whether
              they influence learning processes; the depth of the perceptual differences,
              including how controllable vs. automatic they are, whether they result in
              different perceptual illusions for Easterners and Westerners, and whether they
              include differences in peripheral vision capacity; how unified the perceptual
              differences are; whether individual differences in perception are related to
              individual differences in cognition; and how social factors affect perceptual
              and cognitive functioning. The research is expected to indicate that
              educational practices that benefit holistic thinkers may not be the same ones
              that benefit analytic thinkers; that "culture fair" ability testing may be an
              illusory goal; and that perceptual and thinking styles are sufficiently
              different that ethnic diversity in work groups is likely to improve
              problem-solving.


