Title       : The Role of Affect in Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0132254

Award Number: 0132254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Isbell lisbell@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the role of affect in information processing. Affect
              plays an important role in everyday life, and it has a significant influence on
              human cognitive functioning and social interactions. Although a large and
              growing body of research demonstrates that affect influences the extent to
              which individuals rely upon general, categorical information (e.g.,
              stereotypes) as a basis for forming impressions of others, researchers disagree
              about what accounts for these findings. This project is concerned with how
              affect influences global/local processing during impression formation and
              evaluates a new conceptualization of the role of affect in processing.
              According to this conceptualization, affective feelings serve as conscious
              feedback about largely nonconscious emotional processes. This feedback is used
              by individuals to direct their information processing. In evaluating this
              conceptualization, the research acknowledges that many real-world impression
              formation contexts require individuals to actively seek out information about
              others. Despite this, many researchers have treated the perceiver as a
              relatively passive recipient of target information. To gain a more
              comprehensive understanding of how affective feelings function in more
              naturalistic contexts, it is essential to study active information seeking
              behavior. This will be done by initiating a new direction for research that
              examines how feelings guide information search and impression formation. Given
              that impression formation is one of the most common goals that individuals have
              in human interaction, a greater understanding of the role that feelings play in
              this process will serve to illuminate further our understanding of human
              behavior.

