Title       : Stereogenic Organocopper Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0132539

Award Number: 0132539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Karl Dieter dieterr@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The objective of this work is to understand and develop the reaction chemistry
              of stereogenic organocopper reagents.  The scope of reactivity of these "chiral
              carbanions" will be explored; specifically a variety of alpha alkoxyalkyl
              cuprates and alpha amino alkyl cuprates will be prepared and the
              stereoselectivity of their vinylation, acylation, conjugate addition, and
              substitution reactions will be investigated.  Asymmetric deprotonation and
              transmetallation will be used as routes to prepare these reagents and for any
              substrate where these routes might fail then stereogenic cuprates will be
              prepared by dynamic thermodynamic resolution.  Efforts to determine the
              structures of the organocopper reagents and kinetics of reactions that provide
              the highest enantio- and diastereoselectivites will be undertaken.

 With
              this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. R. Karl Dieter of the Department of Chemistry at Clemson
              University.  Dr. Dieter will explore the reaction chemistry of stereochemically
              enriched organocopper reagents.  The ability to form carbon-carbon bonds in
              molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
              only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer) is one of the most
              important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.  When developed,
              Dr. Dieter's work could be applied to the synthesis of nitrogen and oxygen
              containing heterocycles with activities as antibacterial agents, CNS agents,
              and antiretroviral compounds.  Students trained during the course of this work
              will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a
              number of single enantiomer compounds. 



