Title       : Laboratory Phonology Conference, Yale University, June, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0132005

Award Number: 0132005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Goldstein louis.goldstein@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06510    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation supports the Eighth Conference on Laboratory
              Phonology, which will be hosted jointly by the Yale University Linguistics
              Department and Haskins Laboratories. This conference will take place on the
              Yale campus in New Haven, CT, June 27-30, 2002. The study of the human capacity
              to communicate via speech has traditionally been carried out by separate groups
              of scientists, experimental and theoretical, with little communication between
              them. The experimental scientists examine the acoustical and physiological
              characteristics of  the speech process, while the theoretical scientists study
              the ways that consonants and vowels pattern in the languages of the world. In
              the last 15 years, increased interaction between these groups has been spurred
              by a series of conferences on Laboratory Phonology, that seeks to relate
              language patterns more directly to the physical activities of talking. Research
              resulting from this cross-pollination has already had important implications
              for both basic science and applications such as speech disorders, developmental
              delays, and reading disabilities. 

The Eighth Conference on Laboratory
              Phonology will focus on differences among human languages, what those
              differences have to say about of the universal properties of human speech and
              language, and the nature of the biological specialization that underlies the
              universals. Much research has shown some specialization for human speech and
              language, but there is no agreement on its precise nature. In fact, two threads
              of recent research suggest conclusions in opposite directions. On the one hand,
              there is evidence that phonological universals have been shaped by the
              structure of the human vocal tract and the constraints of communicating through
              an aural channel, sugesting a vocal-aural specialization. On the other hand,
              there is evidence that manual (signed) languages share important properties
              with spoken languages, suggesting a more generic or abstract specialization.
              The conference will bring together leading scientists working on spoken
              languages with those working on signed languages. Their interaction should
              provide new insights into the human specialization for speech and language,
              spur new techniques for investigating both signed and spoken languages, and
              lead to new methods for teaching and learning signed and spoken languages that
              take advantage of their underlying similarities.

