Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Telicity and Event Structure in Language
               Comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0132380

Award Number: 0132380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6297               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Bever   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Doctoral dissertation research: Telicity and event structure in language
              comprehension
ABSTRACT

With NSF support, Ms. Erin O'Bryan will conduct
              research under the supervision of Professor Tom Bever for a doctoral
              dissertation in linguistics.  Recent research in the area of lexical semantics
              has shown that the semantic feature telicity (whether or not an event has a
              specified endpoint in time) is related to argument structure (the arguments
              that a verb requires or allows) (van Hout 2000, Jackendoff 1996, Sanz 1996).
              Recent research in the area of sentence processing has investigated differences
              in the degree of difficulty in understanding garden path sentences (sentences
              that are structurally misinterpreted and require reanalysis), such as The horse
              raced past the barn fell.  Bever and Sanz have predicted that reduced relative
              clause garden path sentences with atelic verbs (verbs without a specified
              endpoint in time, such as race) should be more difficult than those with telic
              verbs (verb with a specified endpoint, such as arrive or melt). This prediction
              follows from the fact that intrinsically telic verbs require a verb
              phrase-internal object, and hence will facilitate the correct analysis of
              reduced relative sentences. Gibson (1991) and Pritchett (1992) have predicted
              that reduced relative clause sentences with transitive verbs that can
              optionally occur intransitively (without a direct object) should be more
              difficult than those with obligatorily transitive verbs.  This prediction
              follows from the fact that transitive verbs require an overt direct object, and
              hence will also facilitate the correct analysis of reduced relative sentences.
              The thrust of the proposed research is to determine which of these explanations
              is correct, or if they both are. 
 
The predictions made by Bever and Sanz
              (in preparation), Gibson (1991), and Pritchett (1992) are based on linguistic
              and psycholinguistic theory, linguistic judgements of acceptability, and
              computational models. The proposed research will test these predictions with an
              online sentence comprehension experiment using the speaker change onitoring
              task (Townsend & Bever 1991). This task has been shown to reflect local
              processing complexity and has the important virtue of being usable with
              experimental groups, so that large numbers of participants can be included. 

              
In the proposed experiment, participants will listen to reduced relative
              clause sentences like those in (a) through (d). The experiment will test
              whether telicity and subcategorization affect the extent of garden pathing and
              whether either of these factors has a more immediate effect than the other. The
              first hypothesis is that reduced relatives  with atelic verbs, such as (a) and
              (b), will result in more processing difficulty than reduced relatives with
              telic verbs, such as (c) and (d).  The second hypothesis is that reduced
              relatives with potentially intransitive verbs, such as (a) and (c), will result
              in more processing difficulty than those with obligatorily transitive verbs,
              such as (b) and (d).  
 
a. The firefighter led by the marshal waved to the
              crowd. 
b. The firefighter escorted by the marshal waved to the crowd. 
c.
              The firefighter saluted by the marshal waved to the crowd. 
d. The firefighter
              sent by the marshal waved to the crowd. 
 
Processing difficulty will be
              measured as missed detections of speaker-change syllables in the by-phrase,
              e.g. on marshal, and on the main clause verb, e.g. waved. The speaker-change is
              a syllable spoken by a different speaker than the rest of the sentence that
              participants are asked to monitor for.  The two speaker-change locations allow
              the investigation of the question of whether one of the factors has a more
              immediate effect on comprehension. The expectation is that either telicity or
              subcategorization will have a relatively larger effect on the early probe
              position. If telicity has a more immediate effect, it suggests that a verb's
              lexical semantics, which syntacticians consider to be structural though it also
              carries meaning, has an earlier and perhaps privileged role in comprehension.
              If subcategorization has a more immediate effect, it suggests that
              distributional properties of the verb have an earlier and perhaps more
              privileged role. 
 
The research will clarify the role of semantic variables
              in comprehension that have not been controlled for in prior research. It will
              also increase our understanding of the online use of semantic and
              distributional verb properties. Additionally, the research will reveal
              information about the true nature of thematic roles, their relationship with
              subcategorization frames, and their relationship with event structure.  


