Title       : Language Change Across the Lifespan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0132463

Award Number: 0132463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian Sankoff gillian@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gillian Sankoff will conduct two
              years of linguistic research on how language change at the community level
              relates to stability at the individual level. This project investigates
              linguistic change in a community of French speakers, taking advantage of a
              unique series of tape recordings made between 1971 and 1995 by Dr. Sankoff and
              her colleagues. The original corpus consists of tapes and transcripts of 120
              native French-speaking Montrealers, stratified by age, sex, and social class.
              Half of the speakers were re-recorded in 1984, and a subset of those were
              followed through 1995. The project will establish trends at the community level
              and assess the degree of stability across individual speaker lifespans. Since
              the speech has already been collected and transcribed, research activities will
              emphasize quantitative analyses of phonetics, grammar, and lexicon across
              speakers. Eight different features will be used to track differential
              malleability of these linguistic subsystems. For example, people might modify
              their grammars more readily than they do their childhood accents.  

This
              sociolinguistic research will refine the concept of a "critical period" for
              language learning. This is the maturational period before puberty when children
              acquire their native languages. For most people, basic linguistic knowledge
              forms a relatively stable system throughout life. Although people learn new
              vocabulary across their lifespan, most 50- or 60-year olds prove faithful to
              the sound system and grammar of the language they first learned as young
              children. And yet, languages are constantly changing. To account for how both
              situations can hold, earlier models of language change focused on the
              transmission of linguistic information from adults to children. Since recent
              research has shown that children model the adult system very closely, it must
              be possible for people to remodel their language -  to some extent - later in
              life. This research on that possibility also addresses how language change
              affects communication, even across generations within the same speech
              community. Understanding language change as experienced by speakers across
              their lifespans will help to solve the puzzle of how and why people alter their
              speech, when the ensuing changes affect communication. The project will also
              address the limits of the possible, in examining the barriers to linguistic
              remodeling in later life for people who encounter new languages or dialects as
              adults

