Title       : Structural and Pragmatic Constraints on the Interpretation of Reflexives and
               Pronouns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0132391

Award Number: 0132391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Runner runner@ling.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Tanenhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Jeffrey T. Runner and Michael K.
              Tanenhaus will conduct three years of linguistic research examining how
              participants interpret two important classes of referring words: pronouns and
              reflexives. The project will use a lightweight head-mounted eye tracker to
              monitor eye movements as participants identify a picture in a scene while
              listening to descriptions of the depicted activities (e.g., "John told Bill
              about the picture of himself."). Which objects participants look at, and when
              they look at them, provides evidence about which referents they are considering
              as they interpret the referring words. The goals of this research are to (a)
              investigate the interpretation of these referring words with on-line tasks
              rather than explicit judgments; (b) evaluate the extent to which grammatical
              factors define the initial set of referents for pronouns and reflexives; (c)
              examine the interaction of grammatical factors with pragmatic and discourse
              factors; and (d) explore the extent to which the potential set of referents for
              pronouns and reflexives is mutually exclusive.	

The results of this research
              will be important for understanding how people assign reference, which is a
              central goal of current research in theoretical and applied linguistics. 
              Reference resolution is one of the most central and challenging problems in
              developing efficient language understanding systems, including systems that are
              being developed for bio-medical applications. Difficulties in reference
              resolution are also associated with some types of language difficulties that
              arise due to brain damage. Information about the timing of eye movements and
              speech will also inform scientists who are developing computer-based language
              understanding systems that use eye movements to help resolve ambiguous words
              and referring expressions.

