Title       : SBIR Phase II: Advanced Software for Interactive Chemistry Tutoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0132003

Award Number: 0132003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny G. Johnson johnson@quantumsimulations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Simulations Inc
	      5275 Sardis Road
	      Murrysville, PA  15668    724/733-8603

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will produce a
              set of completed and commercially viable intelligent tutoring systems for
              chemistry education, building upon a rule-based, model-tracing, cognitive
              modeling tutor prototype for chemical equation balancing.  Teachers, students,
              parents and administrators state that existing chemistry education software
              does not satisfy their need for truly interactive and on-demand computer
              instruction.  Current approaches are rigid and linear, offering only a limited
              number of fixed and statically scripted problems.  They do not deal with the
              individual student's own work in any meaningful or intelligent way.  By
              simulating reasoning using chemical principles rather than compiling a database
              of problems and answers, artificial intelligence methods can provide a route to
              overcoming these serious fundamental limitations.  Although the technology
              proffered by Quantum Simulations, Inc. is technology that will assist all
              students, those students of average or marginal performance will benefit the
              most.

Creating tutoring systems that can function as guides and not just as
              graders of student work is an important step in realizing the full value of
              computers in education.  The proposed work takes a significant step in this
              direction.  Moreover, the technology has been designed in a general way such
              that it can be applied to other educational topics beyond chemistry and can
              work together in a synergistic, value-added fashion with other tools and
              curricula in a multi-resource learning environment.  Quantum Simulations, Inc.,
              customers are driven by strong end user needs and include textbook publishers,
              software provides, and distance learning companies.
