Title       : Comparative Gene-Structure Prediction in Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0132436

Award Number: 0132436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Brent brent@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              DBI-0132436

Brent, Michael
Washington University, St. Louis

ABSTRACT
A
              steadily increasing proportion of biological research is conducted on organisms
              whose genomes have been sequenced. For many research questions, however, an
              organism's genome is important primarily because of the proteins it encodes. So
              a critical question in genome analysis is: What are the structures of all the
              protein-coding genes and the exact sequences of the proteins they encode?
              

The proposed research aims to improve gene-structure prediction in model
              invertebrates by integrating probabilistic models of gene structure with
              information from genome comparisons.
Project 1: Probability models for
              gene-structure prediction using genomic homology
This project focuses on
              developing probability models for exploiting genome comparison to improve
              gene-structure prediction. A novel aspect of the proposed models is their use
              of conservation sequence to represent the degree and pattern of evolutionary
              conservation at each point in the genome to be annotated. A conservation
              sequence is a synthesis of genome alignments. The probability models build on
              the Hidden Markov Model approach used in state-of-the-art gene-structure
              prediction systems.Project 2: Enhanced probability models for single-sequence
              gene-structure predictionTWINSCAN is the gene-structure prediction system
              developed with prior NSF support. TWINSCAN integrates genome comparison with
              probabilistic gene-structure models. This project focuses on developing
              improvements to the single-sequence portion of the gene-structure model and to
              specialize it for model invertebrates. Project 3: Parameter estimation module
              and comparative annotation of invertebrates.  This project focuses on (a)
              development of a complete parameter estimation module that will allow TWINSCAN
              to be adapted to new genomes easily, and (b) genome-wide gene-structure
              prediction in invertebrate model organisms. The focus will be on a pair of
              roundworm genomes and a pair of fly genomes. In each case, genome-wide
              prediction will be done using patterns of similarity to the related genome as
              one information source. Our gene-structure predictions will be provided to the
              research community through a web site (genes.cs.wustl.edu) and a collaboration
              with the Ensembl group at the European Bioinformatics Institute.

The ability
              to systemically, reliably, and affordably predict gene structure would
              constitute significant progress in high-throughput biology and biotechnology.
              Further, an algorithm for computing the complete protein sequence of the
              products of a genome would have important applications. Among these are: 1.
              Identifying targets for functional and biochemical study, such as novel protein
              families. 2. Providing accurate protein sequence to secondary- and
              tertiary-structure prediction programs. 3. Finding genes that give rise to
              specific phenotypes. This research would involve undergraduate and graduate
              students at Washington University in St. Louis, thus contributing to
              research-based education and national biotechnology infrastructure.

