Title       : Research Infrastructure for Nevada's Growth: Targeting Research with Uniqueness
               and Excellence II (RING-TRUE II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0132556

Award Number: 0132556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ & Comm Col Sys of NV
	      2601 Enterprise Road
	      Reno, NV  895121666    702/739-3517

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Nevada plan for research infrastructure improvements will target three
              research focal areas:  Integrated Approaches to Abiotic Stress (IAAS),
              Nanostructured Materials and Devices (NMD), and Advanced Computing in
              Environmental Science (ACES).  Nevada's three research institutions, the
              University of Nevada at Reno (UNR), the University of Nevada at Las Vega
              (UNLV), and the Desert Research Institute (DRI) will collaborate in these
              research areas.  

The goal of the IAAS program is to build an
              internationally recognized research and training program in abiotic stress
              biology.  The IAAS will apply genomics-based approaches to investigating 1)
              genetic requirements or variation for occupancy of extreme environments, 2) the
              functional significance of such genetic variation across many scales of
              biological complexity, 3) the evolutionary processes that create and/or
              maintain such variation.  The IAAS research area will include partnerships with
              the private sector which is becoming increasingly interested in cellular and
              molecular mechanisms that allow organisms to deal with extreme abiotic stress. 
              

In the Nanostructured Materials and Devices area, interdisciplinary,
              collaborative research on complex systems will incorporate both organic and
              inorganic species.  Research emphases include organic light emitting devices,
              field controllable materials, novel polymeric/metal composites for chemically
              specific sensing, imaging nanomaterials and smart devices.  NMD will develop
              new facilities for materials fabrication, characterization and device
              development and involve collaborations with several private sector
              companies.

The ACES project will create the Nevada Environmental Computing
              Grid - a statewide, distributed computational infrastructure. 
              Multidisciplinary research will be centered on providing an application-driven
              environment to stimulate new information technology research of interest to
              computer scientists and private sector partners.

In addition to the research
              effort, the Nevada project includes focused activities designed to increase the
              participation of members of underrepresented groups in science via a
              partnership with the state's K-16 education system.  The goal is to improve the
              successful academic careers of these students and increase the numbers of
              students graduating with degress in science-related fields.   

