Title       : Vibrational Spectroscopy and Relaxation in Liquids and Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0132538

Award Number: 0132538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450600             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Skinner skinner@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James Skinner of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop a general framework
              within which to calculate time- and frequency-domain vibrational spectra of
              solutes in liquid solvents.  This approach builds on the work of others, where
              the solute and vibrational degrees of freedom are treated quantum mechanically,
              and the solute's rotations and translations and all solvent degrees of freedom
              are treated classically.  The framework involves renormalization of the solute
              vibrations by the average interactions with the solvent, and so is expected to
              be able to describe systems with strong solute-solvent interactions.  The
              theoretical approach will be applied to the following systems for which
              experiments have been performed: 1) HOD in liquid D2O (vibrational spectroscopy
              of the OH stretch), 2) the azide anion in liquid D2O (phonon vibrational
              spectroscopy of the azide anion asymmetric stretch), and 3) supercritical fluid
              oxygen and nitrogen (Raman spectroscopy).  Finally, some general issues
              involving vibrational energy relaxation of solutes in polyatomic liquid
              solvents will be investigated.

Many industrially and biologically important
              chemical reactions take place in liquid solution.  The presence of solvent
              molecules are around a solute molecule can greatly affect rates and mechanisms
              of chemical reactions by changing the relative energy levels and providing
              pathways for efficient energy flow into and out of the solvent.  This research
              project aims to provide a molecular level interpretation of the influence a
              solvent has on chemical and biological processes in condensed phases.

