Title       : Hybrid Energy Transfer Power Factor Correction AC/DC Converters With Improved
               Efficiency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0132965

Award Number: 0132965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Issa E. Batarseh batarseh@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Power electronics technology is widely used in various industrial sectors and
              has recently been
identified by the Office of Science and Technology Policy as
              critical for the future growth of the U.S.
economy. Today innovations in
              electronic products are progressing at an unprecedented rapid pace.
However,
              power electronics technology has not kept pace with the growth in low and
              medium power
electronic industries. With this proposal, the PIs seek to
              improve the power supply performance by
exploring new design techniques to
              develop a family of efficient, high-frequency, low and medium
power AC-DC
              converters with reduced cost and improved reliability, and still achieve near
              unity
power factor. This effort targets future stringent power requirements
              for high-speed microprocessor
used in next generation computer and
              communication systems.
The objective of the proposed research is to develop
              novel hybrid energy transfer AC-DC converters
improved efficiency and
              increased reliability and provides Power Factor Correction (PFC). In
              a
traditional single-stage AC/DC-PFC scheme, the converter normally operates
              in Discontinuous
Conduction Mode (DCM) and has the advantages of simplicity,
              low cost and high reliability, while
less efficiency due to its inherent high
              voltage and current stresses. Moreover, it cannot achieve
simultaneously, the
              desired input performance in terms of low power factor and harmonics,
              and
output performance in terms of voltage ripple and regulation capabilities.
              The two-stage scheme can
achieve unity power factor and higher output
              performance, but at the expense of high component
count and increased system
              complexity. This in turn increases cost and degrades the reliability of
              the
whole power electronic system. In both single-stage and two-stage AC/DC
              converters, the power is
processed twice as all the transferred energy would
              once store in an intermediate bulk capacitor. Here,
we propose a novel method
              that allows parallel path of energy transfer to minimize
              power-processing
times and to improve converter efficiency and reliability. A
              lion share of the input power directly
transferred to the output without going
              through the input current shaping stage while the converter
remains a
              near-unity power factor. Furthermore, considering the operation irrelevance of
              PFC stage
and DC-DC stage in two cascade stage converters, the PIs also
              propose a novel concept to improve
the efficiency by linking PFC stage with
              DC-DC stage to provide soft-switching conditions for the
PFC stage or DC/DC
              stage without adding any auxiliary switch.
During the projects two-year
              period, the following major tasks will be carried out:
1) Investigate the
              limitations of improving efficiency in existing PFC- AC/DC converters.
2)
              Aiming at reducing the power losses and processing time, analyze the power flow
              features,
and build the potential path to forward partial input power to the
              output side directly to
minimize the power processing times.
3) Compare
              existing practical soft-switching DC/DC topologies; develop the suitable
              magnetic
coupling paths between the PFC stage and DC/DC stage to benefit each
              other, such as
providing soft-switching condition for PFC stage or/and DC/DC
              stage.
4) Investigate integrated system issues and possible solutions,
              focusing on interaction between
different stages and control schemes.
5)
              Set-up simulation platform and physical test bed, conduct comparative study for
              overall
performance between the proposed topology and existing AC/DC
              converters.
