Title       : Microbial Observatories: Microbial Nitrogen Transformations in Suboxic
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0132101

Award Number: 0132101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $634761             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Murray jmurray@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Staley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. James Murray and James Staley at the University
              of Washington to study microorganisms that mediate nitrogen transformations in
              low oxygen, or suboxic, environments. Such reactions are important because
              nitrogen is a critical element for life processes. The geochemical
              distributions in the Black Sea suggest that this is an ideal location to study
              these novel reactions. The research goals of this project are to discover,
              isolate and characterize the bacteria that are responsible for these nitrogen
              transformations. Closely coordinated microbial and geochemical approaches will
              be used. Samples will be collected on a research cruise to the Black Sea in
              2002 from depths where the chemical transformations are inferred to occur. 
              These samples will be used to enrich and isolate bacterial metabolic groups
              that can carry out these transformations.  Laboratory studies will be used on a
              second research cruise in 2003 to develop molecular markers for identification
              of organisms in fresh environmental samples.  In addition, probes will be
              developed to identify genes of enzymes that are involved in various redox
              reactions. Geochemical studies will be conducted to determine the
              stoichiometries, rates and nitrogen isotope fractionation in water samples from
              the reaction layers.
	Results of this investigation are expected to lead to
              discovery of novel, previously uncharacterized bacteria that carry out these
              important processes. The microorganism to be studied may be present in many
              ecosystems (such as sediments, anoxic aquatic environments, biofilms and
              microbial mats) where waters have low oxygen concentrations. This knowledge
              will increase our understanding of microbial diversity and anaerobic
              respiration in such marine environments. Human society is impacting aquatic
              environments more than ever, leading to an increase in suboxic aquatic
              habitats, and resulting in threats to fisheries and wildlife.  Understanding
              the biological processes occurring in suboxic environments will lead to new
              approaches that could be undertaken for habitat restoration.  

