Title       : Cognitive Processing During Saccadic Eye Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0132292

Award Number: 0132292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Irwin dirwin@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People make rapid eye movements called saccades in order to examine the world
              around them.  The still periods between saccades are called fixations.  It is
              well known that vision is suppressed during saccades; therefore, visual
              information about the world is acquired only during fixations.  Recent findings
              have shown that saccades also interfere with particular cognitive processes. 
              This research will determine why this occurs while also exploring the
              fundamental characteristics and generality of the phenomenon of cognitive
              saccadic suppression.  Four hypotheses about the possible mechanisms underlying
              suppression will be investigated in a series of experiments drawn from the
              areas of working memory, mathematical cognition, stimulus novelty, and
              retrieval from semantic memory.  In general, the experiments will examine
              whether cognitive processes that are set in motion during an eye fixation
              continue to operate while the eyes are moving to a new position in space or
              whether these processes pause during the eye movement.  People will be
              presented with a simple mental task that they will begin to perform while they
              are fixating one position in space and will then make either a short or a long
              saccade to a different position in space while attempting to continue
              performing the task.  If cognitive processing is suppressed during eye
              movements, then long saccades (which take longer to execute) should disrupt
              performance more than short saccades (which take less time to execute). 
              Performance will also be measured in another condition, in which the eyes do
              not move.  Performance in the eye-movement conditions should be equivalent to
              performance in the no-eye-movement condition if eye movements do not interfere
              with cognition.  The effects of cognitive processing on saccadic behavior
              (e.g., saccade latency, duration, accuracy, and peak velocity) will be examined
              as well to determine the reciprocity of the interference.

The average person
              makes about three saccades per second (hence, about 172,800 saccades per
              16-hour working day) and the average saccade lasts about 30 ms; thus, if
              suppression occurs during saccades, it would mean that cognition is disrupted
              for approximately 90 minutes each day.  Determining why this occurs is of
              fundamental importance to the understanding of human cognition, particularly
              for activities such as scene perception and scene navigation that require many
              eye movements.  The research also has practical implications for the design of
              visual displays and control panels that may require users to make saccades.
