Title       : AURA Management and Operations of the National Optical Astronomy Observatory and
               the National Solar Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0132798

Award Number: 0132798
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1                  (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Smith wsmith@smtp.aura-astronomy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy R. Mould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen L. Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AURA/Nat Optic Astron Obse
	      1200 New York Avenue NW, Suite 3
	      Washington, DC  200053929    202/483-2101

NSF Program : 4300      NAT OPT ASTRONOMY OBSERVS-NOAO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0132798
Smith, William

This award will support a five year Cooperative
              Agreement with the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.,
              for management and operations of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories
              (NOAO) and the National Solar Observatory (NSO). NOAO and NSO will administer
              observing time to the astronomical community via peer reviewed observing
              proposals, providing access to research facilities for over 1000 scientists per
              year in astronomy and solar physics.  NOAO and NSO will also administer public
              outreach through education programs, visitor centers, and Web-based information
              and imagery.  NOAO and NSO will also be responsible for coordinating planning
              by the US community for major new federally funded initiatives in ground based
              optical and infrared astronomy; this planning is in close partnership with US
              universities and non-federal observatories. 

NOAO's facilities are located
              at Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) near Tucson, Arizona,  and Cerro
              Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) near La Serena, Chile, which together
              include 4 telescopes of 4-meter class. NOAO is also responsible for the US
              Gemini Program Office (USGP), which is the gateway for US astronomers to their
              share of observing resources on the twin 8-meter Gemini Telescopes. Scientific
              studies will include

  Wide field imaging studies in optical and infrared
              wavelengths to locate and characterize the most distant visible objects in the
              universe and the dark matter pervading the universe, 
  Spectroscopic studies
              to understand composition, distances, and ages of stars and galaxies,
 
              Imaging studies to locate and characterize Kuiper Belt Objects, the most
              distant bodies in the solar system, 
  Imaging and spectroscopic observations
              of supernovae and other stellar explosions, to understand their intrinsic
              nature and their use a measures of the acceleration of the universe by "dark
              energy",
  Spectroscopic studies of the centers of galaxies and quasars to
              determine the nature of massive black holes located in these active galactic
              nuclei. 

NSO's facilities are located on Sacramento Peak, NM, and on Kitt
              Peak.  The principal telescope at Sacramento Peak is a vacuum tower telescope
              with world's best image quality for solar studies, through use of solar
              adaptive optics. The principal telescope at Kitt Peak is a 1.5-meter
              all-reflecting solar telescope, world's largest solar telescope and optimized
              for infrared observations. NSO will also operate the Synoptic Optical Long-term
              Investigations of the Sun (SOLIS) telescopes and the worldwide telescopes for
              the Global Oscillation Network Group (GONG). Scientific studies with the NSO
              telescopes will include

  High precision imaging of magnetic fields on the
              surface of the sun to understand the energy release mechanisms in solar flares,
              
  Synoptic monitoring of changes on the solar surface, including sunspots and
              explosive activity, to determine how these changes affect the Earth, including
              global climate change, 
  Characterization of the internal structure of the
              sun using helioseismology, to determine why the sun changes with the 11 year
              sunspot cycle, 
  Infrared spectroscopy of the solar chromosphere and corona
              to determine the location and composition of cooler clouds of molecular
              material, 
  Infrared spectroscopy of the solar corona to understand the role
              of magnetic fields in shaping and controlling the corona, where solar material
              is ejected into interplanetary space.


