Title       : CAREER: Improved Knowledge on Precipitation Microphysics for Advancing Radar
               Rainfall Estimation and Quantitative Precipitation Forecasting.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0132942

Award Number: 0132942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanouil N. Anagnostou manos@engr.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0132942
Anagnostou

Our understanding and ability to predict and respond to
              changes in the hydrologic environment cannot be properly addressed in the
              absence of reliable precipitation information.  Proposed research aims at
              investigating the following questions: What are the quantitative limitations
              and uncertainty of current operational single polarization radar (e.g.,
              WSR-88D) in rainfall estimation, and what are the advantages/disadvantages of
              X-band polarimetric measurements over current S-band systems for various space
              and time scales?  Those questions will be investigated based on
              multi-instrument specialized field campaigns associated with warm season
              convective storms and winter precipitation systems.  This research includes
              participation in two field projects (i.e., Wallops Area Cold season Project,
              WACP, and the International H2O Project, IHOP) by deploying mobile X-band
              polarimetric radar and a two-dimensional (2D) video disdrometer in coordination
              with the other research instruments brought into the field.  The synergy of
              rainfall observations from multiple sensors available from the experiments will
              be the fundamental building block to support the proposed investigations on
              precipitation microphysics and rainfall estimation (and validation) associated
              with different radar systems (i.e., X-band vs.  S-band and single vs. dual
              polarization measurements).  Successful completion of the research may provide
              compelling evidence of the advantages of X-band polarimetric measurements
              against operational remote sensing systems for support of local flood
              forecasting.  This new remote sensing tool, if proven reliable, would be an
              attractive and economically affordable solution to the problem of monitoring
              remote basins and urban areas that are poorly covered by the National radar
              network, and are prone to flash flooding.

