Title       : Kostenki: Initial Upper Paleolithic in Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0132553

Award Number: 0132553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153697             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Hoffecker jfhoffeck@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a two-year project designed to investigate the earliest
              appearance of modern humans in Eastern Europe.  It focuses on the excavation
              and analysis of archaeological sites located in the Russian village of Kostenki
              on the west bank of the Don River (roughly 450 km south of Moscow).   The
              Kostenki sites have yielded the oldest known remains of modern humans in
              Eastern Europe, and even earlier traces of habitation that were probably left
              by modern humans more than 40,000 years ago.  The new project will excavate the
              lowest human occupation layers of two of these sites (Kostenki 12 and 14) in
              order to expand our knowledge of the technology and economy of their occupants,
              and to establish with greater precision both their age and environmental
              setting.  The research will bring together a team of American and Russian
              scientists from several fields, including archaeology, paleobotany,
              paleozoology, geology and geochronology. 

One project goal is improved
              understanding of how the sites were formed, which apparently involved a complex
              interplay of wind and slope action, periodic flooding, soil formation, and
              possibly other processes.  This goal is closely tied to better dating of the
              earliest occupation levels at Kostenki 12 and 14 and reconstruction of
              environmental conditions.  A series of new absolute dates (radiocarbon and
              luminescence) and paleomagnetic samples will be obtained from these levels, and
              an effort will be made to relate the sequence of layers to global
              climate-change and paleomagnetic events between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago. 
              Fossil pollen and spores will be collected for reconstructions of vegetation,
              which will be used in conjunction with the study of fossil soils to provide
              further support for correlations with the global sequence.  

Excavations
              will be conducted at Kostenki 12 and 14 during July-August of 2002 and 2003. 
              The expanded sample of artifacts, features (e.g., former hearths), and
              associated mammal remains recovered from the lowest occupation levels will
              yield information about the technology and economy of the modern humans who
              appeared in Eastern Europe at this time.  In the context of how the sites were
              formed, study of the mammal remains-such as the body parts represented and the
              damage on them-will help determine whether they were hunted or gathered by
              humans or deposited by natural processes.  Stone artifacts will be analyzed in
              terms of from where the stone was obtained and how the implements were
              manufactured and used (based on microscopic study of the wear on their edges). 
              Artifacts of softer materials (chiefly bone and ivory) are of special interest,
              because their complexity suggests that modern humans may have achieved a
              quantum jump in technological ability over their Neanderthal predecessors in
              Europe.  The project will explore the thesis that complex and innovative
              technology was critical to the survival of modern humans-recently derived from
              southern latitudes and morphologically adapted to warm climates-in the
              relatively cold and dry environments of Eastern Europe.







