Title       : Ethnic, Stylistic and Perceptual Aspects of the Southern Vowel Shift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0132145

Award Number: 0132145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie M. Fridland fridland@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Valerie Fridland will conduct two
              years of linguistic research on vowel shifts in Southern dialects of American
              English. She will compare recent changes in Southern vowels to both older
              Southern speech and contemporary Northern speech. Recent research suggests that
              vocalic positions in Northern and Southern speech are realigning. The systems
              resulting from this realignment suggest increasing divergence between the two
              dialects. Using Memphis as a field site, Fridland's research team will collect
              both naturally occurring conversational data and elicited interview data and
              analyze the acoustic position of vowels in those data. Perceptual tests will
              measure the acoustic positioning of the vowels and the attitudinal load
              associated with changes in individual vowels. By examining the social embedding
              and the perceptual salience of each shifted vowel class, this project will
              assess the internal (regional) and external (national) pressures affecting
              dialect variation and determine how incoming norms are judged and how they
              function as displays of local, ethnic, or national identity for speakers.
              Shared speech norms generally suggest that speakers participate in the same
              communication networks. Thus, an important part of this research is its
              documentation of whether both European-Americans and African-Americans
              participate in the changes, an indication of racial integration in the Memphis
              area. African-Americans do not appear to participate in the vocalic changes
              identified in Northern cities, but their role in the changes affecting Southern
              speech might explain the origin of some changes in the Northern
              African-American vowel system. 

This sociolinguistic research will
              contribute to the emerging picture of contemporary Southern speech and speech
              perceptions. This is significant for both education and theory. First, Southern
              speech is stereotyped as non-standard nationally. Understanding local norms and
              the perceptions behind them is crucial to national testing in education. On an
              applied level then, the research has implications for language specialists and
              educators concerned with how dialect variation relates to educational and
              social disadvantages. Second, this survey of changes in contemporary Southern
              English will document convergence and divergence in dialects and reveal the
              social motivation of some sound changes. On a theoretical level, the research
              will provide insight into the mechanisms behind linguistic change, one of the
              fundamental questions driving sociolinguistic research.

