Title       : Collaborative Research -- Mating Signals and Demographic Divergence: Species
               Comparisons and an Experimental Test
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0132351

Award Number: 0132351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald B. Cocroft cocroftr@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Lay Summary
Cocroft, Hunt and Wood

Mating signals can diverge early in the
              process of speciation, but it is unclear whether signal divergence plays a
              direct role in speciation or is a byproduct of other processes such as
              ecological specialization.  Our goal is to determine the role of mating signals
              in the diversification of a group of plant-feeding insects.  The Enchenopa
              binotata species complex of treehoppers consists of nine species that are
              specialists on various trees and shrubs in North America.  Considerable
              evidence suggests that speciation in this group occurred as a result of a
              series of shifts to novel host plants.  A host shift alters life history
              timing, which, in combination with high host fidelity, allows divergence in
              traits that enhance performance on a novel host.  Our research will test the
              hypothesis that divergence in mating signals is important in speciation by
              reducing gene flow between populations on ancestral and novel host plants.  Our
              project will integrate (1) a comparative study of vibrational mating signals in
              the nine extant Enchenopa binotata species; (2) comparison of patterns of
              signal variation within and among species with patterns of DNA sequence
              divergence; and (3) determination of whether divergence in signals and life
              history traits has occurred in experimentally host-shifted populations.  This
              research will provide a complementary picture of the relationship between
              mating signals and divergence not only in fully differentiated species, but
              also in lineages in the early stages of host plant race formation. Results of
              this research will enhance our basic understanding of speciation, and may
              provide practical benefits such as an improved understanding of how
              agricultural pests become established on novel host species.


