Title       : CAREER: Molecular Scale Electronic Devices and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0132982

Award Number: 0132982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chongwu Zhou chongwuz@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The relentless down-scaling of the conventional metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS)
              based integrated circuits is expected to slow down due to fundamental physical
              limitations and increasingly prohibitive cost associated with fabrication
              facilities.  Molecular electronics, where the idea is that only a few or even
              just one molecule could be used to perform basic electronic functions, holds
              great promises for superior performance and substantially reduced cost.  As a
              bottom-up approach to fabricate nanostructures, molecular electronics employs
              chemical synthesis and assembly to produce devices with critical dimensions
              defined by the molecular wires and hence can eliminate the cost associated with
              advanced lithography techniques.  Such devices utilize various quantum effects
              such as tunneling and conformational transitions to their advantages and thus
              can deliver better performances than conventional MOS devices.

The eventual
              success of this program will firmly establish molecular electronics as an
              intriguing and practical technology with great potential to replace
              silicon-based electronics.  We expect to produce the molecular electronics
              version of two core elements in integrated circuits: transistors and memories. 
              Our molecular transistors will possess a channel length around two nanometers,
              two orders of magnitude smaller than that of today's most advanced
              silicon-based transistors.  We also expect to demonstrate nonvolatile
              spin-dependent memories with molecular wires as the active component.  This
              technique will likely produce ultra-small memory devices and add a new
              direction to the by far "classical" molecular electronics.  Finally we expect
              to demonstrate a new scheme for integrated molecular systems with carbon
              nanotubes as interconnects.  This program will also serve to advance the
              fundamental forefronts of molecular electronics.

Several unique features
              distinguish this program from other existing programs in this field.
1. We
              will utilize the nanopore technique to produce molecular transistors and
              spin-electronic devices.  Our group is one of two existing groups that have
              mastered this technique (the other being the Mark A. reed group at Yale, who is
              currently focusing on two-terminal nanopore devices).  This technique can
              render devices with channel length defined by the molecular wire length (~ 2
              nm) and device areas ~ 10 nm in diameter.  Such nanoscale devices hold great
              promises for high-density integrations.
2. We will investigate both n-type and
              p-type molecular wires in our transistor structures, making complementary
              circuitry possible.  This important issue has by far being unexplored by other
              research groups due to the apparent difficulty.
3. An intimate integration of
              the proposed research and education is guaranteed.  Substantial effort will be
              devoted to educate both graduate and undergraduate students, especially the
              underrepresented, throughout this program.  The research activities will also
              be integrated into the Nanoelectronics and Nanotechnology class I
              developed.
4. We enjoy full support from our collaborators at the
              Nanotechnology Center of NASA Ames Research Center.  Dr. Wendy Fan and her
              colleagues are currently devoting 100% of her time to the organic synthesis
              component of this program, at no cost to NSF.  Dr. Jie Han is focusing on the
              theoretical modeling and simulations of the proposed molecular devices, again,
              at no cost to NSF.
In conclusion, the proposed program holds great promises
              for future nanoscale electronics and has a great chance to succeed.  The
              financial support from NSF can be invaluable in helping me to achieve my goal
              to develop a life-long career in scientific research, academic advising and
              teaching.


