Title       : Microbial Observatories: Anaerobic Bacteria and Methanogens in Northern Peatland
               Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0132049

Award Number: 0132049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $837558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Yavitt jby1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Zinder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Joseph B. Yavitt and Stephen H. Zinder at
              Cornell University to establish a microbial observatory to study the
              microorganisms that produce methane and decompose organic matter in northern,
              peat-forming wetland ecosystems. Although northern peatland ecosystems are
              significant sources of methane, an important greenhouse gas in the Earth's
              atmosphere, almost nothing is known about the microbes that produce methane
              (methanogens) in peatlands or about other anaerobes (organisms living without
              oxygen) that decompose organic matter to compounds used by methanogens. Because
              northern peatlands are characterized by low nutrient availability and acidic
              conditions, Drs. Yavitt and Zinder will concentrate on acid-tolerant bacteria.
              They will study three contrasting sites in central New York State in which
              their preliminary work suggests a rich diversity of as yet uncultivated
              methanogens. Molecular biological techniques will be used to further
              characterize the microbial populations at these sites, and methods will be
              systematically developed for culturing methanogens and culturing other
              anaerobes using organic compounds of particular importance in peatlands. Of
              particular interest will be the highly acidic McLean Bog site with a pH near
              3.6.

These studies will increase our understanding of microbial diversity
              and physiology; moreover, some of the acid-tolerant organisms obtained may have
              biotechnological uses. The microbiological studies will be integrated with
              biogeochemical studies on carbon flow to methane at the sites, and on methane
              flux to the atmosphere. As a result, we will be better able to predict how
              microbial populations in peatlands function and, in particular, how methane
              production will respond to changing environmental conditions, which will
              greatly improve our ability to forecast trends in atmospheric methane
              concentrations. Results of the project will be conveyed to the public through
              written documents, an internet web site developed and maintained by students,
              and visits by students to comparable sites in Canada and Europe.

