Title       : Multidrug Resistance-Like Genes and Auxin Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0132803

Award Number: 0132803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $573283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar P. Spalding spalding@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angus S. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to determine the functions of AtMDR1 and other proteins
              encoded by a group of ABC transporter genes in Arabidopsis that are homologous
              to multi-drug resistance (MDR) proteins of animals.  The animal MDR proteins
              are most often studied for their roles in the resistance of cancer tumors to
              chemotherapeutic drugs. This research will investigate the roles these proteins
              play in plants.  Genetic, biochemical, and physiological evidence indicates
              that at least two of the Arabidopsis MDR proteins participate in the transport
              of the plant hormone auxin, and thus are important to plant growth and
              development.  The auxin-transport inhibitor NPA binds tightly to AtMDR1 and
              AtPGP1 proteins.  Knockout mutants lacking these proteins have severe defects
              in polar auxin transport.  The phenotypes of the knockout mutants are
              consistent with abnormal auxin distribution being the cause.  The research
              activities that produced the substantial background information on these two
              genes will be reiterated to reach some never-before studied genes within the
              MDR-like subcluster.  In addition, biochemical studies will test hypotheses
              about the mechanism of AtMDR1 function.  For example, is it an auxin
              transporter or a regulator of an auxin transporter?  The experimental plan
              includes characterizing knockout phenotypes, determining the effects of the
              knockout mutations on auxin distribution, and biochemical studies of the AtMDR1
              gene after expression in a heterologous system.  The two PIs responsible for
              the project have complementary areas of expertise and will provide
              interdisciplinary training for postdoctoral research associates and graduate
              students.  The dissection of these interesting genes genetically,
              biochemically, and physiologically is expected to provide new insight into the
              hormonal control of plant growth and development.
