Title       : RUI: Microbial Observatories: Microbial Observatory at Soap Lake:
               Biogeochemistry, Microbial Diversity, and Productivity of Anaerobic
               Haloalkaliphilic Bacterial Communites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0132158

Award Number: 0132158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $840461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly C. Pinkart pinkarth@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brent M. Peyton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie R. Mormile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 An NSF Microbial Observatories grant has been awarded to Drs. Holly Pinkart
              (Central Washington University), Melanie Mormile (University of
              Missouri-Rolla), and Brent Peyton (Washington State University) to study the
              anaerobic microbial ecology of a saline, alkaline lake.  Soap Lake is a
              permanently stratified lake consisting two separate water layers which have not
              mixed for over two thousand years.  Although both layers are quite alkaline and
              lack significant amounts of oxygen, the lower layer is an order of magnitude
              more saline.  Additionally, this lake has concentrations of sulfide generally
              considered toxic for most life forms.  In spite of the extreme chemistry of
              this environment, the lake supports thriving communities of algae, zooplankton,
              and bacteria.  The Microbial Observatory will allow the study and
              quantification of the ecology and metabolic capabilities of the relatively
              unknown microorganisms that thrive in this extreme environment.  The goals of
              the project are to characterize the microbial communities that inhabit this
              system, and determine how they affect, and are affected by, the geochemistry of
              Soap Lake.  The methods that will be used include the culturing of
              microorganisms, cloning and sequencing of microbial DNA, and the use of
              satellite imaging for detection of microbial activities.  The Soap Lake
              Microbial Observatory will serve as a model for studying interactions of the
              anaerobic communities in haloalkaline environments and their contribution to
              biomass production.
    Results generated by this project will supplement data
              available for the search for biological activity on Mars and extra-solar
              terrestrial environments, and will augment the Virtual Planet Laboratory
              Program being developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  The Microbial
              Observatory at Soap Lake will likely lead to discovery of novel microorganisms
              useful in industry and biotechnology.  Additionally, this project will allow
              for the significant involvement of undergraduate students, and could serve as a
              model for the integration of research into undergraduate education.  



