Title       : CAREER: Stoichiometric and Catalytic Reaction Transformations at Group 10
               Zwitterions Supported by Bis(phosphino)borate Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0132216

Award Number: 0132216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonas Peters jpeters@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jonas Peters, Department of Chemistry, California Institute of Technology is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              of the Division of Chemistry, National Science Foundation, for his work under a
              CAREER Award to investigate whether neutral, zwitterionic complexes can mediate
              reactions typically catalyzed by cationic, coordinatively unsaturated
              complexes.  Such processes are industrially important and include:  the
              tailored synthesis of polymeric materials; catalytic bond forming reactions
              critical to organic synthesis and pharmaceutical drug development; and
              activation and functionalization chemistry, relevant to the utilization of
              simple hydrocarbon feedstocks. 

The zwitterionic strategy uses
              (phosphino)borate ligands to effectively tether a borate counter-anion to a
              cationic metal center.  The potential advantages of the zwitterionic approach
              are:  1)  Zwitterionic catalysts remove the need for a counter-anion cocatalyst
              and minimize counter-anion binding thereby simplifying the fundamental
              mechanistic studies.  2) The zwitterions should be both soluble and
              catalytically active in relatively non-polar solvent media; whereas, more
              coordinating solvents are typically required to solubilize cationic catalysts,
              rendering them less active.  3) Because neutral, zwitterionic complexes are
              expected to be less electrophilic than their cationic counterparts, they should
              increase reaction rates in catalytic systems that require loss of a donor
              ligand as a rate-determining step.  Preliminary studies with zwitterionic model
              systems lend support to these hypotheses.

Education will be integrated with
              research by using a case study
approach for understanding and solving problems
              in frontier topics in inorganic chemistry.  Interactive software, used in the
              research effort to perform theoretical calculations on experimental systems,
              will also be used in a course supplement to teach molecular orbital theory and
              its practical application in inorganic chemistry.  An advanced laboratory
              synthesis course to complement the lecture course in inorganic chemistry will
              be developed.  The research group will continue its outreach efforts to local
              elementary and high school students in the Pasadena and Los Angeles school
              districts by using laboratory tours, laboratory demonstrations, and informal
              discussions to communicate enthusiasm for science in a way that suggests many
              opportunities for younger students.

Simplified analogs of industrially
              important catalysts will be developed.  Their reaction pathways will be
              determined with a view toward optimizing catalytic systems.  The educational
              program is integrated with this research and extends to undergraduate courses
              and area elementary and high school students.

