Title       : Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research: A Cold Microbial Observatory in
               an Alaskan Boreal Forest Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0132111

Award Number: 0132111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55166              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Metcalf metcalf@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A collaborative grant has been awarded to Drs. Jo Handelsman at the University
              of Wisconsin, Roger Ruess at the University of Alaska, Jill Banfield at the
              University of California-Berkeley, and William Metcalf at the University of
              Illinois to describe the diversity and function of the microbial life in
              Alaskan soil in a Long Term Ecological Research site.  Microbial diversity and
              mechanisms of phosphorous acquisition will be studied by culturing and
              culture-independent molecular methods to access a wide spectrum of organisms. 
              The culture independent methods will include "metagenomics," an approach
              involving cloning the genes from organisms directly from the environment,
              without requiring them to grow in culture.  Diversity will be assessed by
              methods that rely on the sequences of genes that act as molecular signatures
              for microbial species.  Cultured organisms and metagenomic clones will be
              screened for the ability (1) to grow on reduced forms of phosphorous as the
              sole P source and (2) to solubilize the dominant mineral forms of P in the
              forest soil that are identified by our mineralogical characterization. 
              

Soil contains a rich variety of uncultured microorganisms that outnumber
              the cultured organisms by a factor of 100 or 1000.  The soils of interior
              Alaska represent a large and diverse habitat of the boreal forest whose
              micoorganisms, both cultured and uncultured, have been largely ignored.  Recent
              studies of other cold environments have revealed novel and diverse microbial
              life, suggesting that the soils of Alaska will be a productive hunting ground
              for new microorganisms and new microbial functions.  Little is known about
              phosphorous acquisition, which is essential to ecosystem function.  The
              Microbial Observatory will contribute to our knowledge of the microbiology of
              cold soils, increase the diversity of cultured microorganisms, and potentially
              identify new microbial functions for coping with phosphorous limitation.  The
              microorganisms cultured in this study and the metagenomic clones may also
              provide a new resource for biotechnology research for enzyme, drug, and
              agrichemical discovery.


