Title       : Collaborative Research: Parenting and Sociocognitive Correlates of Prosocial
               Behaviors in Mexican American and European American Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0132302

Award Number: 0132302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Carlo gcarlo1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sharing, comforting, volunteerism, and charitable donations are all considered
              different forms of prosocial behaviors (i.e., actions intended to benefit
              others) which are beneficial to society and therefore highly valued and
              desired.  Developmental researchers have provided evidence that there are
              growth spurts in these behaviors across childhood and adolescence.  However,
              existing models of prosocial development have been guided mostly by theories
              that emphasize the role of social cognitions and/or emotions on prosocial and
              moral behaviors.  For the most part, the role of culture and ethnicity on
              prosocial development has been less clear in these theories, even though there
              is clear evidence of cultural and ethnic differences in prosocial development. 
              Although both social cognitions and emotions are significant correlates of
              prosocial behaviors, new theories of prosocial development are needed that
              integrate the role of culture and ethnicity in prosocial development. 
              Unfortunately, the bulk of the research investigating the developmental
              mechanisms that lead to prosocial development has been conducted with white,
              mostly middle class, children.  Thus, our understanding of the development and
              predictors of prosocial behaviors in ethnic minority children is quite limited.
               To begin to address these issues, research is needed on the development of
              prosocial behaviors in ethnic minority children and adolescents.  This project
              is designed to examine parenting, sociocognitive, and culture-related
              correlates of prosocial behaviors across childhood and early adolescence in one
              ethnic minority group (i.e., Mexican Americans).  The two-phased systematic
              research agenda will combine qualitative and quantitative approaches.  The
              overarching goal of the project is to gain an understanding of positive, social
              behaviors in Mexican American and European American children in the United
              States.  The project is designed primarily (a) to examine ethnic group
              similarities and differences with respect to prosocial traits and behaviors in
              Mexican American and European American children and (b) to investigate the
              parenting, familial, and sociocognitive correlates of prosocial behaviors in
              Mexican American and European American children.  When completed, the research
              will answer a number of questions that social and developmental psychologists
              have advanced in recent years. These questions include, but are not limited to,
              the following: (1) Is normal development of the abilities to understand
              another's point of view, to feel sorrow or concern for needy others, and to
              make moral decisions when faced with a context in which there are societially
              defined right and wrong behaviors associated with high levels of prosocial
              behaviors in both Mexican- and European-American children?  (2) Do both
              Mexican- and European-American children who exhibit high levels of prosocial
              behaviors have parents who are warm and supportive and use explanatory and
              empathy-inducing disciplining practices?  (3) Do Mexican American parents,
              compared to European American parents, emphasize collectivism (i.e.,
              orientation towards greater social group) and familial interdependence, which
              in turn accounts for ethnic group differences in prosocial behaviors?  (4) Do
              family and parenting processes impact or explain the relations of the abilities
              to understand another's point of view, to feel sorrow or concern for needy
              others, and to make moral decisions to prosocial behaviors in Mexican- and
              European-American children?  (5) Do the adaptations that Mexican American
              children make to the mainstream and ethnic cultures as a result of the
              processes of acculturation and enculturation impact prosocial development.  By
              addressing these questions, this study is expected to yield important
              information about variables that might promote prosocial behaviors and produce
              useful and valuable new measures of prosocial behaviors to use with Mexican
              American children and adolescents. These products will inform existing theories
              of prosocial development and will enhance intervention programs aimed at
              increasing behaviors that benefit others and society.
