Title       : CAREER: Quality of Service Engineering with Multiple Time-Scale Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0132802

Award Number: 0132802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Starobinski staro@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The multiple time-scale and long-range dependent behavior of network
              traffic have been established by numerous experimental studies. In particular,
              power-law and Zipf-like distributions appear to be inherent to the Internet
              (file size, popularity of web documents, degrees of routers). These findings
              are raising the questions of (i) whether effective and valid mathematical tools
              for modeling and predicting network traffic can be developed and (ii) whether
              classical QoS engineering methods, based on the exponential distribution and
              its variants, can still be useful, if appropriately adapted. This project aims
              at providing positive, constructive answers to these questions, through the
              development of tractable, end-to-end QoS engineering solutions, applicable to
              current and future networks.
     Specifcally, this project will focus on the
              development of a new QoS methodology, tailored
for multiple time-scale
              traffic, termed Stochastically Bounded Burstiness (SBB) calculus.
              This
methodology provides robust statistical bounds on various performance
              measures, such as delay, at each node of a network. The SBB calculus applies to
              very general network settings and leads to high utilization of network
              resources. This project proposes to address a number of fundamental research
              issues towards a possible implementation of the SBB calculus into practical QoS
              architectures, such as, but not limited to, DiffServ. These issues are related
              to (i) traffic characterization and measurements (ii) policing (iii) admission
              control and QoS routing and (iv) network topology (the SBB calculus currently
              applies only to acyclic networks). In addition, the applicability of this
              methodology to new types of networks, such as small ad-hoc networks, will be
              investigated, in a collaborative effort with Nokia.
     Next, this project
              proposes to elaborate an innovative framework for the modeling and
              the
analysis of power-law distributions, such as the Pareto distribution. The
              proposed framework is
based on a fitting procedure that can approximate a
              power-law distribution arbitrarily closely by
a mixture of exponential
              distributions. This modeling approach provides novel perspectives on
              the
design and analysis of important systems where power-law distributions
              arise. In particular, this
project proposes to make use of this approach in
              order to analyze and improve the performance of
multi-server systems, such as
              clusters of web servers.
     The educational goals of this project are to
              develop a rich and challenging curriculum in computer networking, and to
              establish QoS engineering as one of its major disciplines. For this purpose, a
              new Internet instruction laboratory is planned, where students will get the
              opportunity to experiment with various networking equipment and communication
              technologies. The PI intends to develop two new networking courses, one
              undergraduate and one graduate, that will take advantage of this facility. In
              addition, the PI plans to introduce innovative teaching methods in order to
              enhance the communication skills of the students.
