Title       : CAREER: Quantum Phases and Phase Transitions in Strongly Correlated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0132874

Award Number: 0132874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Demler demler@cmts.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a CAREER award that combines research and educational activities.  The
              research topic is strongly correlated electron systems.  The research component
              adopts a strategy of considering particular systems with a goal of developing
              general tools for studying the role of interactions in fermionic and bosonic
              systems, and bringing out a common framework for understanding the physics of
              strongly correlated states of matter.  Intrplay of superconductivity and
              antiferromagnetism in the high Tc cuprates will be investigated to understand
              electron systems with competing instabilities.  Stripes in the quantum Hall
              systems at integer filling factors will be studied as an example of electron
              systems with phase separation on mesoscopic scale.  The relation between
              bosonic and fermionic mechanisms of suppression of superconductivity and the
              role of dissipation on the superconductor to insulator transition will be
              considered in the case of one-dimensional systems (wires and chains of
              Josephson junctions) as a typical example of quantum phase transitions.  Spinor
              bosonic atoms in optical lattices will be studied to learn about the role of
              interactions in bosonic systems.  Investigation of fundamental and universal
              properties will be complemented by concrete calculations of observable
              quantities that can be verified in experiments. 

The educational component
              involves developing an undergraduate course that presents condensed matter
              physics from the point of view of relevance to practical applications.  By
              discussing recent developments in technology the course will motivate students
              to learn about progress in condensed matter physics and show the science in its
              dynamics: from basic research to industrial innovations.  The course will use
              examples of modern microelectronics, semiconductor optics, magnetoelectronics
              and others to show how discoveries in condensed matter physics initiated major
              transformations in industry in the past.  It will also address areas of current
              academic research that may play a crucial role in technologies of the future,
              for example, nanotechnology, and quantum computations and communications. 
              Presentations will be accessible to an audience with only a superficial
              knowledge of quantum physics.  
 
This is a CAREER award that combines
              research and educational activities.  The research topic is strongly correlated
              electron systems.  The research component adopts a strategy of considering
              particular systems with a goal of developing general tools for studying the
              role of interactions in fermionic and bosonic systems, and bringing out a
              common framework for understanding the physics of strongly correlated states of
              matter.  Intrplay of superconductivity and antiferromagnetism in the high Tc
              cuprates will be investigated to understand electron systems with competing
              instabilities.  Stripes in the quantum Hall systems at integer filling factors
              will be studied as an example of electron systems with phase separation on
              mesoscopic scale.  The relation between bosonic and fermionic mechanisms of
              suppression of superconductivity and the role of dissipation on the
              superconductor to insulator transition will be considered in the case of
              one-dimensional systems (wires and chains of Josephson junctions) as a typical
              example of quantum phase transitions.  Spinor bosonic atoms in optical lattices
              will be studied to learn about the role of interactions in bosonic systems. 
              Investigation of fundamental and universal properties will be complemented by
              concrete calculations of observable quantities that can be verified in
              experiments. 

The educational component involves developing an undergraduate
              course that presents condensed matter physics from the point of view of
              relevance to practical applications.  By discussing recent developments in
              technology the course will motivate students to learn about progress in
              condensed matter physics and show the science in its dynamics: from basic
              research to industrial innovations.  The course will use examples of modern
              microelectronics, semiconductor optics, magnetoelectronics and others to show
              how discoveries in condensed matter physics initiated major transformations in
              industry in the past.  It will also address areas of current academic research
              that may play a crucial role in technologies of the future, for example,
              nanotechnology, and quantum computations and communications.  Presentations
              will be accessible to an audience with only a superficial knowledge of quantum
              physics.  


