Title       : An Interdependence Theoretic Analysis of Behavioral Affirmation and the
               Michelangelo Phenomenon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0132398

Award Number: 0132398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caryl E. Rusbult rusbult@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People pursue a variety of life goals, seeking to move closer to their "ideal
              selves" by succeeding professionally, acquiring material possessions,
              developing desirable dispositions and abilities, and improving their physical
              and spiritual selves. Such goal pursuits do not transpire in a vacuum. Human
              dispositions, motives, and behavioral tendencies are fashioned at least in part
              by interpersonal experience. Among the many forces that shape the self, few if
              any "sculptors" exert effects as powerful as those of our close partners. Such
              effects can vary from exceedingly positive to exceedingly negative: Some close
              partners help bring out the best in each other, supporting and promoting one
              another's goal pursuits, whereas others either fail to do so or bring out the
              worst in each other.

This project identifies a process termed the
              "Michelangelo phenomenon," a congenial pattern of interdependence whereby close
              partners sculpt one another in such a manner as to bring each person closer to
              his or her ideal self. A key variable in this process is "partner affirmation,"
              or the degree to which a partner's perceptions of and behavior toward the self
              are congruent with the self's ideal. Partner affirmation has been shown to be
              associated not only with greater personal growth (movement toward the ideal
              self) and enhanced personal well-being, but also with adjustment and vitality
              in ongoing relationships.  This project explores several previously unexamined
              components of this phenomenon by continuing a longitudinal study of ongoing
              marital relationships.

