Title       : Object Cognition in Infants and Adults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0132444

Award Number: 0132444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Karen Wynn karen.wynn@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Scholl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the central lessons we have learned from the emerging discipline of
              cognitive science is that most seemingly effortless mental tasks, for instance
              recognizing faces and understanding speech, are in fact the result of
              incredibly complex feats of cognitive processing.  Our minds not only make such
              accomplishments possible, but they do so in a seemingly effortless way that
              hides their complexity and difficulty from us.  This research project will
              focus on the cognitive processing responsible for one such seemingly obvious
              aspect of our mental lives, our intuitive ability to perceive the world in
              terms of discrete objects (such as people, cars, and chairs).  This ability
              seems somehow obvious and necessary to us; after all, the world is populated by
              such discrete objects.  In fact, however, interpreting the world in terms of
              discrete objects is a Herculean task for the brain, since the incoming visual
              information consists of an undivided wash of colors, shapes, and motions.  Our
              brains must grapple with such information, and through great efforts turn it
              into the orderly scenes of discrete objects that we perceive during almost
              every moment of our lives.  This cognitive processing is critical to our lives,
              as it makes our visual experience coherent.  This research project will explore
              how these "object cognition" processes work, answering a number of important
              and specific questions:  What information does the brain use to infer the
              existence of a discrete object in a visual scene?  What information is used to
              determine whether a briefly glimpsed object is in fact the same object that was
              viewed earlier?  What are the limits on such abilities?  The answers to such
              questions will help us understand how the brain accomplishes some of its most
              important but least appreciated tasks.  This research will also address other
              critical questions:  Where do these abilities come from?  Are they hardwired
              into our visual systems from birth, or are they learned gradually?  Are the
              cognitive processes which young infants use to make sense of the world in terms
              of discrete objects the same processes that guide our mature perception of
              objects in the world?  Previous research on "object cognition" has studied both
              infants and adults, but these investigations have typically proceeded
              completely independently, in different sub-fields of cognitive science.  This
              research will bridge this gap, by comparing object cognition in infants and
              adults, and by directly testing the hypothesis that researchers in these two
              areas have been exploring the same underlying brain mechanisms.  This research
              thus has the potential to unite two previously independent areas of cognitive
              science, while pursuing the main goal of understanding the cognitive processing
              which provides us with the coherent perception of a world filled with discrete
              persisting objects, which we rely on but take for granted during almost every
              waking moment.  In addition, this research on object cognition in normal adults
              and infants has implications for better understanding of, and perhaps improved
              treatment for, certain object-based visual disorders in impaired patient
              populations (such as "Balint Syndrome").  In addition, it may be useful in the
              development of artificial systems that implement similar processes for dividing
              visual scenes into discrete objects and tracking them over time and motion.
