Title       : CAREER: Towards Robust and Efficient High-Order Adaptive Computational Methods
               for Conservation Laws in Complex Geometries -- Analysis, Implementation, and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0132967

Award Number: 0132967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan S. Hesthaven Jan.Hesthaven@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the CAREER effort is to take some important steps towards the
              development and application of new, adaptive, high-order accurate methods for
              solving conservation laws. While the technical emphasis will be on efficient
              implicit time-stepping methods and techniques for local error and regularity
              estimation, the effort will maintain a focus on large scale, realistic
              applications from the applied sciences and engineering, and the use of national
              high performance computing facilities. The complexity of this multidisciplinary
              task, the development of a computational platform focusing on educational
              elements, and the fundamental nature of the problems being considered will
              provide a stimulating environment in which to train future computational
              scientists in emerging computational techniques for solving conservation
              laws.

Application of basic physical principles of conservation of mass,
              momentum, and energy has proven itself to lead to accurate and reliable
              mathematical models of the physical world surrounding us. Such models, known as
              conservation laws, display a richness, much like the physical world, that
              continues to challenge developers of computational techniques for solving such
              problems. The mere universality of such models, however, warrants that new and
              improved methods be developed to enable the efficient and robust modeling of
              problems in areas as diverse as the dynamics of fluids and gases, optical
              communication and high-speed electronics, applications in electromagnetic
              radiation, or even climate modeling. Hesthaven proposes to develop new adaptive
              high-order methods for such problems and to train computational scientists in
              this area.

