Title       : The Development of New Olefin Metatheses-Based Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0132221

Award Number: 0132221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc L. Snapper Snapper@BC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to expand the scope and utility of olefin
              metathesis reactions.  In an expansion of the PI's prior work, the types of
              olefins that can be used in cross metathesis reactions will first be
              investigated.  Intermolecular cross metatheses of functionalized and cyclic
              olefins will be studied and the incorporation of allenes and alkynes into ring
              opening metatheses will be investigated.  Secondly, metathesis based
              isomerization reactions will be developed and novel skeletal rearrangements of
              polyolefinic ring systems using this approach will be effected.  Ruthenium
              catalyzed enantioselective metathesis isomerizations will be explored in
              addition to the sequential coupling of metathesis reactions with Kharasch
              reactions to build more complicated structures in a single reaction flask.


              With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting
              the research of Dr. Marc L. Snapper of the Department of Chemistry at Boston
              College. Dr. Snapper will explore the scope and utility of olefin metathesis
              reactions.  Olefin metathesis is an industrially important process used to make
              a number of specialty chemicals and starting materials for pharmaceutical
              syntheses from petroleum feedstocks.   Developing shorter, more environmentally
              friendly routes to specialty chemicals (which are catalytic in metals used to
              effect the bond forming metathesis reactions) is one likely outcome of the
              proposed work.  Students trained during the course of this work will gain
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical as well as specialty chemical industries.
              




