Title       : Documentation of Pisa Flores Tepehua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0132293

Award Number: 0132293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178215             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn MacKay 00cjmackay@bsuvc.bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Trechsel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Carolyn J. MacKay and Frank R.
              Trechsel will conduct three years of linguistic research on Pisaflores Tepehua,
              an undocumented and endangered Totonacan language spoken in and around
              Pisaflores, Veracruz, in Mexico. Fieldwork will emphasize recording and
              analyzing grammatical, lexical, and text material. The PIs will work with
              native speakers to produce a grammatical description of Pisaflores Tepehua, a
              trilingual Tepehua/Spanish/English lexicon, and a collection of personal
              histories, narratives, conversations, and other discourse genres recorded in
              digital audio and video formats. The project will thus produce a comprehensive
              description of the language and document its use as an expression of social and
              cultural identity.

This documentation will: a) provide the first and perhaps
              only grammatical description of this typologically interesting and undocumented
              language; b) yield data essential to the reconstruction of Proto-Totonacan, the
              ancestor language from which all the Totonacan languages are descended; c) help
              determine the historical relationship of Pisaflores Tepehua to other Totonacan
              languages and to other indigenous languages in Mesoamerica; and d) provide
              speakers of the language with a practical orthography and other materials for
              use in literacy and language maintenance projects. Tepehua is currently the
              principal means of communication in Pisaflores, and it is still being acquired
              by children. But it is rapidly being replaced by Spanish. Without documentation
              and revitalization, Tepehua may be abandoned within a generation. Tepehua
              materials resulting from this project will be valuable to the native speakers
              in Pisaflores, who are struggling to maintain their language for future
              generations, and to linguists and other scientists interested in native
              American languages and cultures.


