Title       : NSF-EC: Biochemistry of Algal Adhesives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0132443

Award Number: 0132443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Waite waite@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1665,5980,9117,9162,9179,AMPP,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award to University of California Santa Barbara is to isolate and
              characterize adhesive glycoproteins from different algae species, and to
              determine molecular weight, shape and primary sequence of these proteins and
              their subunits.  With this award Professor John Waite will evaluate the
              chemical functionality of the adhesive proteins, especially the determination
              of post-translational modifications and comparison of these modifications to
              those observed in adhesive proteins from mussels.  Modeling of the adhesive
              proteins and studying methods to control cross-linking reactions during the
              adhesive curing process will be carried out.  European scientists, who will be
              collaborating with this project, will provide algal adhesive proteins,
              haloperoxidase and cDNA-deduced protein sequences for these studies.

This
              multi investigator project with six university research teams, two biotech
              companies and European scientists will isolate, characterize, mimic, and
              bulk-produce algal adhesive proteins with the ultimate aim of developing
              pharmaceutical adhesives and to mitigate fouling. Many analytical methods
              including tandem mass spectrometry with collision-induced decomposition will be
              used to determine the primary sequence of these proteins and their subunits.
              This NSF project is co-funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,
              and Divisions of Chemistry (Advanced Materials), Materials Research (Solid
              State Chemistry), International Office (Western Europe) and Civil and
              Mechanical Systems (Surface and Material Design) as a Cooperative Activity in
              Materials Sciences between the National Science Foundation and the European
              Commission (NSF 01-105). This project is being carried out in collaboration
              with the Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research Institute; Technion
              University, Israel; University of Birmingham, England; Gothenburg University,
              Sweden; Roscoff Marine Station, France; and industrial collaborators from
              Iceland (Bio-Gels Pharmaceuticals Ltd) and Israel (Biota Ltd).
