Title       : Collaborative Research: Topic in Many-Body Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0132726

Award Number: 0132726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore R. Kirkpatrick tk10@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education
              in the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor Belitz at
              the University of Oregon (DMR-0132555).  The main objective of the project is
              to enhance the current understanding of many-electron systems at very low
              temperatures, and especially of phase transitions and other collective
              phenomena in such systems. The PIs will apply an effective field theory,
              developed during previous grant periods, to various collective phenomena of
              electrons in solids. The methods employed are general field theoretic
              techniques and the renormalization group. Specific systems for which this
              project is relevant include, magnets, superconductors, and doped
              semiconductors. The successful completion of this project will contribute to
              the understanding of an important area of condensed matter physics, and will
              train technical personnel with theoretical expertise in this field.
%%%
This
              is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education in
              the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor Belitz at
              the University of Oregon (DMR-0132555).  The research focuses on fundamental
              problems of condensed matter physics involving strong electronic correlations
              in clean and disordered systems. Specific topics of study include quantum phase
              transitions in ferromagnets and superconductors, the coexistence of
              superconductivity and ferromagnetism in UGe2, and how electronic correlations
              affect the metal-insulator transition. Quantum phase transitions occur at zero
              temperature and are driven by quantum fluctuations in contrast to the more
              familiar and well-understood phase transitions that are driven by thermal
              fluctuations and have non-zero transition temperatures. Critical fluctuations
              associated with quantum phase transitions may influence electronic behavior
              over a wide temperature range and may explain unusual electronic properties
              exhibited by materials with strong electronic correlations and other condensed
              matter systems. The award also supports education in advanced theoretical
              methods for condensed matter phenomena.
***

