Title       : Applications of Field Theory to Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0132990

Award Number: 0132990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo H. Fradkin eduardo@buenosaires.physics.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research and education on electrons in low-dimensional
              condensed matter systems with a large number of strongly coupled degrees of
              freedom. The properties of these systems are dominated by large quantum
              mechanical fluctuations. The ideas, concepts, and methods of quantum field
              theory will be used to carry out theoretical research in a wide range of areas
              including: electronic liquid crystal phases in strongly correlated fermionic
              systems, high temperature superconductors, and quantum Hall systems; quantum
              Hall topological entanglement and its applications to quantum computation;
              fractional quantum Hall effects and non-commutative geometry; and condensed
              matter analogs of general relativity, including analogs of the Hawking
              radiation in super liquids. 

This award supports theoretical research and
              education on electrons in low-dimensional systems. Research will focus on new
              physical phenomena that have been uncovered in the past few years, such as
              particles with fractional charge and fractional statistics, topological quantum
              computing, liquid crystal phases in electron liquids, and the possible
              existence of phases of matter with electron fractionalization. The physical
              systems where such phenomena take place are two-dimensional electron gases in
              large magnetic fields, strongly correlated systems such as high temperature
              superconductors, and the recently discovered ultracold dilute gases.  Advanced
              methods of condensed matter theory, such as quantum field theory, will be used
              to address the intellectually challenging fundamental problems that arise in
              the condensed matter physics of these low-dimensional systems.  This work may
              contribute to the intellectual foundation of future electronic device
              technologies.

