Title       : CAREER: Landmark-Based Speech Recognition in Music and Speech Backgrounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0132900

Award Number: 0132900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Hasegawa-Johnson jhasegaw@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  The research will
              develop speech recognition and auditory scene analysis models that are
              probability distributions whose parameters can be trained from data and whose
              internal structures are capable of abstracting the perceptual response patterns
              of human listeners.  Two broad research questions will be explored:  (1) Can
              probability models representing the pitch, envelope, and timing of an acoustic
              source be computed and integrated in a tractable manner?  (2) What are the
              theoretical and empirical requirements for the partitioning, training, and
              recognition scoring of probability models for landmark-based acoustic features?
               Landmarks in speech are identifiable points in the flow of sound over time,
              such as consonant releases and closures, vowel centers, and glide extrema.  The
              educational component of this project includes significant curriculum
              development at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, and a strong
              investment in the mentoring of undergraduate and graduate research
              trainees.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early
              career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an
              academic leader of the twenty-first century.  This is fundamental scientific
              research in acoustics and computer science, but it addresses the very practical
              problem that computers are still far worse at recognizing speech than human
              beings are.  Speech recognition technology has already become an important
              industry, but it will become far more important in the future as mobile
              computing and computer-mediated communications make it necessary for millions
              of people to control machines verbally rather than by means of keyboards.  The
              educational component of this work will train graduate students to be teachers
              and communicators, as well as researchers, thus preparing them to help build
              the base of personnel needed in this exciting, growing area.

