Title       : Fertilization in The Sea: The Ecological and Evolutionary Consequences of Sperm
               Chemoattraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0132635

Award Number: 0132635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Zimmer z@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Krug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1148,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Disentangling the effects of female choice, contest competition and scramble
              competition for mates.
M. Spritzer, D. Meikle, and N. Solomon 
lay
              abstract

Sexual selection is differential mating success caused by variation
              among members of one sex in a trait that influences acquisition of mates.
              Although sexual selection is one of the most intensively studied areas in the
              field of behavioral ecology, surprisingly little is known about  the relative
              importance of the different mechanisms of sexual selection. The main goal of
              the proposed research is to determine the relative importance of female choice,
              contest competition, and scramble competition for mates in determining the
              mating success of males. Female choice involves females choosing to mate with a
              male based on conspicuous ornaments or behaviors. Contest competition involves
              direct aggressive interactions between males and scramble competition, in
              contrast, involves a male's ability to rapidly and accurately locate mates.
              Meadow voles were used as the study species because past studies suggest that
              all three of these mechanisms of sexual selection occur among these rodents.
              Male navigation ability was chosen as a trait believed to be favored by
              scramble competition, and male dominance rank was chosen as a trait believed to
              be favored by contest competition. In addition, the influence of female choice
              upon both of these traits will be tested. The specific objectives are to
              determine: (1) the relationship between male navigation ability and male mating
              success, (2) the relationship between dominance and navigation ability among
              male voles, (3) the relative influence of dominance and navigation ability upon
              male mating success, and (4) female mating preferences for males with varying
              levels of navigation ability and dominance. A series of lab and field
              experiments will be used to achieve these objectives. Navigation ability will
              be measured by scoring each male's ability to complete a maze test, and male
              dominance will be tested by scoring aggression between pairs of males in arena
              trials. Male reproductive success will be determined using genetic paternity
              analyses. The results of this project will be an important next step in
              understanding how sexual selection shapes the evolution of a species.

