Title       : CAREER: Hierarchical Abstractions of Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0132716

Award Number: 0132716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Pappas pappasg@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1518,1667,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PI: George J. Pappas
CCR-0132716
NSF CAREER : Hierarchical Abstractions of
              Hybrid Systems

Recent years have witnessed the availability of extremely
              powerful and inexpensive computers, the explosion of communication networks,
              and revolutions in sensor and actuator technology. These accelerating advances
              have found their way inside many physical systems such as cars, aircraft,
              chemical processes, power networks, micro-mechanical systems, and manufacturing
              systems, resulting in the so-called embedded control systems or embedded
              software systems which merge physical processes with information systems. 
              These application domains are important not only from an engineering
              perspective but also because of their prevalence in
everyday life and the
              well-being of the economy.

Designing efficient, yet robust, large-scale
              embedded systems is a significant systems challenge.  It is of immediate
              importance to develop the research foundations and educational programs
              to
enable next-generation engineers to optimally utilize the opportunities
              offered by information technology.  The difficulty with embedded systems arises
              from the fact that the software
design and the control design is highly
              decoupled.   As a result, physical constraints, such as differential equations,
              are not taken explicitly into account in the software design
              process.
Consequently, fundamentally novel approaches to the design of
              embedded systems are needed as well as the development of models and tools that
              address the analysis and design of the integrated system with its many
              different physical, functional and logical aspects.

The research discipline
              of hybrid systems provides a theoretical foundation for the modeling, analysis,
              and design of embedded systems.  Hybrid systems naturally combine
              discrete-event and continuous-time systems in a manner that can capture
              software logic, physical dynamics, and communication protocols, in a unified
              modeling framework.  Hybrid systems have been used as mathematical models for
              automated highway systems, air traffic management systems, embedded automotive
              controllers, manufacturing systems, chemical processes, and, more recently,
              biomolecular networks. The wide applicability of hybrid systems has inspired
              a
great deal of research from both control theory and theoretical computer
              science.

Despite the great success of hybrid systems as a model, the
              applicability of state-of-the-art analysis and design techniques for hybrid
              systems has been limited to examples of small size due to complexity. One of
              the fundamental approaches for reducing complexity involves the use of
              hierarchical decomposition.  One of the main challenges in hierarchical systems
              is the extraction of a hierarchy of models at various levels of abstraction
              which are compatible with the functionality and objectives of each layer. 
              Hierarchies have been instrumental in separately managing the complexity of
              both control and software designs. However, for hybrid systems which
              re-integrate software and control, the right notion of hierarchy is a great
              challenge, and is the critical obstacle for scaling our models, theories,
              algorithms, and tools to large scale, embedded systems.

Next-generation,
              large-scale embedded systems have motivated new control as well as software
              paradigms.  As a result, there are numerous opportunities for fundamental and
              significant
contributions from both a theoretical and an applied perspective. 
              In this exciting intellectual landscape,  the research and educational agenda
              of the proposed research focuses on developing the theoretical foundations for
              the hierarchical decomposition of hybrid systems at various levels of
              abstraction. The long term goal of the research agenda will address the
              fundamental problem of given a class of hybrid models, and a class of
              properties that
must be preserved, extract modeling abstractions that preserve
              the properties of interest. Achieving this goal will consist of first
              developing robust notions of bisimulation for purely  continuous systems, and
              then unifying the continuous and discrete notions in a manner that is
              consistent with the dynamics of hybrid systems.

Merging discrete and
              continuous systems creates serious educational issues in order to combine the
              traditionally separate threads of discrete and continuous mathematics.  These
              issues must
be addressed at all educational levels.  At the graduate level,
              creating new courses on hybrid systems are needed, but with focus on complexity
              reduction methods in both control theory and
computer science. However, given
              the one-sided backgrounds of most undergraduate students, what is needed at the
              undergraduate level, is a cross-departmental, embedded systems course that will
              highlight both the discrete and continuous nature of embedded systems in
              various application domains. This will allow the earlier uniformization of
              educational backgrounds, expose students to related application domains in
              other departments, as well as demonstrate the cross-disciplinary power of the
              models, methods, and tools.


