Title       : Collaborative Research: Thermal and Processing Effects on the Properties of Low
               Cost Thermotropic Copolyesters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0132519

Award Number: 0132519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Bubeck bubeck@mmi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan Molecular Inst
	      1910 West St Andrew Rd
	      Midland, MI  486402657    /   -

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research project is to develop an understanding of the
              processing of thermotropic liquid crystalline polymers (TLCPs) so that the
              current barriers to widespread applications are lowered. This will be
              accomplished through a coordinated study of melt stability, flow behavior, and
              structure/properties of TLCPs.  An array of sophisticated characterization
              methods will be applied to monitor the thermal stability of the melt at high
              temperature, and x-ray scattering methods to study the development and fate of
              molecular orientation (directly related to mechanical properties of TLCPs) in
              both simple flows and complex flows of  relevance to processing. These methods
              have been productively applied to 'model' TLCPs of purely scientific interest
              in recent years, but this project affords the first opportunity for a
              comprehensive study of a technologically relevant material using these
              techniques.  To relate such fundamental information to product properties,
              channel flow plaques will be molded under protocols guided by the x-ray
              results, and their morphologies and physical properties studied.

These
              materials are used commercially in applications requiring excellent
              processibility, mold-filling precision, physical properties, dimensional
              stability, and thermal stability. Despite considerable promise, TLCPs have yet
              to be broadly applied in numerous applications where their potential as high
              strength/low weight materials might be realized. Contributing factors include
              thermal stability limitations at high temperatures in the melt during
              processing, systematically weak directions in moldings, and the high cost of
              commercially available TLCPs. This work will feature a TLCP material that
              offers potential for dramatic price reductions (approximately $3/lb), thereby
              directly addressing the central issue of cost. The collaboration between
              Northwestern University and MMI provides a venue for graduate and undergraduate
              students to gain experience in state-of-the art characterization tools and
              thermal analysis.

