Title       : CAREER: Monotone Optimal Policies in Parallel Processing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0132811

Award Number: 0132811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Lewis melewis@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will explore the
              application of Markov decision processes to three related problems in parallel
              queueing systems. In each scenario, as the number of parallel queues increases,
              the complexity of the decision-making process increases. Thus, finding the
              structure of the optimal policy in order to decrease the size of the search
              becomes crucial.  The first problem considered is a question of routing in a
              multi-server queueing system that appears in several areas of industry. For
              example, in demand chain logistics a company receives a request for a
              particular part. This part may be manufactured at several different plants in
              the same general area. If the company has an integrated information source, a
              decision-maker can query the system about how much work is in process at each
              of the several plants, estimate the time (and cost) it will take each plant to
              complete the job at hand and place the order accordingly.  We next take the
              same routing problem described above and consider scheduling in a particular
              manufacturing plant. If there are several stations capable of performing the
              same task, the applicability of the previous model remains. We complicate
              matters a bit, by noting that some of the machines may deteriorate. We then
              seek a joint, maintenance and routing policy.  Finally, we consider an example
              of load balancing that is useful in parallel computing. Sup-pose that work
              orders can be broken up, partially served on any computer and, upon completion,
              reassembled. Since the computers are networked, and a decision-maker would like
              to utilize these resources wisely, it may be advantageous to re-route work that
              has been sitting in queue at a particular machine to a different machine. That
              is to say, that the decision-maker would like to keep the load balanced between
              machines. The decision where a job will actually be processed is thus
              reevaluated so that idleness is reduced.

The main thrust of the education
              plan in this proposal is to try to increase the number of successful Minority
              graduate students in industrial engineering and operations research. This will
              be facilitated by several activities, not the least of which is to attempt to
              increase the number of minority graduate students at the University of
              Michigan. Close ties to the undergraduates in the Industrial and Operations
              Engineering Department (IOE) at the university will be developed through
              mentoring and increased financial support for under-represented minority
              graduate students will reduce teaching requirements.
