Title       : Dissertation Research: The Syntax and Semantics of Quantification and
               Relativization in Quechua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0132445

Award Number: 0132445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly Diesing md20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Molly Diesing, Dr. Rachel Hastings will collect data
              for her (second) doctoral dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on
              the Quechua language through fieldwork in the regions of Cusco, Peru, and
              Quito, Ecuador. Quechua speakers will be consulted regarding the meaning and
              contexts of use of expressions involving quantification and nominals containing
              relative clauses. Evidence from both spontaneous speech and texts (such as
              folktales published in Quechua) will also be consulted. The semantics of
              quantification in Quechua has received little attention in the past, and thus
              an initial goal of this study will be to investigate the semantic scope of
              quantifiers, and the syntactic position of the quantifier within a nominal.
              Some unusual, apparently clause-escaping properties of certain Quechua
              quantifiers will then be used to probe the structure of relative clauses.
              Quechua permits constructions in which the "head" of the relative clause (the
              nominal being modified by the clause) appears internally to the clause, as well
              as constructions in which the head is external. The semantic interactions
              between quantification and these two types of relativization will be used to
              investigate the detailed structure of these clauses.

The importance of this
              research lies both within Quechua linguistics and within cross-linguistic
              theories of syntax and semantics. First, this research will contribute to the
              body of Quechua data that is available to on-going efforts to document Quechua
              grammar, promote Quechua literacy, and analyze variation between dialects.
              Second, within theoretical linguistics, the results of the study will
              contribute to the emerging field of cross-linguistic semantic studies, and
              quantification studies in particular. The results of this research will also
              inform on-going debates on the structure of relative clauses, in particular
              questions regarding relations between internally and externally-headed
              relatives. 

