Title       : Regulation of Chromosome Dynamics and Segregation in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0132237

Award Number: 0132237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $845000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Orr-Weaver weaver@wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this work is to define the regulatory mechanisms that ensure
              accurate segregation of the sister chromatids in mitosis and meiosis. 
              Drosophila is a powerful model organism in which to decipher the control of
              chromosome segregation for three reasons: 1) chromosome dynamics can be
              visualized directly; 2) genetic tools allow ready detection of mutants
              defective in segregation; and 3) it is possible to ablate gene function using
              RNAi in order to evaluate the role of genes identified in other species.  This
              research focuses on proteins that control two crucial aspects of chromosome
              dynamics: sister-chromatid cohesion and condensation.  In order for sister
              chromatids to move away from each other during anaphase they must first be
              physically attached to each other.  This ensures that each sister chromatid of
              a pair attaches to microtubules emanating from opposite spindle poles. Cohesion
              must be precisely regulated to release only as the sisters separate at
              anaphase.  The Drosophila MEI-S332 protein binds to centromeres to maintain
              cohesion and is essential during meiosis.  The cohesin complex of proteins is
              essential both for the establishment of cohesion during DNA replication and its
              maintenance until chromatid separation at anaphase.  The cohesin complex acts
              along the length of the chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis I and maintains
              cohesion at the centromere in meiosis II.  This research addresses the
              mechanism by which MEI-S332 localization to centromeres is regulated and
              analyzes the relationship between MEI-S332 and the cohesin protein complex. 
              The condensin complex is necessary for chromosome condensation, and mutations
              have been recovered in the gene encoding one of the subunits.  This project
              will define the interdependency of the cohesin and condensin complexes.  The
              role of the condensin complex in meiosis and gene expression also will be
              investigated.  Three collections of mutants with defects in segregation have
              been recovered and will be analyzed to determine the activities of the gene
              products.  The phenotypes indicate that these genes play critical roles in
              chromosome segregation, thus their investigation will provide new insights into
              chromosome dynamics.

This research investigates the control of chromosome
              segregation, with the goal of deciphering two fundamental aspects essential for
              the proper partitioning of chromosomes during cell division.  Accurate
              segregation of chromosomes is essential during the divisions that produce sperm
              and eggs in order to avoid birth defects such as Down Syndrome.  Inaccurate
              segregation during cell proliferation produces aneuploid cells; these cells
              with an incorrect number of chromosomes are prone to become transformed cancer
              cells.  The mechanisms that ensure proper segregation remain to be elucidated. 
              This basic research builds on the identification of proteins known to
              participate in chromosome segregation to unravel the dynamics of chromosome
              behavior.
