Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Metallaradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0132017

Award Number: 0132017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus H. Theopold theopold@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Chemistry Division supports Dr. Klaus Theopold, Chemistry Department,
              University of Delaware, for research into the reaction chemistry of
              paramagnetic organometallic chromium and vanadium compounds. First, the
              synthesis of paramagnetic alkyls of chromium and vanadium coordinated by
              various nacnac-ligands will be developed. Important goals of this effort are
              the synthesis and structural characterization of single molecule catalysts for
              olefin polymerization. Secondly, high oxidation state chromium chemistry will
              be developed. This will include an exploration of oxo alkyls both with and
              without Cp-ligands, and the preparation of catalysts for O2-driven oxidation.
              Finally, new ligands, including bidentate carbenes, will be utilized to support
              paramagnetic organometallics. 

This project is fundamental in nature but
              will have practical impact on commercial catalyst development. The work will
              examine how oxygen atom transfers to and hydrogen is abstracted from
              hydrocarbons takes place with presently employed hexavalent chromium catalysts.
              Additionally, alternative catalysts that are more environmentally benign than
              those now used will be developed. Undergraduate and graduate students will
              experience a varied research culture and will gain a strong background in
              synthetic chemistry which is in high demand in chemical and pharmaceutical
              companies.

