Title       : Building Object Categories in Developmental Time: The 32nd Carnegie Cognition
               Symposium, June 7-9, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0132328

Award Number: 0132328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Gershkoff-Stowe gershkof@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Rakison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A three-day symposium, to be held June 7-9, 2002, will bring together leading
              researchers in the fields of cognitive development, visual perception, language
              acquisition, developmental neuroscience, and computational modeling to address
              key questions about the nature of category representations and the mechanisms
              that produce them.  Speakers will focus on how children build object
              categories, beginning with the basic architecture of the brain and with the
              constraints or biases that provide the foundation of early perceptual
              experience.  These developments will be considered in the light of subsequent
              growth of categorical and semantic abilities.  Research will be presented that
              examines three interrelated themes: (1) fundamental processes by which children
              are able to individuate and categorize objects and their physical properties;
              (2) ways in which language transforms children's emerging categories and the
              selection of features relevant for object categorization; and (3) higher-level
              cognitive processes that guide the formation of coherent systems of category
              knowledge.  The aim is to encourage the exchange of ideas, to synthesize the
              field's progress, and to build links to broader theoretical concerns.  An
              additional aim is to contribute to the development of junior scientists and
              students.  To this end, an invited cohort of promising young scholars will
              attend the meeting and interact with the speakers in an accessible and
              facilitating setting.  A final aim of the symposium is to provide early
              childhood educators and clinicians with practical information about the way
              that infants perceive and learn about objects in the world.  This knowledge may
              serve as a valuable tool for assessing aberrant development in at-risk infants
              in the earliest stages of life.  The results of the symposium will be published
              as the 32nd in the series of Carnegie Cognition Symposium volumes.
