Title       : Airborne Gradiometer Survey For The Proposed San Andreas Fault Drill Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0132137

Award Number: 0132137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manik Talwani manik@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0132137
Talwani

Airborne gravity gradiometry is a technology that has only
              recently been developed, but which has enormous potential.  It is capable of
              making absolute gravity gradient measurements of great precision very rapidly
              over almost any kind of terrain, and at a relatively modest cost.  It could
              well revolutionize measurements involving gravity for various types of studies
              focused on the shallow crust, and because the instrument determines absolute
              values, for time lapse studies as well.  The former could include, for example,
              studies involving the detection of blind faults, determination of the thickness
              of sedimentary fill or of basalt flows and lithologic contacts in densely
              vegetated areas as well as environmental and mineral exploration related
              problems.  The latter could help trace fluid flow in the shallow crust or magma
              movement in volcanoes, as well as other movements of material within the
              shallow crust on the human time scale.

Only two airborne gradiometers are
              actually operational today.  Both are based on Lockheed Martin's GGI
              gradiometer and have been adapted for airborne work jointly by Lockheed Martin
              and BHP.  It is clear that this technology is in its infancy and some
              preliminary experimentation is necessary in order to test its suitability for
              crustal work.  This project involves an aerial gradiometer survey of the
              proposed drill site for the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD), a
              component of EAR's Earthscope Initiative. SAFOD will involve drilling a 4 km
              deep hole which will intersect the San Andreas Fault near Parkfield, CA.  In
              addition to helping determine the deep structure at the proposed drill site,
              the fact that the gradiometer makes absolute measurements can be put to another
              use.  It is quite possible that in a time lapse experiment, that is by making
              two measuremenbts over the identical space separated in time, changes in the
              subsurface can be monitored.  These changes could be the motion of fluids or
              changes associated with an earthquake.  For the latter experiment, it is
              obviously important to establish a base line measurement before the earthquake.
               If a number of measurements are made it may be also possible to see if fluid
              motions in the shallow subsurface are reliable precursors to
              earthquakes.
***























