Title       : Microbial Observatories: Collaborative Research: Salt Plains Microbial
               Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0132097

Award Number: 0132097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $601807             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Henley henley@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A collaborative grant has been awarded to Drs. William Henley and Robert Miller
              (Oklahoma State University), Mark Buchheim (University of Tulsa) and Mark
              Schneegurt (Wichita State University) to establish a Microbial Observatory at
              the Salt Plains National Wildlife Refuge in northern Oklahoma.  The briny
              remains of an ancient sea that once covered middle America rise to the surface
              and evaporate under dry conditions to leave a crust of white salt on the
              barren, flat, 65-km2 Salt Plains.  Rainfall events dissolve the salt crust and
              create temporary streams and ponds, altering the landscape.  Salt conditions
              change rapidly in time with rainfall events and in space as the plains give way
              to vegetated areas.  The rapidly changing conditions and high surface
              temperatures, salt concentrations and UV exposure make this an extreme
              environment.  The Salt Plains Microbial Observatory will use a combination of
              classic microbiology techniques and leading-edge genetic techniques to
              characterize microbial communities (bacteria and algae) and study how they
              survive in such a harsh environment.  It is expected that many novel microbes
              will be discovered, and a repository of microbial biodiversity will be
              established, along with Internet databases of genetic information.  Educational
              opportunities will be available for undergraduate and graduate students,
              including a summer course for students from groups underrepresented in the
              sciences.

Capturing the biodiversity of this remarkable environment will
              preserve unique microbes that have beneficial properties for man, as potential
              sources for new antibiotics, drugs, and enzymes for industrial processes and
              'green' chemistry.  Fundamental ecological questions will be addressed that
              have widespread application to the management and conservation of our natural
              resources.  Surviving under such harsh conditions, the microbes on the Salt
              Plains will serve as models for organisms that may be found on other planets. 
              Representing the first extensive study of a non-marine, terrestrial,
              hypersaline environment, the Salt Plains Microbial Observatory is poised to
              make significant new discoveries.
