Title       : Molecular Relaxation and Radiative Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0132571

Award Number: 0132571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaul Mukamel mukamel@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shaul Mukamel is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in molecular relaxation and
              radiative processes.  He will continue his development of theoretical methods
              for the design and systematic interpretation of multidimensional femtosecond
              correlation spectroscopies in systems of coupled localized vibrational or
              electronic chromophores.  Visible and infrared analogues of multiple-pulse NMR
              techniques provide novel snapshot probes into the structure as well as
              dynamics, interactions and relaxation processes of complex molecular
              assemblies.  The fundamental theoretical concepts underlying techniques
              involving molecular responses to sequences of shaped and timed radiation pulses
              will be developed.  Semiclassical methods for simulating nonlinear response
              functions will be tested.  A classical-oscillator description of the
              spectroscopies will be developed, setting the stage for designing new pulse
              sequences that accomplish the same goals as their NMR analogues and providing a
              framework for computing and interpreting multidimensional signals.

The
              advent of pulsed laser technology combined with the use of non-linear optical
              techniques has led to a large number of new methods to probe gas-phase and
              condensed-phase molecular systems.  Mukamel is developing theoretical
              techniques that are central to the interpretation of the data obtained from
              these experiments.  These interpretations lead to many important insights
              regarding chemical reactions and the effects of solvation in condensed phase
              systems that can have application to understanding biological systems.

