Title       : Reactive Systems at the Onset of Microsolvation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0132584

Award Number: 0132584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Leopold kleopold@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Proposal: CHE-0132584
PI:  Leopold, Kenneth R.

The effect of
              solvation on molecular structure and reactivity is an important problem in
              chemistry. The investigation of microsolvated species offers a valuable means
              of bridging gas phase measurements with studies of condensed matter. Such work
              offers the possibility of developing an increasingly accurate molecular-level
              description of solvation. In this project, rotational spectroscopy will be used
              to examine the effects of microsolvation on reactive acid-base complexes.
              Molecular structures and dipole moments will be determined from rotational
              constants and Stark effect data, respectively. Aspects of charge distribution
              will, in certain cases, also be revealed by nuclear hyperfine structure. Two
              classes of systems are targeted: (i) partially bound Lewis acid-base complexes,
              whose structure and bonding change dramatically upon crystallization and (ii)
              hydrogen bonded systems which undergo proton transfer in solution or in the
              crystalline phase. These systems are chosen because in both cases, aggregation
              promotes chemical change and the effects of microsolvation are, therefore,
              expected to be pronounced. The central question to be addressed in this work is
              , "In systems for which aggregation drives chemical change, how big is the
              effect of the first near neighbor?". Several systems with higher degrees of
              solvation are also considered. This work will systematically exploit the
              hypersensitivity of these reactive acid-base complexes to their near-neighbor
              interactions for the purpose of investigating "solvation" effects at the small
              cluster level.

Much of the chemistry important to human activity involves
              substances in solution. For example, the chemistry of living things, reactions
              in contaminated ground waters, and even a host of important industrial
              processes occur only when molecules are dissolved in a solvent. When such
              reactions occur, the solvent itself is not a direct participant in the
              chemistry, though it has become increasingly clear that its presence can play a
              significant role in mediating the reactions that take place. Thus, in this
              project, we are interested in studying the role of solvent in mediating
              chemical processes. Our approach is to gain a basic understanding of the
              problem by examining the effect of a single solvent molecule close to a pair of
              reactive molecules. To accomplish this, we isolate two reacting molecules, plus
              one solvent molecule, and use microwaves to investigate how the solvent affects
              them. Understanding the influence of a single solvent molecule is an important
              step, as it is the fundamental building block for understanding the influence
              of the many solvent molecules present in a real solution. Moreover, the basic
              knowledge gained from this work may have direct consequences for modeling
              difficult problems of societal importance, e.g., the formation of particles in
              the earth's atmosphere, whose presence has wide ranging effects on climate,
              ozone levels, and human health. In this way, we envision potential practical
              applications for the fundamental science addressed in this project. Graduate
              students at the University of Minnesota will participate in this research as
              part of their training toward the doctoral degree and will learn numerous
              technical skills applicable to a wide variety of problems.

