Title       : Investigations of Metal-Element Multiple Bonding and New Methods for
               Metal-Mediated Bond Activations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0132099

Award Number: 0132099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Don Tilley tilley@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor T. Don Tilley, Department of Chemistry, University of California at
              Berkeley is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to investigate complexes that
              contain a transition metal-main group element multiple bond and to develop new
              methods for transition metal mediated bond activations.  A primary reaction
              type by which transition metal centers cleave chemical bonds involves the
              migration of a group from a donor atom to the metal (alpha - migration). This
              process produces a metal-element multiple bond, which is a functionality with a
              rich reaction chemistry and which is important in many metal-mediated
              transformations. Although alpha-migrations are well established for
              metal-carbon bonded systems, they are much less developed in M-N, M-O, M-Si,
              M-P, and other metal heteroatom systems. This proposal aims to assess the
              generality and synthetic utility of alpha-migration as a route to isolable
              species containing multiple bonds between various main group and transition
              metal fragments. In doing so, several fundamental questions will be addressed:
              (a) Can alpha-migration be used to generate new types of metal-element multiple
              bonds? (b) How does the electron count at the transition metal center influence
              alpha-migration chemistry? (c) Does a formally charged metal center promote the
              alpha-migration process? (d) What substituents in addition to hydrogen
              participate in alpha-migration chemistry? (e) Can the design and implementation
              of new ligand sets provide access to new bond activations? (f) Can
              alpha-migrations be incorporated into new catalytic cycles? To address these
              questions, specially designed complexes containing metals from throughout the
              transition series will be prepared. Many of these will feature coordinative
              unsaturation, and ligands designed to facilitate bond activations.

The goal
              of this work is to provide a basis for the development of new and useful
              metal-mediated chemical processes. The discovery of new bonding patterns and
              reactivity modes will be followed by attempts to use this information in the
              design of new catalytic cycles. Many of these investigations will focus on
              silylene complexes that have recently been discovered, but as other
              metal-element multiple bonded compounds are obtained, their reactivities will
              be explored in the search for useful transformations.

