Title       : In vitro Genetic Analysis for Metabolic Engineering of Cell-Free Protein
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0132535

Award Number: 0132535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Swartz swartz@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this project is to develop methods for efficient and
              sensitive metabolic surveys of genomes. This project will attempt to use the
              availability of genomic sequences, massively parallelmolecular biology
              techniques, and efficient cell-free protein synthesis to obtain functional
              expression of all the soluble enzymes in a genome, one protein per reaction
              chamber.  With this approach, nearly every enzyme could be tested rapidly for
              its effect on a targeted metabolic process. This capability would be
              demonstrated by improving the performance of cell-free protein synthesis.  This
              project will attempt to show that cell-free conditions can be developed to
              mimic the E. coli cytoplasm and to provide a variety of prosthetic groups so
              that complex, multimeric proteins will fold properly to become bioactive.  This
              project would also attempt to show that single bioactive proteins can have a
              profound effect on cell-free protein synthesis and that these effects would be
              predicted based on the known, intracellular function of the protein. Ten
              proteins have been chosen to represent various challenges in protein expression
              and activation.  If this project is successful, directed genetic changes could
              be made with a much higher probability of the desired outcome.

