Title       : CAREER: Dynamically Adaptive Wavelet-Based Algorithms for Numerical Simulations
               of Complex Multi-Scale Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0132664

Award Number: 0132664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg V. Vasilyev   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The past decade has witnessed the development of wavelet analysis, a brand-new
              mathematical tool, which has been quickly adopted by diverse fields in science
              and engineering. In a brief period it has reached a certain level of maturity
              as a well-defined mathematical subject with a strong interdisciplinary
              character. Wavelets have certainly begun to make an impact in many areas,
              including signal processing, data and image compression. However, wavelet
              application to the solution of diffcult partial differential equations (PDE)
              arising in different areas of physics and engineering has been very limited.
              The objectives of this CAREER proposal are manifold. The first objective
              concerns the advancement of the state of the art of wavelet-based numerical
              algorithms. The second involves the application of the method to challenging
              engineering problems, which currently are difficult to solve using conventional
              numerical algorithms. The final aim of this project is in education and
              dissemination of the use of wavelets in large scale scientific computing. More
              specifically, our educational goals are (a) to develop a comprehensive
              graduate/upper undergraduate level course on the use of wavelet-based numerical
              algorithms for solving partial differential equations, (b) to develop and
              disseminate ``easy-to-follow" wavelet-based codes, and (c) to write a textbook
              ``Wavelets and Numerical Solution of PDEs." The project will consist of three
              parts: (1) algorithmic development, (2) high- performance computing
              applications, and (3) course and textbook development. In the first part of the
              project we plan to improve and further develop the dynamically adaptive second
              generation wavelet collocation (DASGWC) algorithm in these two areas: (a)
              extension of the method to complex geometries and (b) adaptation of the
              algorithm for efficient use on massively parallel computers. At the same time,
              we plan to apply the further improved second-generation wavelet collocation
              algorithm to the following two classes of problems: (a) fluid-structure
              interaction and (b) micro-scale heat transfer. These problems are chosen with
              an eye to testing the strength of the wavelet method and to evaluating the
              degree in which it can really shine over conventional numerical methods.
              Finally, we will develop a course and a textbook on high- performance
              algorithms with particular emphasis on wavelet-based adaptive methods and their
              implementation in modern computational environments. We will also maintain a
              web site where we will post some of the rudimentary wavelet codes for solving
              PDEs, homework assignments, and other relevant material. We feel that such a
              service would be of immense educational value to the graduate students in
              engineering and science, since very few universities offer courses in
              scientific computing using wavelets.


