Title       : Mechanism of Mucilage Formation in the North Adriatic Sea: A Component of CREICO
               (Cooperative Research on Ecological Interactions in the Coastal Oceans)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0132677

Award Number: 0132677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farooq Azam fazam@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is a component of CREICO (Cooperative Research on
              Ecological Interactions in the Coastal Oceans) program in the Adriatic Sea.
              This international initiative is intended to develop cooperation between
              Croatia, Slovenia, Italy and the US in environmental science in the Adriatic,
              in concert with Adriatic Observing System (CAOS) being developed with NOAA.
              CREICO is intended to increase understanding of the structure and function of
              ecological systems in the Adriatic, and the system response to perturbations.
              The focus of CREICO is on "bloom phenomena" and their causes and consequences.
              This proposal focuses on the mucilage phenomenon (mare sporco). Over the last 3
              centuries, enormous accumulations of "mucilage" have occurred along the coasts
              of the northern Adriatic Sea, affecting the coasts of Italy, Slovenia and
              Croatia. The cause remains a mystery. Mucilage events damage local fisheries
              and tourism. Scientifically, the huge organic matter accumulation represents an
              opportunity to study the ecosystem level mechanisms of variability in the
              carbon biogeochemistry, and North Adriatic offers a natural "laboratory."
              Predicting the mucilage events would be an excellent test of models of oceanic
              carbon biogeochemistry.

While phytoplankton blooms produce the organic
              matter that ultimately forms mucilage Dr. Azam hypothesizes that bacterial
              processing of phytoplankton biomass, to produce slow?to-degrade polysaccharide
              plays a significant role. They will test hypotheses on bacterial production of
              slow?to-degrade dissolved and colloidal organic matter (including bacterial
              capsular material and exudates) and its aggregation to form mucilage under
              relevant ecosystem conditions. This work will be done in collaboration with
              Serena Fonda?Umani (Italy), Vera Zutic (Croatia) and Valentina Turk (Slovenia).
              They will use mesocosms (in Fonda?Umani lab in Trieste, Italy) to test
              hypotheses through perturbation experiments. Further, they will take advantage
              of the planned two 15?d cruises. Bacterial studies will use molecular
              approaches, to explore species?specific roles in mucilage production and
              decomposition. Polysaccharide structure analysis will seek relationships
              between bacterial biochemical profiles and polysaccharide utilizability. Dr.
              Azam and his lab have been informally collaborating with Italian, Slovenia and
              Croatian marine scientists and students on mucilage studies, in research and
              training. This research will increase this collaboration; it will address a
              long?standing oceanographic problem, with potential of discovering fundamental
              principles of carbon cycling of relevance to research on global
              change.









