Title       : Mississippi EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0132618

Award Number: 0132618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan W. Pote   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Altenkirch  (Principal Investigator former)
              Elizabeth J. Hawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mississippi Research Infrastructure Improvement Program builds on successful
              previous investments and targets five areas:
1)Nanostructured Silicate Systems
              with Designed Molecular and Supermolecular Architecture in Hybrid
              Organic/Inorganic Materials; 2) Computational Chemistry; 3) Integrating
              Molecular, Cellular and Organismal Responses of Bioregulatory Systems to
              Environmental Stressors; 4) Protein Structure and Localization; and 5)
              Computational Simulation and Information Technology. 

The Nanostructured
              Silicate Systems group involves chemists, physicists and polymer
              scientists/engineers.  It will develop nanostructured silicate systems and
              "molecular silicas" to exploit the potential for the design of novel materials
              with macroscopic properties that are a direct consequence of the unique
              nanoscopic properties of the finely dispersed heterogeneous components. The
              Computational Chemistry research group will concentrate on fundamental problems
              of potential energy surfaces, geometry and structure of inclusion complexes,
              hydrogen bonding in ground and excited states, and ring strain while  improving
              computational efficiencies of the methods employed.  The research group
              involved with Integrating Molecular, Cellular and Organismal Responses to
              Stress will investigate the biochemical, physiological and behavioral responses
              of the bioregulatory systems of animals and plants brought about by chemical
              and other stressors, including delineation of changes in the proteome during
              stress responses.  The Protein Structure and Localization group will
              investigate structures known to have important physiological roles and involves
              identifying the compartment(s), in which protein acts, including movement from
              one compartment to another that often regulates protein function.  They will
              use relatively low-resolution tools in conjunction with computational methods
              to recognize domains and other elements of tertiary structure. The
              Computational Simulation and Information Technology group will provide high
              performance computing and information technology support to the other research
              areas.  

The research infrastructure improvement project includes
              researchers at the University of Mississippi (UM), the University of
              Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC), the University of Southern Mississippi
              (USM), Jackson State University (JSU), Mississippi State University MSU), and
              Mississippi College (MC).  Cross-cutting computational support will be provided
              by the Mississippi State University Engineering Research Center.

In addition
              to the research effort, the Mississippi infrastructure improvement plan
              includes support for activities to strengthen the campus environment for
              research.  This support includes faculty start-up funds, equipment, travel and
              stipends for undergraduate and graduate students.  Staff development activities
              such as seminars and workshops, commercialization assistance, subscription
              services etc. will also be available to further strengthen the research
              environment.  The Mississippi project also includes focused activities designed
              to increase the participation of women and members of other underrepresented
              groups in the activities of the award.

