Title       : Fundamentals of Experimental Science in Early Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0132315

Award Number: 0132315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Klahr klahr+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1666,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to investigate the thinking processes of young
              children and to find out how these processes affect children's ability to learn
              science in elementary school. The main focus of the research will be on how
              children learn to design simple experiments and how they understand
              experimental outcomes so that they can reach conclusions based on hard
              evidence.  Throughout the project, there will be two intertwined strands of
              effort, lab-based studies and classroom-based studies.  The expectation is that
              results from the lab studies will form the basis for the design of improved
              curriculum units that are grounded in cognitive theory and that can be
              implemented within the constraints of real classroom situations.  Conversely,
              the expectation is that the classroom observations and assessments will raise
              questions that will be studied in the lab.  The research will involve several
              interrelated studies.  One will determine whether or not teaching children the
              basics of experimental design will enable them to understand better the results
              of others' scientific investigations, for example, other children's science
              fair posters, or claims they hear about what "scientists have discovered." 
              Another study will investigate children's understanding of various types of
              error that can occur during the design, setup, execution, and analysis of
              experiments.  The goal is to find out how children react when they see that
              things don't always turn out exactly the same way when they run the "same"
              experiment repeatedly.  In addition, part of the research will explore the
              effect of presenting science instruction via a computer interface rather than
              with a live teacher.  One of the studies will examine pre-school children's
              ability to generate notations for simple procedures that involve sequences of
              actions.  Such an ability is an important precursor to using notation in the
              science lab.
