Title       : CAREER: Metallated Polythieno[3,4-b]pyrazines as Ordered Hybrid Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0132886

Award Number: 0132886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth C. Rasmussen seth_rasmussen@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9162,9178,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this award to
              North Dakota State University Fargo to synthesize and characterize
              metal-polymer hybrids prepared from transition metals and
              polythieno[3,4-b]pyrazine and its alkylated derivatives.  These composite
              materials are expected to have the electro- and photochemical properties of
              transition metal complexes with the electronic and optical properties of the
              organic polymer.  Since metal centers will be bound directly to the polymer
              backbone, undesirable steric interactions will be eliminated in addition to
              stronger metal-polymer electronic coupling. This methodology to prepare
              composites without the use of copolymeric systems will have synthetic control
              for the production of well-ordered metallated polymers, which in turn will
              retain the desirable aspects of the conjugated polymer while allowing the metal
              centers to serve as electro- or photosensitive switches to modulate the polymer
              properties.  Ordered heterometallic conjugated polymers will also be
              synthesized to determine structure-property relationships of these hybrid
              systems, and they will be evaluated for their potential applications in
              conducting, photo-conducting, and nonlinear optical materials.  The Career
              Development Plan will incorporate History of Chemistry into the chemistry
              curriculum both at the undergraduate and graduate level courses with credit
              including seminars and web-based chemical history displays.  These programs
              will also be offered to North Dakota high school science teachers as a way to
              allow them to include this material in their curriculum.

Polymer-metal
              composites will be prepared from conducting polymers and transition metals. 
              Since the metal centers will be bound directly to the polymer backbone in these
              materials, these well-ordered and oriented hybrids are expected to provide
              enhanced electronic and optical properties.  Long-term goals of the project
              will be to prepare heterometallic, multidimensional and conjugated polymer
              materials for multi-dimensional arrays for potential applications in
              supramolecular chips for information storage.  A new curriculum to teach
              History of Chemistry will be introduced at both graduate and undergraduate
              levels.  High school science teachers will also be provided opportunities to
              take the course in History of Chemistry.
