Title       : Microbial Observatories: Linking Phylogeny and Biogeochemistry for the Discovery
               of Novel Chemolithotrophs Inhabiting Geothermal Gradients in Yellowstone
               National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0132022

Award Number: 0132022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. McDermott timmcder@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gill G. Geesey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Inskeep  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Timothy R. McDermott, William P. Inskeep, and
              Gill G. Geesey of Montana State University to establish a Microbial Observatory
              to study and discover novel chemolithotrophic microorganisms in Yellowstone
              National Park (YNP). As a general physiological group, chemolithotrophs are
              tremendously underrepresented, particularly given the predominance of inorganic
              energy sources in our biosphere. These microbes acquire energy for growth from
              the oxidation of inorganic chemicals such as ferrous iron, hydrogen sulfide,
              elemental sulfur, arsenite, or hydrogen gas. Because geothermal springs
              typically contain abundant levels of all or most of these chemical species, YNP
              represents an ideal location to conduct this search. The research will utilize
              novel cultivation and molecular techniques to describe, characterize, and
              isolate the microbial populations present along geochemical and temperature
              gradients. This detailed description of the microbial populations will be
              accompanied by a complete analysis of the aqueous and solid phase geochemistry,
              providing a comprehensive approach that will link molecular description with an
              understanding of the ecological relevance of identified populations.

This
              observatory occupies a key link in the study of the thermophilic microorganisms
              in Yellowstone, and it will work closely with other observatories in YNP to
              maximize research synergy and discovery. In addition to contributing to the
              general development of microbial ecology principles, this research will foster
              the cross-disciplinary training of graduate students. Further, the information
              derived from this work will contribute to the continued development of
              databases that document and describe microbial diversity occurring in YNP's
              geothermal features, which in turn will facilitate extensive education-outreach
              opportunities of direct value to the education mission of YNP. All cultures and
              DNA obtained from this project will be stored in the Montana State University
              Thermal Biology Institute thermophile culture collection, providing biological
              materials for future screening.  

