Title       : Biological thought: A cross cultural view
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0132469

Award Number: 0132469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Medin medin@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Atran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norbert Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra R. Waxman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will study children's acquisition knowledge in the domain of
              biology.  The goal is to understand better what biological knowledge children
              bring to the classroom and how this knowledge is organized to support reasoning
              and explanation.  Although children's understanding of biology has been
              examined in quite a few studies, little attention has been directed at the
              question of how biological knowledge might vary in children being raised in
              different cultural settings and among adults with different levels of
              experience.  Since the existing work in the area suggests that adult
              conceptions of biological kinds and ecological relationships varies with
              culture and experience, children's understandings of nature likely also varies
              with culture and experience.  Identifying cross-cultural differences and
              commonalities in biological knowledge is important if we are to meet the
              educational goals of the 21st century.  It is also important to build theories
              that reflect accurately the diversity in knowledge and experience of people
              around the world.  The project will include a number of under-studied
              populations, including urban and rural majority culture children, urban Mexican
              immigrant children, rural Native American children, rural Yukatek Maya and
              Ladino children.  Children and adults will be given a variety of tasks to probe
              their underlying biological concepts (e.g. "alive"), processes, and
              relationships.  In addition, the research will examine parent-child dyads and
              other sources of information that help to shape children's conceptions of
              biology.  The research will test specific theories about which aspects of
              biological knowledge are likely to be universal, which aspects vary with
              culture and experience, and how these variations interact with formal
              instruction.  This research is directly relevant to science education.  It is
              important to engage the understandings that children bring to the classroom in
              order to build on their real world experience and to address misconceptions
              when they arise.  To ignore real world experience would risk failure to
              understand the educational possibilities for learning about science in general,
              and biology in particular.
