Title       : NSF-EC: Third Workshop on Superconductivity and Magnetism of Advanced Materials;
               Krakow, Poland; July 14-18, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0132474

Award Number: 0132474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bogdan Dabrowski dabrowski@anl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Piotr Klamut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1665,1711,1734,5953,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Third Workshop on Magnetism and Superconductivity of Advanced Materials
              (Ladek Zdroj, Poland, July 15-20, 2002) will direct its focus on the interplay
              between magnetism and superconductivity. A wide spectrum of new materials with
              novel properties, which have been discovered during the last three years, will
              be discussed at the workshop. Some of the materials presented will include new
              oxide magnetic superconductors from the class of ruthenocuprates, selected
              tripled state superconductors (UGe2, Sr2RuO4), heavy fermion compounds,
              modified C60 fullerenes, MgB2 (a "classic" superconductor that is challenging
              our current theoretical and experimental understanding of the electron-phonon
              interaction and gap anisotropy), and new compounds in the related class of
              manganites and ruthenates. Progress in the field of artificial heterostructures
              that consist of spatially distinct superconducting and magnetic layers,
              including systems that enable novel probes of the interaction of magnets and
              superconductors across an intervening layer, will be also reviewed and
              discussed at the meeting. An important goal of the Workshop will be providing
              an opportunity to strengthen collaborations between U.S. and European
              scientists, as well as enabling new collaborations to form. The workshop
              proceedings will be published in a special issue of Physica C, and will include
              articles based on both oral and poster presentations.
%%%
The Third Workshop
              on Magnetism and Superconductivity of Advanced Materials (Ladek Zdroj, Poland,
              July 15-20, 2002) addresses issues of novel superconducting and magnetic
              materials. Emphasis will be placed on properties, characterization, and
              processing of compounds exhibiting a range of novel phenomena arising from
              mutual interactions of magnetism and superconductivity. The need for this
              conference arises from the rapid development of this field, which is also of
              high interest in the community of contemporary mainstream condensed matter
              physics. This Workshop will also feature properties and processing of
              artificially grown magneto-superconducting, layered heterostructures, as well
              as magnesium diboride  - an exciting new superconductor. Theoretical
              understanding of the properties of these materials and development of
              applications of their unique magnetic and electronic properties will be
              reviewed in depth at the meeting. An important goal of the workshop will be to
              provide U.S. and European scientists the opportunity to strengthen, as well as
              form new, collaborations. Young Polish and American scientists attending the
              workshop will be exposed to world-class research in the fields of
              superconductivity and magnetism. They will have the opportunity to interact in
              the workshop as well. All talks will be thorough, with generous time allowed
              for substantive discussions between the participants and speakers. The workshop
              materials will be published in a special issue of Physica C, and will include
              articles based on both oral and poster presentations.
       This NSF project
              is co-funded between DMR and INT as a Cooperative.   Activity in Materials
              Sciences between the National Science Foundation and the European Commission
              (NSF 01-105). The project is being carried out in collaboration with the Center
              of Excellence for Physics and Fabrication of Low Dimensional Structures for
              Technologies of Future Generations (CELDIS) operated by the Polish Academy of
              Science within the 5th EC Framework Programme.

