Title       : Kentucky EPSCoR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0132295

Award Number: 0132295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W.D. Connolly connolly@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Kentucky EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will enhance
              research and education in two broad priority areas -- biological and
              environmental research - at the University of Kentucky, the University of
              Louisville, and Murray State University.  In biology, Kentucky EPSCoR will
              provide facilities and faculty in functional genomics, cellular and molecular
              proteomics, biomedical nano- and micro-electro-mechanical systems, and
              structural biology.  In environmental research, Kentucky EPSCoR will set up
              facilities for the new Kentucky Environmental Research and Education Consortium
              (KEREC) at the University of Kentucky and Murray State University.  The
              overarching goal of KEREC is to improve the quality, scope, and national
              competitiveness of Kentucky's environmental research programs by provision of
              faculty, staff, and laboratories.  The facilities will include the
              Environmental Research and Training Laboratories housed within the College of
              Engineering and the University of Kentucky and the Center for Watershed
              Environments at Murray State University.   Research in biological and
              environmental research is vital to the economy of both Kentucky and the nation.
               Each priority area has critical implications for human health, agriculture,
              and knowledge-based industry. 

Education and human resource programs will be
              augmented through undergraduate training.  A statewide fellowship program for
              minorities and underrepresented groups will be continued and augmented.  A
              minority pipeline program for including faculty and undergraduate students from
              HBCUs and other regional universities in Kentucky's research programs will be
              extended to HBCUs beyond Kentucky.   Predominately undergraduate institutions
              of the state will benefit from the Infrastructure Enhancement Program, which
              supports research and education outside of the major research universities.

