Title       : CAREER: Ferroelectric Multilayers, Superlattices, and Compositionally Graded
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0132918

Award Number: 0132918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $517164             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Pamir Alpay p.alpay@ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project focuses on the study of artificially layered ferroelectric
              superlattices and compositionally graded ferroelectric films for applications
              in microelectronics. In the paraelectric state ferroelectric materials possess
              some of the largest dielectric constants attainable, a property particularly
              relevant for applications where transient charge storage is required, such as
              capacitors in dyanmic random access memories(DRAM). Enhanced properties are
              sought through spatial variations in internal stresses, film composition, and
              microstructure. It is anticipated that through intrinsic characteristics of
              ferroelectric materials and the introduction of compositional and internal
              stress gradients, exceptional and unusual electrical and electromechanical
              properties can be obtained which are not possible for bulk ferroelectrics and
              ferroelectric thin films. The proposed work is a combined experimental and
              theoretical effort. The theoretical part will be based on an extended mean
              field Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire phenomenology. Elastic and electrical
              interactions between individual layers will be modeled and physical properties
              of ferroelectric multilayers and compositionally graded films will be
              determined. The model developed will serve as a basis to design ferroelectric
              stacks with enhanced physical properties via artificially created
              non-uniformities such as compositional variations, different stress levels, and
              interfacial defect structures. Ferroelectric and/or paraelectric layers with
              systematic variations in composition, thickness, and misfit with respect to the
              underlying substrate will be deposited by rf-sputtering or pulsed lased
              deposition techniques. Initially, the focus will be on the deposition of the
              prototypical BaTiO3/SrTiO3 system. Based on the information gathered,
              multilayers of other perovskite systems such as PbTiO3/CaTiO3, PbTiO3/SrTiO3,
              and KNbO3/KTaO3, will be grown. Ferroelectric stacks and compositionally graded
              films will be characterized crystallographically and microstructurally via
              x-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Local compositional
              distribution of elements will be determined by energy-dispersive x-ray
              spectroscopy (EDXS) using an electron energy filter. Physical properties such
              as polarization hysteresis, dielectric, piezoelectric, and pyroelectric
              properties will be measured. The unconventional ferroelectric properties of
              these multilayers due to chemical and structural non-uniformity will be the
              basis for designing novel devices and circuits. This part of the research will
              involve an established industrial collaboration. 
%%% 
The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance. The research is accompanied by an intensive
              educational plan. To promote comprehensive and active learning, advanced
              interactive course web sites will be developed for undergraduate and graduate
              level courses. Also, a "popular science" interactive web site on thin film
              science and technology aimed at a general, non-technical audience will be
              designed. The target audience for this web site is high school teachers,
              juniors, and seniors. Two new interdisciplinary graduate level classes will be
              designed and implemented. Another educational benefit of the proposed project
              sought is summer internships for graduate and undergraduate students involved
              in this research through industrial collaboration. Overall, the project
              provides students with new challenges and research approaches in materials
              synthesis, processing, and characterization, and provides new tools and
              approaches to education and training. Thus, an important feature of the project
              is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and
              education. 
***  

