Title       : Fully Three-Dimensional Stability Analyses and Evolution of Hurricanes and
               Tornadoes with Secondary Circulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0132006

Award Number: 0132006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Montgomery MTM@chandra.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tornadoes and hurricanes are two of the most destructive natural phenomena that
              threaten the U.S. population.  A universal characteristic of these storms is a
              vertically aligned, intense vortex in the core region.  The classical approach
              of analyzing the linearized dynamics of small perturbations to vortices has
              yielded substantial insight into the behavior of intense atmospheric vortices,
              helping to explain such phenomena as multiple vortex formation in tornadoes and
              rapid inner-core structure change in hurricanes.  The vast majority of these
              studies, however, have been applied to essentially two-dimensional
              perturbations to two-dimensional vortices.  In some studies, three-dimensional
              perturbations have been considered, but the basic-state vortices were
              homogenous in the vertical direction.

This research will advance the study
              of intense atmospheric vortices in two ways.  First, the classical methods of
              vortex stability analysis will be extended to allow for the study of truly
              three-dimensional vortices.  The equations of motion will be the
              three-dimensional anelastic equations such that neither hydrostatic,
              quasi-geostrophic, or other balance approximations are required.  Intense
              atmospheric vortices of all types are not homogenous along their vertical axis,
              but often have considerable variation of their wind and density fields with
              height.  The stability analysis will allow for eigenfunctions that vary
              arbitrarily with height, so that the Principal Investigators can find truly
              three-dimensional eigenmodes, unstable or otherwise, in the cores of
              three-dimensional vortices.  This approach will be applied to axisymmetric
              basic-state vortices, based on the results of numerical simulations and
              existing or future observational data sets of tornadoes and
              hurricanes.

Secondly, the secondary circulation, which is known to play a
              critical role in the development and maintenance of tornadoes and hurricanes,
              will be incorporated into the basic state flow.  Previous investigations on the
              influence of radial inflow and vertical outflow on the stability of these
              vortices have been limited to highly idealized vortices.  Whether the secondary
              circulation, and in particular the shear of the vertical wind up through the
              core of the vortex, stabilizes or destabilizes the vortex remains an open and
              intriguing question and may be critical in understanding inner-core dynamics in
              tornadoes and hurricanes.  For stable vortices, such as developing tropical
              cyclones or "one-celled" tornadic vortices, a natural extension of the research
              will be to determine the linearized evolution and impact on the basic-state
              vortex of three-dimensional, asymmetric, nonhydrostatic
              perturbations.

Successful completion of this research will lead to better
              understanding and, potentially, better forecasts of destructive atmospheric
              vortices.
