Title       : West Virginia Blueprint for Science and Technology: Strengthening Statewide
               Multidisciplinary Academic Research Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0132740

Award Number: 0132740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8946994            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Hill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura J. Jenski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Hornak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances L. Van Scoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
West Virginia has developed a strong academic base on which to support larger
              scale competitive programs and technology transfer in the areas of
              Identification Science and Technology (Id S&T) and High Performance Computing
              (HPC) and deems them important to the future economic development for the
              state.   This project builds infrastructure at West Virginia University and
              Marshall University to strengthen physical and intellectual capability in these
              scientific areas. 

Identification Science and Technology is based on the
              growing synergy between molecular science and engineering applications.  It
              reflects the multidisciplinary research in areas defined by the interfaces of
              molecular/life sciences, micro/nano science and information science and
              technology. Research in the molecular/life sciences will develop scientific
              understanding of life signatures at the most fundamental level by focusing on
              biochemical complexity and the hierarchy of organization.  Research in the
              micro/nano sciences and engineering will focus on design and use of new devices
              to acquire biometric information.  Research in information science and
              engineering will develop data analysis and interpretation of large volumes of
              spacial and temporal biometric information.  

The High Performance Computing
              research area will enhance the infrastructure for computational science and
              human/computer interfaces that support the numerical and data analysis
              necessary to complement the physical research.  The HPC effort will: 1) link
              the EPSCoR HPC plan to the broader academic research computing and information
              science and engineering infrastructure plan; 2) find new ways to assist users
              interacting with computers and assist researchers in various disciples; and 3)
              provide a resource for student research and education at various levels
              including high school.  The HPC effort includes use of an established Virtual
              Environment Laboratory for a variety of innovative research and educational
              activities.

In addition to work in the research areas, the project will
              integrate the NSF EPSCoR activities with on-going educational and outreach
              initiatives in the state, create new initiatives, and increase the
              participation of underrepresented groups in science, mathematics, engineering,
              and technology.




