Title       : Deciphering the Evolution of the Opioid/Orphanin Gene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0132210

Award Number: 0132210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Dores rdores@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip B. Danielson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 A striking feature of chemical communication systems in the brains of jawed
              vertebrates (gnathostomes) is the apparent duplication of genes that produce
              useful neuropeptide compounds.  For example, in mammals there are four
              neuropeptide precursors (proenkephalin, prodynorphin, proopiomelanocortin, and
              proorphanin) that produce opiate-like peptides (opioids) or nociceptic-like
              peptides (orphanins).  These four precursors are members of a gene family, the
              opioid/orphanin family, and the apparent redundancy of genes in this family in
              fact reflects the evolutionary history of the vertebrates.  Gene duplication
              events at discrete points in vertebrate evolution have allowed for the layering
              of neuropeptide networks over time, and have led to a diversification in
              function of these peptide products, including roles in analgesia, nociception,
              motor control, and feeding.  This project combines molecular biology procedures
              with a comparative approach to define trends in the evolutionary radiation of
              the orphanin/opioid gene family in gnathostomes.   The cloning and sequencing
              of cDNAs, coupled with the measurement of gene expression by real-time PCR,
              will generate a database of sequences for each gene in the family that will be
              used to perform cladistic analyses and to identify novel opioid sequences.  By
              examining selected vertebrate lineages where the evolution of this gene family
              has been slower than in mammals or teleost fish, it is possible to make
              inferences about the origin and transitions in the sequential evolution of this
              gene family.  These data will test the 'proenkephalin hypothesis' that the
              ancestral gene in the opioid/orphanin gene family was a gene that coded for the
              enkephalin-like product.  Results will provide a new level of understanding of
              the evolutionary mechanisms underlying the functional diversity in this
              important family of neuropeptides.
    The impact of this project will extend
              beyond neuroendocrinology to molecular neurobiology in general, and to
              evolutionary biology with respect to the trends that promote species diversity.
               Multi-disciplinary undergraduate and graduate training also is an important
              component of this project.

