Title       : EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0132534

Award Number: 0132534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Waxman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy P. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Oklahoma EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will build two new
              statewide research programs, the Oklahoma Functional Genomics Consortium and
              the Oklahoma Network for Nanostructured Materials (NanoNet).  Both programs are
              based on existing strengths at State research universities and each addresses a
              field of current national priority.  Functional genomics follows the completion
              of large-scale genome projects and enables biologists to explore how genes
              interact with each other and the environment in complex biological systems. 
              Research in this field is vital not only for enhancing fundamental
              understanding of genetics, but also for improving both human health and the
              agricultural industry, which is critically important to the economy of both
              Oklahoma and the nation.  Nanotechnology is based on the observation that
              nanostructured materials have electrical, optical, and chemical properties that
              are different from those of molecules and different from those of bulk
              materials.  Future technology that exploits these new properties will have
              major impact on the economy of the State, the nation and the world. 
              Development of nanotechnology research infrastructure will enable Oklahoma both
              to compete for major research funding and to grow industries that depend upon
              highly skilled workers.  

Oklahoma has developed a strong spirit of
              interdisciplinary and inter-institutional collaboration among its
              research-intensive campuses.  The Oklahoma Network for Nanostructured Materials
              (NanoNet) and the Oklahoma Functional Genomics Consortium will be formed by
              investigators at Oklahoma State University, the University of Oklahoma at
              Norman, the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, the University of
              Tulsa, and the nonprofit Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, in partnership
              with the private sector to implement the goal of attaining sustainable research
              infrastructure through nanotechnolgy and genomics.   

