Title       : Acquisition of a Laser-Flash Apparatus for Measurement of Thermal Diffusivity to
               2000C
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0132275

Award Number: 0132275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Hofmeister hofmeist@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0132275
Hofmeister

Heat transport pertains to problems on all scales in
              Earth science, e.g., laboratory experiments, crystallization and texture of
              igneous rocks, ductile faulting, mantle plumes, Earth's convection patterns,
              and planetary formation and evolution. Understanding such processes requires
              knowledge of either the thermal diffusivity (D) or the thermal conductivity (k
              = DrCV ). The physical property k describes the rate at which heat flows from
              the hot to the cold end of a rigid material, and thus pertains to conductive
              processes. When the material flows as well (convective processes), D applies. 
              Because density (r) and heat capacity (CV) at temperature are well-constrained
              or readily predicted, measurements of D provide the data needed to understand
              heat transport.  However, the temperature dependence of D is generally unknown
              for geological and planetary materials and the available data are inconsistent.
              Disparities exist in the previous methods because heat is transported as light
              over the short scales of the experiments in a manner that is specific to a
              given experiment. The results are thus not a material property.  This complex
              situation exists because planetary materials are transparent at some
              wavelengths of light (and light is heat). Technological advances in materials
              science have led to a device which overcomes this problem. Funds from this
              grant will support acquisition of such a laser-flash apparatus to measure
              thermal diffusivity (D) from room temperature to 2000oC. No comparable
              instrument exists in Earth Science research facilities in the U.S.  The
              apparatus not only doubles the 1000oC range typical for the scant existing
              data, most of which are 30 years old, but is easy and rapid to use, and
              provides D(T) on melts. The data generated by the laser flash apparatus provide
              the needed tests for the T dependence for phenomenological models for k. 
              Combining theory and experiment not only allows extrapolation of measured D and
              k to all conditions of interest to Earth science, but will further our
              understanding of the microscopic basis of transport properties.
***

