Title       : Microbial Observatories: Intra-annual Diversity and Dynamics of Chesapeake Bay
               Virioplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0132070

Award Number: 0132070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $989663             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. E. Wommack wommack@dbi.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D W. Coats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. K. Eric Wommack (University of Delaware), Feng
              Chen (University of Maryland), and D. Wayne Coats (Smithsonian Environmental
              Research Laboratory) to characterize novel viruses and investigate their role
              and importance in the annual plankton cycle of the Chesapeake Bay.  For over a
              decade scientists have known that viruses are the most abundant biological
              entities in marine and aquatic environments.  In the rich, productive estuarine
              waters of the Chesapeake, viral abundance is around 10 million viruses per
              milliliter; exceeding bacterial abundance by a factor of 10.  Collectively
              these populations, comprised principally of bacterial and algal viruses, are
              known as the virioplankton.   The specific identity of the vast majority of
              these strains is still unknown to science.  This study will be the first to
              apply comprehensive characterization and monitoring of virioplankton
              populations within an estuary over several annual cycles.  Methodological
              approaches will include the use of molecular genetic and genomics tools to
              identify changes in the composition and diversity of Chesapeake Bay
              virioplankton.  These observations will be interpreted in light of the
              physio-chemical and biological changes which occur seasonally in the
              Chesapeake.  In addition, viruses infecting important microorganisms occurring
              in the Chesapeake will be isolated in an effort to characterize specific
              virus-host interactions.  

The broad question poised to marine scientists
              since the discovery of high viral abundance is: what is the diversity of these
              viruses, and what role do they play in the maintenance and function of marine
              microbial ecosystems?  Ultimately, these microbial communities comprised of
              bacteria, unicellular protists, and viruses determine the fate of nutrients and
              pollutants in coastal waters; and are at the center of the marine food web.  A
              more complete understanding of the inner workings of marine microbial
              communities will assist in efforts to assess, maintain and even restore the
              health of marine and estuarine ecosystems.

