Title       : International Collaborative Expedition to Collect and Study Fish Indigenous to
               Sub-Antarctic Habitats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0132032

Award Number: 0132032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156109             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. William Detrich ICEMAN@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Notothenioid fish are a major group of fish in the Southern Ocean. The ancestral
              notothenioid fish stock of Antarctica probably arose as a sluggish,
              bottom-dwelling perciform species that evolved some 40-60 million years ago in
              the then temperate shelf waters of the Antarctic continent. The grounding of
              the ice sheet on the continental shelf and changing trophic conditions may have
              eliminated the taxonomically diverse late Eocene fauna and initiated the
              original diversification of notothenioids. On the High Antarctic shelf,
              notothenioids today dominate the ichthyofauna in terms of species diversity,
              abundance and biomass, the latter two at levels of 90-95%. Since the
              International Geophysical Year of 1957-58, fish biologists from the Antarctic
              Treaty nations have made impressive progress in understanding the notothenioid
              ichthyofauna of the cold Antarctic marine ecosystem. However, integration of
              this work into the broader marine context has been limited, largely due to lack
              of access to, and analysis of, specimens of Sub-Antarctic notothenioid fishes.
              Sub-Antarctic fishes of the notothenioid suborder are critical for a complete
              understanding of the evolution, population dynamics, eco-physiology, and
              eco-biochemistry of their Antarctic relatives. This project will support an
              international, collaborative research cruise to collect and study fish
              indigenous to sub-antarctic habitats. The topics included in the research plans
              of the international team of researchers includes Systematics and Evolutionary
              Studies; Life History Strategies and Population Dynamics; Physiological,
              Biochemical, and Molecular Biological Investigations of Major Organ and Tissue
              Systems; Genomic Resources for the Sub-Antarctic Notothenioids; and Ecological
              Studies of Transitional Benthic Invertebrates. In a world that is experiencing
              changes in global climate, the loss of biological diversity, and the depletion
              of marine fisheries, the Antarctic, Sub-Antarctic, and their biota offer
              compelling natural laboratories for understanding the evolutionary impacts of
              these processes. The proposed work will contribute to development of a baseline
              understanding of these sensitive ecosystems, one against which future changes
              in species distribution and survival may be evaluated judiciously.
