Title       : CAREER: Intelligent Argument Generation in Text and Information Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0132821

Award Number: 0132821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Green nlgreen@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award.  The research will
              develop techniques for computer systems to communicate technical arguments to
              people without technical training, using integrated text and data graphics.  It
              will integrate empirical methods from computational linguistics and
              human-computer interaction.  Empirical methods will be used to determine
              appropriate techniques for conveying technical arguments to people with
              non-technical backgrounds.  Initially, the project will develop analytical
              methods based on a corpus of human-authored multimedia presentations.  For
              example, corpus studies can determine which features of arguments suggest where
              supporting graphics should be placed.  Next, human-computer interaction
              experiments will be used to determine the effectiveness of techniques based on
              the analytical models, and to investigate alternatives to the techniques that
              are shown not to be sufficient.  The resulting empirically-based techniques
              will be incorporated into computational models that will extend current
              approaches in natural language generation, automated graphic design, and
              intelligent multimedia presentation systems.  The computational models will be
              demonstrated with a prototype system for genetic counseling.  The educational
              component of this project will include new course curriculum, provide
              undergraduate and graduate computer science students with the opportunity to
              participate in research, and develop a laboratory for human-computer
              interaction studies that will be a resource for students and other faculty
              members.

This CAREER award recognizes and supports the early
              career-development activities of a teacher-scholar who is likely to become an
              academic leader of the twenty-first century.  Her research seeks solutions for
              the problem that people who lack appropriate technical training are faced with
              increasing responsibility for making vital decisions based on technical
              arguments, often involving quantitative and statistical data.  If successful in
              the area of genetic counseling, the approach could be applied to many other
              areas where decision makers need help in using technical information and
              analyses.

