Title       : CAREER: Efficient and Realistic Spatial/Temporal Appearance Details
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0132970

Award Number: 0132970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yizhou Yu yyz@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0132970
Yu, Yizhou
U of Ill - Champaign

This project addresses the problem
              of recovering and synthetically generating realistic appearance details. 
              Appearance details include color/reflectance variations, small geometric
              features on 3D surfaces, and the change of these high-resolution geometric and
              physical properties at different times. We call these details 3D and temporal
              textures in contrast to 2D textures which only have color variations in a 2D
              space. 

This project  describes fundamental research in four classes of
              problems surrounding 3D and temporal textures:

(1) the development of a
              unified framework for texture modeling considering 3D spatially and temporally
              varying details;

(2) the development of novel algorithms that either recover
              high-quality appearance details from photographs and videos or generate them
              synthetically;

(3) the development of efficient synthesis algorithms that
              can generate novel instances of 3D and temporal textures from given
              examples;

(4) the investigation of efficient representation and compression
              schemes for 3D and temporal textures.

This project will result in
              significant advances in 3D and temporal appearance modeling and synthesis, and
              therefore lead to overall qualitative improvement of the synthetic imagery
              created by graphics approaches.

3D and temporal textures complement
              geometric modeling and physical simulation.  Addressing the proposed problem
              will greatly benefit these and other related research directions. Recent
              advances in physics-based simulation made it possible to generate synthetic
              imagery from solving light transport and motion equations.  While these
              simulation-based techniques are quite expensive, the results generated from
              these techniques are often found to be too clean and smooth to look realistic
              enough.  Incorporating appearance details into these methods would be highly
              desirable.  Meanwhile, recent geometric reconstruction techniques from images
              and laser range scans have made it possible to acquire high-quality geometric
              models. 

Appearance modeling is becoming increasingly important in computer
              graphics applications where the efficient and realistic representation of
              details is essential.  This work will be able to produce statistically correct,
              physically plausible appearance details in an efficient manner. In the film
              industry, high-quality hair models and skin surface details will dramatically
              shrink the gap between synthetic and real characters. In the game industry,
              real-time 3D and temporal textures will bring virtual environments a large step
              closer to reality. This holds true for a large number of applications including
              electronic commerce, TV and Web content production, human computer interaction,
              architectural and archeological walkthroughs.

Altogether, the expected
              outcome of the project will be the development of important new techniques and
              results that provide real-world applications with useful solutions,
              cross-fertilization between computer graphics and other related areas (such as
              image processing and computer vision), and curricular innovations.

