Title       : Collaborative Research: Topics in Many-Body Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0132555

Award Number: 0132555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dietrich Belitz belitz@greatwhite.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education
              in the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor
              Kirkpatrick at the University of Maryland (DMR-0132726).  The main objective of
              the project is to enhance the current understanding of many-electron systems at
              very low temperatures, and especially of phase transitions and other collective
              phenomena in such systems. The PIs will apply an effective field theory,
              developed during previous grant periods, to various collective phenomena of
              electrons in solids. The methods employed are general field theoretic
              techniques and the renormalization group. Specific systems for which this
              project is relevant include, magnets, superconductors, and doped
              semiconductors. The successful completion of this project will contribute to
              the understanding of an important area of condensed matter physics, and will
              train technical personnel with theoretical expertise in this field.
%%%
This
              is a collaborative award that supports theoretical research and education in
              the area of condensed matter theory. The collaborator is professor Kirkpatrick
              at the University of Maryland (DMR-0132726).  The research focuses on
              fundamental problems of condensed matter physics involving strong electronic
              correlations in clean and disordered systems. Specific topics of study include
              quantum phase transitions in ferromagnets and superconductors, the coexistence
              of superconductivity and ferromagnetism in UGe2, and how electronic
              correlations affect the metal-insulator transition. Quantum phase transitions
              occur at zero temperature and are driven by quantum fluctuations in contrast to
              the more familiar and well-understood phase transitions that are driven by
              thermal fluctuations and have non-zero transition temperatures. Critical
              fluctuations associated with quantum phase transitions may influence electronic
              behavior over a wide temperature range and may explain unusual electronic
              properties exhibited by materials with strong electronic correlations and other
              condensed matter systems. The award also supports education in advanced
              theoretical methods for condensed matter
              phenomena.
***


























