Title       : Microporosity Formation in Alloy Solidification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0132225

Award Number: 0132225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Beckermann becker@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to advance fundamental understanding of
              microporosity formation during solidification of alloys. The single most
              important feature of the research is that it focuses solely on the microscopic
              scale (on the order of microns) where nucleation, interfaces, growth
              morphologies, and micro-flows can be directly observed. Previous studies of
              microporosity formation have been concerned with larger length scales and have
              not resolved the actual solid and pore microstructures. The study will provide
              valuable knowledge of pore nucleation and growth rates, microscopic flow and
              solute fields in the solid-liquid-gas system present during pore formation, and
              the interactions between the pores and the evolving microstructure.  The
              research will be accomplished through the combined use of novel modeling,
              numerical simulation, and experimental techniques. A phase-field method will be
              developed to model the complex phase transformation and transport phenomena
              present, including multi-component thermodynamics, curvature effects, and
              convection. Modern numerical techniques, such as deforming finite element
              meshes and highly efficient parallel solvers, will be employed to solve the
              model equations. The experiments will use transparent model alloys inside a
              Hele-Shaw cell under a high-resolution microscope. In the experiments, the
              initial gas content and the solidification conditions will be carefully
              controlled. The model predictions will be validated by the experimental
              measurements.

The work finds application in nearly every metal casting
              process. The problem of microporosity is of renewed interest because of the
              dramatically increased use of castings in the automotive and aerospace
              industries. Only the detailed prediction of microporosity can aid in its
              prevention and in assessing its influence on the strength and fatigue life of
              cast components. The transfer of the knowledge obtained through the proposed
              project will take place through continued collaboration with the casting
              industry, the development of improved microporosity models for use in casting
              simulation software, and the education of students. From a more fundamental
              point of view, the project will advance a largely uncharted area of research
              that is concerned with micro-scale, multi-component, multi-phase systems with
              phase change. Such systems are important not only in metal casting, but also in
              other materials processing operations, in nature, and in living organisms.


