Title       : Phase II Technician Support for Noble Gas Geochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0132265

Award Number: 0132265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0132265
Kurz

This award will provide partial support for Dempsey Lott in
              the Isotope Geochemistry Facility at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
              (WHOI), under the guidelines for  Phase II technician support in the EAR
              Instrumentation and Facilities Program.  Lott will have responsibility for
              maintenance, training, and technical support associated with the WHOI noble gas
              and thermal ionization mass spectrometers, under the supervision of Dr. M. D.
              Kurz.  The laboratory has specialized in helium and neon isotopic measurements
              in seawater, groundwater, and a variety of rocks and minerals, for a diverse
              set of scientific programs.  Active projects include mantle noble gas
              measurements from the Hawaiian Scientific Drilling Project (Mauna Kea volcano)
              and submarine lava flows from various locations (ocean islands and ocean
              ridges), helium-3 surface exposure dating from surficial Galapagos lava flows,
              and surface exposure dating from various glacial deposits (Western USA,
              Patagonia, Antarctica).  An important goal of the proposed research is to
              expand measurement capabilities to the heavy noble gases, which will involve
              some technique developement.  Specifically we will utilize a newly designed
              stainless steel cryogenic trap that performs significantly better than
              conventional (charcoal) traps, and will have applications to many aspects of
              noble gas geochemistry.  The technical expertise of Lott will help make the
              noble gas measurement capability accessible to many researchers at WHOI and
              also the broader U.S. earth science community.


