Title       : Microbial Observatories: Anhydrophilic, Halotolerant Microbial Mats of San
               Salvador Island, Bahamas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0132528

Award Number: 0132528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $853720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans W. Paerl hpaerl@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan W. Decho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Pinckney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy F. Steppe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Hans Paerl and Timothy Steppe (University of North Carolina at Chapel
              Hill), Alan Decho (University of South Carolina at Columbia), James Pinckney
              (Texas A & M University) are examining the community structure and function of
              highly-diverse microbial mats located in lakes on San Salvador Island, Bahamas.
               Because water evaporation exceeds rain precipitation on San Salvador,
              lakewater salinity can reach up to five times that of normal seawater. 
              Interannual and seasonal variability in rainfall causes lake-levels and
              salinities to fluctuate greatly.  Consequently, the microbial mats, which cover
              extensive portions of the lake bottoms and control the lakes' ecology, are
              subjected to prolonged periods of harsh, potentially lethal constraints such as
              desiccation, intense solar radiation, and high temperatures.  Yet, they manage
              to grow and survive under some of the most extreme conditions on the planet. 
              The objective of this study is to assess the influence water availability has
              on the structural diversification, community composition, production, and
              carbon sequestration in microbial mats over a five-year period.  A particular
              emphasis will be placed on culturing and characterizing novel organisms that
              are adapted to water-stressed environments.  State of the art molecular
              biological, polymer chemistry, physiological, and microbiological techniques
              will be employed to accomplish the research goals.

Water is indispensable
              for life.  The proposed work addresses a fundamental mechanism that is
              essential to all life, the ability to conserve water and balance ions. 
              Understanding and characterizing water-stressed microbial communities may
              provide information crucial for understanding key controls of life processes on
              other planets and moons where water may exist.  Anhydrophilic communities exist
              under 'feast or famine' conditions with regard to water availability.  Rainfall
              on San Salvador is episodic and largely confined to major storms, including
              hurricanes to which the island is often subjected.  Monitoring the
              physiological responses of pristine anhydrophilic communities over time and
              under different hydrologic conditions will provide information necessary to
              understanding how long and short term climatic oscillations (including a
              predicted 10 to 40 year period of elevated hurricane activity) impact critical
              life-sustaining processes.  Culturing individual populations will provide
              specific information for understanding the biology of anhydrophilic life forms
              that may be exploited for industrial or medical purposes.


