Title       : Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota (ASEND)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0132289

Award Number: 0132289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Sheridan Mark_Sheridan@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The North Dakota "Advancing Science Excellence in North Dakota (ASEND)"
              initiative is aimed at expanding the research capacity of North Dakota and to
              strengthen its ability to participate in the nation's mainstream science,
              engineering, and mathematics (SEM) enterprise.  This initiative capitalizes on
              North Dakota's existing research strengths and takes advantage of opportunities
              to integrate research into education and into the economy of the state. The
              ASEND initiative will develop SEM infrastructure at North Dakota State
              University (NDSU) and the University of North Dakota (UND) 

North Dakota
              (ND) will focus on three research areas: catalysis, biocomplexity and
              multisensory integration.  Each of these areas has been identified as niche to
              the state and contributing to national interests.  In the area of catalysis, an
              interdisciplinary network of researchers will build on ND's current expertise
              in polymers and combinatorial chemistry to develop novel processes and
              materials, particularly those with technology transfer/commercialization
              potential. The biocomplexity focus area will concentrate initially on the
              influence of parasitism on biocomplexity.  An interdisciplinary team of
              researchers will investigate the role of parasites on host population genetics,
              landscape ecology, sexual selection, host bioenergetics, biodiversity and
              evolution. The multisensory integration research area will bring together
              cognitive and sensory psychologists with neurophysiologists to study sensation,
              perception, cognition and action.  Researchers will investigate the sites,
              structures and processes of neural activity associated with multisensory
              integration.   Potential applications include the development and evaluation of
              virtual environments.  

In addition to the research efforts, the ND project
              includes a multifaceted human resource development program designed to increase
              the opportunities available for students of the ND University System to
              participate in research and to increase the number of members of
              underrepresented groups (e.g., low income, first-generation college, women,
              Native Americans) involved in SEM research activity.  Moreover, a technology
              transfer program designed to facilitate academic-private sector partnerships
              and integration of research into the economy of the state will be implemented. 
              The technology transfer effort includes programs linking undergraduate
              students, graduate students and faculty with local industries and a commercial
              feasibility support program.





