Title       : Social Stigma vs. Situational Status in Dyadic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0132420

Award Number: 0132420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Richeson Jennifer.Richeson@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9135,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this planning grant is to initiate a program of research
              examining the influence of situational status-defining roles on cognitive,
              affective, and behavioral dynamics of intergroup dyadic interactions.
              Specifically, this research explores how situational status impacts dyadic
              interactions between members of traditionally stigmatized groups (African
              Americans and women in workplace contexts), and members of traditionally
              nonstigmatized groups (White Americans and men). Three distinct dyadic types
              emerge from combinations of situational and socio-cultural status:
              status-congruent, status-reversed, and equal-status. The studies provide an
              initial foray into the impact of these three dyadic types on an important
              dynamic of intergroup relations: intergroup attitudes. Previous research and
              theory make conflicting predictions about how these dyadic types affect the
              attitudes of members of dominant groups regarding the stigmatized outgroup. The
              research examines whether explicitly endorsed attitudes moderate the effects of
              dyadic type, and possibly, therefore, resolve current discrepancies in the
              literature. Nonverbal behavioral correlates of the effects of status-congruent,
              equal-status, and status-reversed interactions on automatic attitudes are also
              investigated. These planning activities are expected to launch a program of
              research, investigating the influences of structural factors (such as
              interaction roles) and motivational factors (such as interaction goals) on
              multiple dynamics of intergroup dyadic interactions. The findings will help our
              understanding of intergroup conflict, as well as elucidate pitfalls in current
              approaches to prejudice reduction.

