Title       : The Phylogeny of Xantusiidae, and its Placement with Scleroglossa (Reptilia:
               Squamata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0132227

Award Number: 0132227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Sites Jack_Sites@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. McClellan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica A. Maisano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Lee Bezy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacques A. Gauthier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Relationships among the "night lizards" (Xantusiidae) have been problematic for
              over a century. Because of the group's antiquity, knowledge of its most
              primitive members is critical for understanding the deep evolutionary history
              of the larger group of lizards called scleroglossans.  Scleroglossa, which
              includes snakes and their ancestors, is unique among amniotes (reptiles, birds,
              and mammals) in the repeated evolution of body elongation and limb reduction,
              Xantusiidae is a "tree-changing" group in that its alternative placements can
              alter hypothesized relationships among most other scleroglossan groups, but too
              few data are available to infer the exact placement of Xantusiidae.  Thus, this
              project will: (1) reconstruct the phylogeny of the Xantusiidae based on the
              most extensive taxonomic sampling attempted to date; (2) use this  phylogeny as
              a framework for a detailed study of the mutational dynamics and evolution of
              the mitochondrial cytochrome-b (cyt-b) gene; and (3) use the phylogeny to infer
              the exact position of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa.
	This study will use
              both molecular and morphological data sets.  The molecular sampling of relevant
              xantusiid species/populations is virtually complete; approximately  4500 base
              pairs (bp) of DNA sequence data will be collected for about 80 individuals,
              representing regions of several nuclear and mitochondrial genes (including the
              entire cyt-b gene).  Extensive morphological data will be collected, including
              internal cranial characters revealed via high-resolution X-ray CT (HRCT) scans
              of all named fossil and extant xantusiids.  HRCT will permit nondestructive
              collection of novel characters from fossils still embedded in matrix and
              critically important type specimens too precious to dissect.  All characters
              will be combined and subjected to extensive computer analyses run on parallel
              clusters to ensure exhaustive searches of tree space.  Mitochondrial cyt-b
              sequences will be mapped onto the resulting phylogenetic hypothesis for
              statistical studies of mutational dynamics across all levels of divergence in
              the Xantusiidae.  This project will also support a large sequencing effort to
              address placement of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa, including at least 8500
              bp from 6 - 8 nuclear genes and some of the same mtDNA gene regions used for
              Xantusiidae.  Preliminary data (HRCT scans) will be collected for selected
              scleroglossan taxa for preparation of a proposal to support a complimentary
              morphological study of the placement of Xantusiidae within Scleroglossa.
              
	This study will provide extensive morphological and molecular data sets, and
              a complete survey of cyt-b mutational dynamics, for an entire group of lizards
              (Xantusiidae).  The group's small size will permit thorough explorations of
              tree search strategies for both data sets, sensitivity analyses to different
              character coding schemes and assumptions about character evolution, and
              determination of the group's basal members.  This will in turn provide an
              understanding of character state distributions within Xantusiidae, which is key
              to its placement within Scleroglossa and therefore to understanding the
              evolution of this larger group.  Extensive data sets will be generated
              including novel nuclear genes (optimized and made available for studies of
              other lizard groups) and novel cranial characters revealed via HRCT (and made
              available as an online resource).  The study will provide extensive
              opportunities for undergraduate student training.

