Title       : Hula-Twist, A Supramolecular Photochemical Reaction Mechanism. A New Perspective
               of Photoisomerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0132250

Award Number: 0132250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. H. Liu rliu@gold.chem.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Asato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
              Chemistry Division, Professor Robert S. H. Liu, of the Department of Chemistry
              at the University of Hawaii- Manoa, will study a volume-conserving
              photochemical cis-trans isomerization reaction mechanism postulated in 1985 to
              account for the rapid photoisomerization reaction of the retinyl chromophore in
              the visual pigment rhodopsin. This mechanism is referred to as the Hula-Twist
              (HT). Its salient stereochemical feature is the simultaneous configurational
              and conformational transformation of two adjacent double and single bonds.
              Model compounds designed to provide distinguishable chemistry between
              Hula-Twist (HT) and the conventional one-bond-flip (OBF) mechanism will be
              prepared and their photochemical and photophysical properties will be examined.
              The medium is expected to play an important role to inhibit the OBF process
              allowing detection of the normally more difficult HT process. However, other
              conditions that might result in re-directing molecules from reacting in an OBF
              manner to the HT manner are also present and discussed. Meaningful model
              compounds used for test experiments are proposed. Among photosensitive
              bio-molecules containing a Pollyanna chromophore, the isomerization of PYP
              (photoactive yellow protein that makes bacteria response repulsively toward
              blue light) and bilirubin (the yellow bile pigment involved in jaundice and its
              phototherapy) can be rationalized by the involvement of HT in their
              photochemical reactions. Experiments are now proposed to prove unambiguously of
              its involvement. For the visual pigment rhodopsin and the energy storage system
              bacteriorhodopsin, HT is no longer considered likely to be the sole process
              responsible for the observed photochemistry. Recent X-ray crystal structural
              work on the primary photoproduct of bR (K) showed that the structure is not
              that from the once proposed HT -I 4 process. A modified pathway for both bR and
              rhodopsin is now proposed. HT has been retained in the initial photochemical
              process. However, before its completion, the process is likely to be
              re-directed by the rigid protein cavity to a series of volume-conserving
              bicycle pedal (BP) processes (in the ground state) leading to the more stable
              13-cis or all-trans products. New experiments designed to test these ideas are
              proposed. The proposed experiments will be carried out by Professor Liu's
              group, concentrating on chemical synthesis and low temperature
              photochemical-spectroscopic studies in collaboration with a network of
              international specialists (time-resolved UV-Vis and FT-IR and other
              spectroscopic and biophysical studies). The common goal is to understand the
              nature of the very fundamental photochemical cis-trans isomerization that
              happens in native systems as well as in laboratories and to determine the scope
              of the novel two-bond twist mechanism. Perhaps this research can finally
              provide a definitive answer to the question of how the seemingly
              volume-demanding photoisomerization process of a polyene chromophore in a
              highly specific protein binding site can take place in less than a picosecond,
              a time scale much too fast for protein reorganization.

