Title       : Microbial Observatories: Viruses from Yellowstone Thermal Acidic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0132156

Award Number: 0132156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Young myoung@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Mogk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Stedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francisco F. Roberto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mark Young and David Mogk (Montana State
              University-Bozeman) in collaboration with Drs. Kenneth Stedman (Portland State
              University) and Frank Roberto (DOE-INEEL Idaho Falls) to identify and
              characterize novel viruses from high temperature acidic environments present in
              Yellowstone National Park.  The goals of this grant are to discover and analyze
              previously unknown viruses from very hot (>178F) and acidic (pH < 4)
              environments, conditions approaching boiling battery acid, and to monitor the
              virus populations in these environments over time. Preliminary data indicates
              that the viruses in these environments are unique and quite unlike viruses
              found in more "normal" environments.  A combination of biochemical and
              molecular tools will be used to cultivate these viruses in the laboratory and
              to monitor their presence in Yellowstone's hot springs. In addition, detailed
              chemical analysis of these environments in which these viruses live will be
              performed.  All cultures and DNA obtained from this project will be stored in
              the Montana State University Thermal Biology Institute thermophile culture
              collection, providing biological materials for future screening

This
              research has broad implications. The detailed analysis of viruses has often led
              the way to fundamental breakthroughs in our understanding of the biochemistry
              of life (such as the discovery of DNA as the genetic material).  The research
              supported by this grant to characterize viruses from extreme environments is
              likely to lead to new and fundamental understanding of biological adaptations
              required for life at high temperatures.  Presently, we only have a rudimentary
              understanding of how organisms survive in extreme environments and how they
              have adapted to their unique chemical environments. The discovery and analysis
              of viruses from high temperature environments is an important step in the
              understanding how these unusual microbial communities operate.  In addition,
              these studies will provide additional insights into how life adapts to changes
              in all environments. This research will also determine if viruses can act as
              sensitive biosensors of chemical and biological change. Finally, these studies
              will not only impact our understanding of life on earth but may also provide
              new insights in how to look for extraterrestrial life.  

