Title       : SGER: Apoptosis in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0132889

Award Number: 0132889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Lewis k.lewis@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1112      GENES AND GENOME SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              When a bacterial cell dies, the cause of death is often autolysis, rather than
              direct damage produced by a harmful factor. Hydrolysis of peptidoglycan is a
              necessary stage in cell wall synthesis, and autolysis has been viewed as a
              result of "disbalance between peptidoglycan synthesis and hydrolysis",
              essentially a maladaptive mistake. This project explores the hypothesis that
              autolysis is not a mistake, but adaptive programmed death. Autolysis is part of
              the developmental process of fruiting body formation and sporulation in
              Myxococcus. Autolysis which is required for natural transformation in S.
              pneumoniae is another example of specialized adaptive programmed death.
              Bacteria show many features of complex organization, similar to multicellular
              organisms. Like in multicellular species, a bacterial population would benefit
              from eliminating defective cells. The aim of this project is to test the
              feasibility of the idea that autolysis is the mechanism of adaptive apoptosis
              in bacteria. Specifically, a search for regulatory components of a possible
              apoptotic pathway linking particular types of cell damage to activation of
              autolysins is being undertaken. A genetic approach is being used to identify
              putative apoptotic genes. E. coli will be mutagenized with mini-Tn10 transposon
              and selected for survival to lethal levels of a mutagen; and high temperature.
              Mutants that show resistance to killing (but not resistance to growth in the
              presence of) both factors will become candidates for being affected in genes
              coding for apoptotic compounds. "Random" PCR will be used to identify the
              flanking DNA regions, amplified DNA will be sequenced by single passage,  and
              the genes carrying the Tn insertions will be identified using the database of
              the E. coli genome. The mutants will also be characterized phenotypically using
              a panel of different lethal factors. Strains with known mutations, such as
              those lacking autolysins, will also be tested for possible survival with the
              panel of lethal factors. This exploratory project will show whether E. coli has
              regulatory genes affecting autolysis and will lay the basis for future detailed
              studies of apoptosis in bacteria.
