Title       : CAREER: Enabling New Networking Applications and Distributed Systems with
               Mobile, Lightweight Protection Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0132817

Award Number: 0132817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Gribble gribble@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Advances in network and computing technologies have accelerated the
              proliferation of infrastructure
such as content distribution, caching,
              middleware services, and network measurement testbeds. Recently,
however, a
              number of new application domains are beginning to emerge that are not
              well-supported by
existing technologies, such as the ability to distribute
              dynamically generated or active content, to rapidly
deploy new and untrusted
              Internet services into existing infrastructure, and the ability to dynamically
              inject
network measurement code into an existing network experimentation
              infrastructure.
     These new application domains all share several security
              and resource management requirements: safely
executing untrusted code, scaling
              to a large number (100s or 1000s) of protection domains per physical host, and
              supporting a large degree of multiplexing of physical host resources across
              many concurrently active protection domains. Although there have been many
              sandboxing technologies proposed in the past, none of them have the combination
              of water-tight isolation and the ability to scale to a large number of
              protection
domains required by these new applications.
     The goal of this
              CAREER proposal is to enable this wide array of new networking and
              distributed
middleware applications by designing and implementing lightweight
              protection domains, technically focusing
on the notion of using virtual
              machine monitors (VMMs). A virtual machine monitor is a software layer
that
              runs immediately on top of the hardware/software boundary, virtualizing all
              names exposed by that
boundary to give higher-level virtual machines the
              illusion of their own dedicated physical machine. Virtual
machines are known
              to have strong isolation, and they are known to support code migration.
              However,
existing virtual machines and guest operating systems are typically
              heavyweight, permitting only a small
number (3-10) to concurrently execute on
              a single physical machine. The first research challenge posed in
this proposal
              is designing and implementing mechanisms for building lightweight VMMs, virtual
              machines,
and guest operating systems, so that 100s or 1000s can concurrently
              execute. An ancillary challenge implied
by this is resource management across
              virtual machines: to fully isolate one VM from another, each VM's
resource
              usage (e.g., CPU consumption, I/O rates, memory footprint) must be bounded by
              the VMM.
     Once the researchers have successfully implemented lightweight
              virtual machines, they intend to heavily leverage this new mechanism to explore
              several new research topics, as well as revisiting a few existing ones. For
              example,they will use virtual machines as a sandboxing mechanism enabling web
              servers to dynamically inject new content-generation code into content delivery
              networks or web caching systems. As another example, they will use VMs to
              enable untrusted code authors to upload new Internet services into a virtual
              hosting platform.  As a third example, the researchers plan on exploring the
              role of virtual machines as a resource container in cluster-of-workstations, in
              particular exploring the ability to dynamically alter relative resource
              consumption rates of virtual machines to create the effect of isolated \virtual
              clusters" within a single physical cluster.
     For the educational component
              of the CAREER proposal, the researchs plan on exploring the use of their
              virtual machine monitor as a substrate for supporting novel projects in
              undergraduate and graduate advanced
operating systems courses, such as CSE451
              and CSE551 at the University of Washington. A virtual machine
monitor is a
              natural place for supporting intricate debugging mechanisms, and hardware
              device emulation.
Having students augment the virtual machine monitor and use
              it to develop simple components of an
operating system will radically improve
              the students' understanding of OS issues, as they will be forced to
understand
              the interface between the OS and the hardware, as well as the structure of the
              OS itself. Finally,
this will also provide us with an opportunity to revise
              the OS course curriculum to include modern topics as
security, isolation,
              mobility, and OS support for embedded devices (which share characteristics of
              the virtual machines that we will emulate with our VMM).
