Title       : A Proposal for the Measurement and Analysis of Extremely Low Frequency (ELF)
               Waves at South Pole Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0132576

Award Number: 0132576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc R. Lessard marc.lessard@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. LaBelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will detect and record magnetic field fluctuations in the
              Extremely Low Frequency (ELF) range at South Pole Station. The range of
              frequencies being measured (1 to 350 Hz) encompasses interesting and important
              phenomena related to magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. The primary objective
              is to characterize auroral ion cyclotron waves, which, according to theory,
              modulate precipitating electron fluxes, causing the flickering in auroral
              luminosity emissions.   Substantial evidence now exists in support of this
              theory, although the excitation mechanism responsible for the ion cyclotron
              waves is somewhat uncertain.   Perhaps the most well-developed theory suggests
              that the waves result from an electron beam instability.   In any case, the
              frequency of the flickering or, equivalently, the frequency of the ground-based
              observations of ion cyclotron waves can be used to infer the altitude of the
              excitation mechanism, since the wave frequency depends on the strength of the
              known background magnetic field. As such, the information that will be acquired
              as part of this project can be used to test models of auroral acceleration
              mechanisms.
     The second objective of this project is to study dispersive
              ELF waves, a type of wave that has been reported in the literature only a few
              times, but one that may provide important information regarding substorm onset
              or, perhaps, boundaries of open and closed magnetic fields.   A first step in
              the project is to identify the wave mode and to determine the location and
              geomagnetic conditions under which these waves are observed.   Ultimately the
              most important parameter to be quantified is energy transfer, which occurs via
              Poynting fluxes and particle energy.   A significant fraction of the particle
              energy flux is associated with auroral phenomena, so to a great extent our
              knowledge of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling depends on how well we
              understand auroral processes.

