Title       : RUI: Halogenation of Model Compounds of the Humic Acids: Investigation of
               Contaminant Formation During Drinking Water Treatment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0132224

Award Number: 0132224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor L. Heasley vheasley@ptloma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Point Loma Nazarene Col
	      3900 Lomaland Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921062810    619/849-2200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to investigate the formation of drinking water
              contaminants.  Compounds which are formed by the reaction of chlorinating (and
              in some cases brominating) agents with humic acids and other organic materials
              will be studied.  A number of phenol and resorcinol related humic acid models,
              which have received little attention previously, will be chlorinated and
              brominated in a variety of solvents and the reaction products will be
              identified.  Reactions of dichloramine, the active chlorinating agent at near
              neutral pH in water, with phenols will be studied.  Reactions involving humic
              acid models and oxidants containing chlorine-oxygen bonds will also receive
              attention.  Similar studies with brominating agents will also be performed.
              

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research of Dr. Victor L. Heasley of the Department of Chemistry
              at Point Loma Nazarene College.  Dr. Heasley will explore contaminant formation
              which occurs during the treatment of drinking water with chlorinating agents. 
              Models of naturally occurring humic acids (plant material found in all waters)
              will be treated with chlorine and bromine and the reaction products determined.
               Understanding these reactions should provide information about how water
              purification can be accomplished in conjunction with minimizing the amount of
              these byproducts formed.  Students trained as a result of working on this RUI
              (Research in Undergraduate Institutions) project will gain experience in
              environmental chemistry as well as organic chemistry.   These undergraduate
              students typically go on to work in the pharmaceutical or specialty chemical
              industries or go on to advanced study in graduate or medical schools.




