Title       : High-Temperature Sorption Process for Oxygen Removal and Air Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0132684

Award Number: 0132684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry YS Lin jlin@alpha.che.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at studying fundamental issues related to the development
              of a new, efficient high-temperature oxygen sorption process based on
              perovskite-type ceramic sorbents for oxygen removal and air separation.  The
              new sorption process takes advantage of the unique properties of certain
              perovskite-type ceramics which can adsorb a large quantity of oxygen, but not
              other gases, at high temperatures (300-800oC).  Three perovskite-type ceramic
              materials with different compositions are selected as the sorbents for this
              study.   The sorbent pellets and particles of various sizes are prepared by
              citrate and press-sintering methods.  The thermodynamic defect equilibrium for
              oxygen sites in these ceramics is being studied experimentally by the
              gravimetric method and theoretically using point-defect and cluster-defect
              models.  This defect equilibrium study provides oxygen-sorption isotherm data
              for these sorbents.  Heat of sorption and order-disorder phase transformation
              of these ceramic sorbents is studied also by TGA/DSC.  Oxygen sorption kinetics
              on these ceramic sorbents are investigated experimentally by the transient
              gravimetric method and modeled using a simple linear-driving-force model and a
              more complex model based on the ambipolar diffusion theory.  The chemical and
              mechanical stability of the ceramic sorbent particles is being studied
              systematically by dilatometry and attrition tests.  Finally, fixed-bed
              experiments for oxygen removal or air separation are conducted to obtain data
              for design of a practical separation process based on this new concept.
              

This project represents the first effort in developing sorption processes
              based on this new group of non-traditional sorbents.   On the fundamental side,
              this project may lead to development of a large number of new sorption
              processes with unique separation characteristics that are not offered by the
              traditional sorption processes.   If a hydrocarbon is used to regenerate the
              sorbent, this process can be extended to provide new chemical reactors for
              partial oxidation of hydrocarbons with improved selectivity.  On the practical
              side, the proposed sorption process is based on perovskite-type ceramics with
              preferential equilibrium sorption for oxygen.  Successful development of this
              sorption process will have a significant impact on industrial processes for air
              separation and oxygen removal.  


