Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Arsenic in Biology and Medicine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0132855

Award Number: 0132855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16560              (Estimated)
Investigator: A Gandolfi gandolfi@pharmacy.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5921,9187,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0128922
Gandolfi

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on arsenic in biology and medicine to be
              held in Honolulu, Hawaii from December 15-20, 2002.  The co-organizers are
              Professor A. Jay Gandolfi at the University of Arizona and Professor Kazuo
              Suzuki of Chiba University in Japan.  Arsenic is a toxicant of worldwide
              concern.  Arsenic causes a range of toxic effect and is classed as a human
              carcinogen.  Arsenic can be present naturally in soil and water or can be
              released into our environment by man's activities (e.g.mining).  It appears in
              various oxidation states as both inorganic and organic forms.  Each of these
              has distinct toxicological properties.  Arsenic exposure can also be by
              ingestion (water, food) and inhalation (dust).  Being an element, arsenic
              cannot be destroyed and must be contained to control its toxic exposures.  The
              goals of the meeting are to:  A) discuss the dose-response relationship for
              cancer and non-cancer endpoints for target organs of arsenic toxicity;  B)
              determine the low-level dose-response effects for arsenic at concentrations
              relevant to those expected from arsenic contaminated drinking water;  C)
              evaluate in vitro models of arsenic-induced molecular toxicity and comparison
              of these results with those seen in arsenic-exposed populations; and  D)
              clarify whether there is a linear dose-response relationship for arsenic or if
              there is a threshold dose-response (a non-linear response).  Specific topics
              for discussion are:  1)  chronic arsenism caused by underground water;  2)
              chemical forms of arsenic and its metabolism;  3) mechanisms underlying the
              toxicity of arsenic;  4) mechanisms underlying the carcinogenicity of arsenic; 
              5) organ-specific toxicity of arsenic;  6) animal species-specific metabolism
              and toxicity of arsenic;  7) interaction of arsenic with other biological
              elements;  8) excretion and removal of arsenic (antidote to arsenism);  9)
              safety dose for chronic ingestion of arsenic;  and  10) genetic polymorphism
              and arsenic toxicity.

Concerns about the acceptable levels of arsenic in our
              environment are sweeping the world.   Arsenic toxicity and carcinogenicity
              represent one of the big challenges for researchers in the new millennium.  The
              recent efforts to change the drinking water standards for arsenic has
              stimulated numerous research investigations.  Since a majority of the
              investigations have been performed in the United States and Japan it is very
              timely to convene this joint meeting to share these studies. The project
              advances international human resources through the participation of a postdoc
              and graduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation. The researchers plan to publish proceedings of
              the seminar in a journal such as "Environmental Health Perspectives."

