Title       : South Carolina 2001 Research Infrastructure Improvement Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0132573

Award Number: 0132573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Druffel druffel@scra.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. L. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ya-Ping Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yusuf A. Hannun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Little  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Carolina Research Au
	      PO Box 12025
	      Columbia, SC  29211    803/799-4070

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The South Carolina EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will enhance
              the research infrastructure in nanoscience, structural and chemical biology,
              and bioengineering by adding a critical mass of researchers to these targeted
              areas.  The goal is to improve South Carolina's R&D competitiveness through the
              continued development and use of science and technology resources in the three
              major research universities (Clemson University, University of South Carolina,
              and the Medical University of South Carolina) and through productive, long-term
              partnerships between academia, government, and the private sector.   This
              project will enhance nanomaterials research at Clemson University in
              collaboration with the University of South Carolina, expand
              bioengineering/biomaterials research at Clemson University, develop and upgrade
              biomolecular structure research at the Medical University of South Carolina,
              and establish and expand statewide initiatives in education/outreach. Outreach
              initiatives to support interfaces with the state's four-year colleges, HBCUs
              and the private sector will also result from this funding.  Collaborative
              opportunities between faculty from HBCUs and those residing within the major
              research universities will further develop the state's research enterprise. 
              

Faculty hires in the nanomaterials/nanotechnology program at Clemson
              University will complement existing expertise in the state, benefit graduate
              and undergraduate education, and serve to stimulate the further development of
              the emerging knowledge-based, high-tech economy in South Carolina.  The Medical
              University of South Carolina will expand its biomolecular structure capacity
              and develop chemical biology through the addition of five new faculty. 
              Partnerships with the College of Charleston and interactions with state and
              federal agencies will add synergism and competitiveness in additional areas of
              research.  The bioengineering/biomaterials program will be used to establish a
              branch of the Clemson University Bioengineering Department at the Medical
              University of South Carolina staffed with new Clemson University bioengineering
              hires, and add new faculty at Clemson with expertise in molecular
              biology.





