Title       : CAREER: Scanning Tunneling Microscopy as a Synthetic Tool: C-C Coupling of
               Haloaromatic Reactants on Copper Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0132996

Award Number: 0132996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludwig Bartels ludwig.bartels@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project, in the laboratory of Professor Ludwig Bartels at the
              University of California-Riverside, uses scanning tunneling microscope methods
              as a tool in organic synthesis.  This early Career award supported by the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses the site directed synthesis
              of organic molecules bound to surfaces.  Building on recent work that
              demonstrated the synthesis of biphenyl from iodobenzene using the STM tip,
              Bartels and his coworkers will extend this approach to the synthesis of
              individual molecules having multiple elementary units.  This approach will
              allow the synthesis of molecules of exactly the desired conformation. 
              Application of this approach to the synthesis of chiral molecules of specific
              conformation is planned as well.  This basic research program will provide the
              background and understanding necessary for the development of molecular
              electronic devices and other nanomaterial synthesis strategies.   Professor
              Bartels is also developing a course focussing on semiconductor processing that
              will be taught in the Chemistry Department as a part of this Career award.

A
              detailed understanding of the construction of complex organic molecules will
              result from the work carried out in this Career award.  Professor Bartels and
              his coworkers will use STM to manipulate individual molecules, coupling various
              functionalities to make molecules of the desired conformation adsorbed on a
              substrate.  Coupling reactions will be used for the initial work, followed by
              more complex addition reactions.  A semiconductor processing course will be
              developed as part of this Career award. 
