Title       : Theoretical Studies of Chemistry in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a0130996

Award Number: 0130996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Jorgensen william.jorgensen@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              William Jorgensen of Yale University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical studies of organic
              chemistry in solution.  Chemical systems are modeled at the atomic level using
              molecular quantum mechanics, molecular mechanics, molecular dynamics, and Monte
              Carlo statistical mechanics.  The project includes the following efforts: (1)
              developing revised potential functions for organic molecules that are
              consistent with Jorgensen's improved computational model for liquid water, with
              testing that emphasizes Monte Carlo simulations for the proper use of pure
              organic liquids and free energies of hydration, (2) developing improved
              semiempirical  quantum mechanics methods to enable routine computational study
              of organic and enzymatic reactions in solution, (3) incorporating semiempirical
               configuration interaction into the quantum mechanics framework, with initial
              applications to solvolysis reactions and Bergman cyclization, and (4)
              initiating basic studies of intramolecular interactions with organofluorine
              compounds to complement current interest in perfluoroalkanes as solvents and in
              fluorophobic effects.  Outcomes are expected to enable an enhanced
              understanding of organic reactions, molecular properties, and intramolecular
              interactions that are central to chemistry and biochemistry. 

This research
              will reveal useful information on molecular processes in solution, and the ways
              in which molecules are affected by their solvent environment.  The theoretical
              studies closely parallel and complement experimental research on optimization
              of organic reactions and on the development of catalysts, selective receptors
              for organic molecules including drugs and metabolites, materials with novel
              properties, and molecular devices. 

