Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Work and Life in the New Economy: An Ethnography
               of High Tech Startup Companies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0130151

Award Number: 0130151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10089              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn M. Dudley kathryn.dudley@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              High-technology startup companies have been heralded as the future of work, but
              scholars have yet to examine the extent to which startups' organizational
              structures and corporate cultures differ from those of previous generations and
              other industries. This doctoral dissertation research by a cultural
              anthropologist in the American Studies program at Yale University tests the
              hypothesis that high-tech startups represent a new corporate form with unique
              implications for employees and the technologies they develop. This comparative
              ethnography of U.S. high-tech startups investigates employees' experiences and
              conceptions of work in a particular industry and organizational setting. Taking
              into account the unique demographics of the startup workforce, this study
              challenges received wisdom concerning the relationship between work and home
              life and elucidates the characteristics of a new generation of white-collar
              employees, salient topics considering recent economic and cultural shifts in
              the high-technology industry. In light of skyrocketing unemployment in the
              high-tech industry over the last half of 2001, interviews with unemployed
              high-tech workers supplement data collected on corporate employees. Methods
              include long-term participant observation, directed and open-ended interviews,
              video ethnography, surveys, analysis of labor force statistics, and historical
              study of management theory and the corporate form. This research advances our
              understanding of the place of work in contemporary life and the evolution of
              the corporate form, knowledge that will help employees, managers, and labor
              advocates modify the organization of corporate work and the quality of workers'
              experiences
