Title       : Na and Ca Transport Across the Plasma Membrane of Squid Giant Axons: Mechanisms
               of Metabolic Control of the Na/Ca Exchanger
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0130962

Award Number: 0130962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Beauge lbeauge@immf.uncor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,5911,9117,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Sodium/Calcium exchanger is an integral cell membrane protein in charge of
              regulation of intracellular Calcium concentration. It works as a
              counter-transport, exchanging one Calcium ion (two positive charges) for three
              Sodium ions (three positive charges) from different membrane sides; i.e. it is
              electrogenic because the unbalance of transported charges generates current.
              The energy for Calcium transport against a gradient is taken from the gradient
              of Sodium ions plus the electrical membrane potential difference across the
              membrane. In addition to Sodium-Calcium competition for the transporting sites,
              this mechanism displays regulation by intra- and extracellular ligands. There
              are two main types of regulation on the intracellular side: (1) Ionic: Sodium
              inactivation, Calcium  stimulation and Proton inhibition, and (2) Metabolic:
              ATP and phosphoarginine (PA) stimulation. Regulation by ATP requires Magnesium
              and also a low molecular weight soluble cytosolic regulatory protein (SCRP); PA
              needs Magnesium but no SCRP The metabolic pathways for ATP and PA are
              different. In the proposed work the investigator aims to individualize and
              characterize the interrelationships between ionic and metabolic regulation of
              the squid Sodium/Calcium exchanger by using two experimental preparations: (i)
              Squid axons under internal dialysis, an essentially "in vivo" preparation that
              permits ionic and biochemical control of intra- and extracellular environments,
              and (ii) Squid nerve membrane vesicles, that allow to perform parallel
              transport and biochemical assays. The plan includes: (i) To study the links
              between ATP, PA, Sodium and Protons and the relevance of the intracellular
              Magnesium in the modulation of the Sodium/Calcium exchanger; (ii) To use
              32P-labeled PA to investigate if there are membrane phosphorylations involved
              in the PA stimulation. (iii) To isolate and identify the low molecular weight
              soluble cytosolic regulatory protein (SCRP) essential for ATP regulation. It
              must be emphasized the broad impact of the expected results: First, provide
              insights on normal function of the cardiovascular system and brain. Second,
              help to understand diseases, like cardiac and brain hypoxia and ischemia, and
              hypertension, situations where the is a large imbalance of the ligands
              affecting one of the most important membrane system for cell Calcium regulation
              in brain and cardiovascular system, the Sodium/Calcium exchanger.



