Title       : Organization of Plant Metabolic Pathways and Subcellular Trafficking of
               Phytochemicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0130062

Award Number: 0130062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich Grotewold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Very little is known on how plant metabolic pathways are physically organized in
              the cell, or how plant metabolites are transported within or between cells. 
              These are problems of central importance for plants, because many metabolites
              are toxic or are synthesized distantly from where they accumulate.  The
              biosynthesis of flavonoid pigments and related metabolites provides a useful
              system to investigate the significance of the formation of large multi-enzyme
              complexes in the biosynthesis of phytochemicals, and to dissect the basic
              mechanisms by which plant metabolites are transported within cells.   The two
              main goals of this project are: 1) to investigate the subcellular localization
              and association of enzymes corresponding to two branches of maize flavonoid
              biosynthesis, and 2) to explore the distinct trafficking pathways of plant
              metabolites using inducible auto-fluorescent compounds.  To accomplish the
              first task, the subcellular localization of GFP-tagged enzymes corresponding to
              the two main branches of maize flavonoid biosynthesis will be examined in the
              presence and absence of the other enzymes in the pathway.  Each branch of the
              pathway can be independently induced using specific transcription factors.  The
              possibility that flavonoid biosynthetic enzymes physically interact will also
              be investigated, using complementary genetic and biochemical approaches. 
              Together, these studies will determine whether multi-enzyme complexes
              corresponding to different branches of a metabolic pathway form, and whether
              these complexes localize to different places in the cell.  For the second goal,
              previously identified green and yellow auto-fluorescent compounds will be
              isolated and chemically characterized.  The green auto-fluorescent compounds
              accumulate in structures, the green fluorescent bodies (GFBs), previously not
              recognized in plants, and which fuse with the plasma membrane.  These GFBs will
              be isolated and the proteins associated with them will be characterized.  These
              proteins will provide useful markers to investigate the biogenesis, cargo
              transport and fusion of these bodies to particular membrane domains.


