Title       : CISE Research Resources: From High Performance to Low Power: Infrastructure for
               Ubiquitous Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0130143

Award Number: 0130143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Sivasubramaniam anand@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mahmut T. Kandemir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Jane Irwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vijaykrishnan Narayanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130143
Anand Sivasubramaniam
Pennsylvania State University

CISE
              Research Resources:  From High performance to Low Power: Infrastructure for
              Ubiquitous Computing

This CISE Research Resources proposal asks to establish
              a computing infrastructure laboratory in the Department of Computer Science and
              Engineering at Pennsyvlvania State University.  The resources will include a 16
              node dual Pentium/Linux cluster connected by Gigabit Ethernet, laptops and PDAs
              with wireless LAN capabilities, and testing/measurement equipment for
              evaluating energy-performance trade-offs on the mobile devices.  This
              laboratory will support the research activities of the following NSF-funded
              projects:  1) Scheduling Support for High Performance Clusters; 2)
              Energy-Efficient Architctures and Their Interaction with Software: A Java
              Perspective; 3) EOC: An Energy-Aware Optimizing Compiler Framework; and 4)
              Optimization and integrated Control of Low Power Wireless Multimedia Networks. 
              These projects address different components of this ubiquitous computing
              infrastructure.  At the high performance end, the principal investigators will
              examine architectural and systems software issues in the design and deployment
              of clusters of workstations for the emerging and demanding applications (such
              as web services, databases, graphics and visualization applications, and
              multimedia) to provide high performance and guaranteed service.  At the
              resource-constrained end, they will examine architectural, runtime and
              compilation optimizations, specifically targeted for conserving battery energy
              and to make energy-performance trade-offs.  They also will examine the issue of
              wireless communication that is intended to seamlessly integrate the
              mobile/handheld devices with the servers (clusters) on the wired
              network.

The equipment will serve as a platform for the experimental
              activities and evaluation of prototypes in these projects.  The laboratory will
              also be used in many of the courses that we teach at the graduate and
              undergraduate level to introduce students to this important emerging topic.
