Title       : Large-Scale Phenomena in Anti-Predator Behavior: On the Consequences of Putting
               Predators Back Into Predator-Prey Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0130758

Award Number: 0130758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Lima lslima@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3551

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale phenomena in anti-predator behavior: on the consequences
of putting
              predators back into predator-prey interactions

PI - Steven L. Lima

Most
              studies on the anti-predator behavior of animals focus on a small area in which
              prey respond to an ambient level of predation risk imposed by predators.  The
              tendency has been to focus more the behavior of prey rather than predators, and
              the latter have usually been treated merely as a source of risk to prey rather
              than active participants in the behavioral interaction.  This small-scale
              perspective has revealed much about behavioral predator-prey interactions, but
              it has missed an entire class of behavioral interactions that exist at larger
              spatial scales.  To appreciate these large-scale interactions, one must think
              on the scale of an ecological landscape, or an area many km2 in extent-a scale
              much larger than usually considered by behavioral ecologists.  One must also
              put predators back into the picture by allowing them to be an active
              participant in the behavioral interaction.  More specifically, the proposed
              work is motivated by a simple question: what drives the movement of animals
              across a landscape?  The present (small-scale) consensus holds that movement by
              prey attracts predators, hence movement by prey must reflect a need to find new
              sources of food, etc. However, the results of a simulation model show that
              predator and prey may be involved in a large-scale shell game, in which
              predators move frequently in search of elusive prey, and prey move among
              feeding sites to remain elusive.  Furthermore, if prey in a given area are
              relatively difficult to locate, then predators will focus their attention
              elsewhere on more predictable prey, with the result that these predictable prey
              may initiate greater movement to avoid predators. This indirect interaction
              among prey (through their effect on the predator's behavior) represents a
              related large-scale phenomenon: the predator pass-along effect.  Under other
              circumstances, predators might avoid constantly attacking prey at a particular
              location in an effort to render them more catchable in the long-run. Such
              predatory behavior represents another large-scale effect: prey management by
              predators.  The further theoretical exploration of these large-scale phenomena
              is an important feature of the proposed work.
Much of the proposed work covers
              an empirical exploration of these large-scale behavioral interactions. This
              work focuses on the conceptually important paradigm of the small bird in
              winter, in which small birds must survive both the rigors of winter and the
              predatory onslaught of bird-eating Accipiter hawks. This task requires much
              basic biological research, as very little is known about the large-scale
              movements of small wintering birds or Accipiter hawks. The daily movements of
              hawks and their avian prey will be followed (via radiotracking techniques) over
              study areas many km2 in extent. Basic information will be established on hawk
              and prey home range sizes and movements. Using food manipulation sites
              established throughout a study area, the distribution and spatial
              predictability of prey birds will be altered experimentally. These food sites
              will be manipulated (established and withdrawn) in order to test predictions
              concerning shell games, predator pass-along effects, and prey management by
              predators. Conducting behavioral research at a large spatial scale presents
              unique challenges, but such work represents an important step in the study of
              predator-prey interactions, one that may ultimately shed much light on
              ecological systems in general.

