Title       : Origin and Development of the "Other-Race Effect" in Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0130826

Award Number: 0130826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257625             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Brigham brigham@psy.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Analyses of "wrongful convictions," cases in which subsequent evidence (e.g.,
              DNA analyses) has indicated that the convicted person was not guilty of the
              crime, have found that incorrect eyewitness identifications have led to more
              convictions of innocent people than have all other factors combined. Prior
              research has shown that a key factor on eyewitness mistakes is the tendency for
              people to recognize faces of a different race more poorly than faces of their
              own race; this phenomenon has been called the "other-race effect." Research
              with adults has clearly demonstrated the pervasiveness of this effect, but
              little is known about when this effect originates or what its course of
              development may be through childhood. This gap in knowledge is addressed in the
              current project by examining the effect in young African Americans and Whites
              at four developmental levels (second graders, sixth graders, tenth graders, and
              college sophomores). The goals of the project are to understand how the effect
              develops across childhood, and whether and how it can be changed. In addition
              to yielding important basic information about human perception and memory,
              these studies should provide useful information to those who work with children
              as witnesses in the criminal and civil justice systems. The findings should be
              particularly relevant to those who formulate policies about how best to obtain,
              interpret, and utilize eyewitness memory reports from children of various
              ages.

