Title       : The Genetics of Parental Care Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0130880

Award Number: 0130880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie edb3@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Genetics of Parental Care Behavior
Edmund D. Brodie IIII

The genetic
              control of behaviors involved in social interactions is difficult to understand
              because traits of one individual can be influenced by traits of individuals
              with which it interacts.  Such influences have traditionally been considered
              sources of environmental variation in phenotypes, but this view ignores the
              possibility that the 'environmental' influences can themselves be genetically
              determined. The result is a complex web of genetic effects that reach from
              traits in one individual to traits in another and allows environmental sources
              of variation to contribute to evolutionary change.  Indirect genetic effect
              (IGE) theory provides a framework for understanding such complex inheritance in
              terms of the quantitative genetic parameters and equations traditionally used
              to understand evolutionary processes.  The presence of IGEs can substantially
              alter evolutionary dynamics and outcomes, but virtually no empirical studies of
              IGEs are available with which to evaluate the general importance of IGEs in
              behavioral evolution.
	Parental care behavior is one of the most common
              examples of social interactions that can generate IGEs.  The behavior of both
              parents and offspring determines how much care parents provide, and parental
              care in turn influences many traits in offspring. If parent and offspring
              components of parental care are genetically variable, IGEs exist and can affect
              the evolution of parental care. The proposed research will investigate the
              genetics of maternal provisioning in the burrower bug, Sehirus cinctus. 
              Parental care in burrowers is limited to females, which provision their
              offspring with fruits from mint plants as the sole source of nutrition. 
              Previous research has shown that burrowers are an ideal system for studying the
              genetics of parental care because they can be readily cross-fostered, reared,
              and bred in captivity.
	The proposed work is divided into two parts designed
              to determine how genes in mothers and offspring interact to determine the
              inheritance of parental care behavior. Project 1 is an experimental
              investigation of how maternal care influences offspring traits that will reveal
              how traits in one generation influence traits in the next.  Project 2 combines
              a quantitative genetic breeding design with manipulative cross-fostering
              experiments to measure the relative importance of genes in parents and
              offspring in determining provisioning. This project will also determine
              patterns of genetic variation and covariation among parent and offspring
              components of provisioning behavior. Genetic variation is a requisite for the
              evolution of any trait.  IGE theory recognizes that genetic (co)variation for
              interacting phenotypes (e.g., parental care) need not be direct, but rather may
              exist through indirect pathways from social partners. Specific results from
              each project will be used to test assumptions and predictions of phenotypic
              models of parental care evolution. Moreover, this work will represent the first
              quantitative genetic study of parental care behavior to consider the importance
              of social context. 

