Title       : RUI: Mutagenesis and Mechanistic Studies of Firefly Luciferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0130908

Award Number: 0130908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Branchini brbra@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bioluminescence the emission of light by living organisms is a fascinating
              phenomenon that
has enchanted children and challenged those who have tried to
              fully understand it. Fireflies are
examples of bioluminescent beetles capable
              of emitting light of various colors from green to red.
The basic biochemistry
              of the firefly light emission process has many practical
              applications
including drug development, clinical trials and food testing.
              This project will investigate the key
firefly protein called luciferase that
              is responsible for the extraordinary biochemical light
process. The research
              is designed to identify important components of firefly luciferase and
              to
determine how specific amino acids work together to efficiently produce
              light of varying color.
Molecular biology techniques will be used to create
              and evaluate new luciferase proteins. The
results should contribute to a
              better understanding of firefly bioluminescence and the
fundamental process by
              which living organisms convert chemical energy into light. The
elucidation of
              the light-emitting process of firefly luciferase is important to the
              continued
development of significant useful applications. Additionally, a
              better understanding of the firefly
luciferase structure-function properties
              is important to fundamental biochemical processes with
significant practical
              applications extending beyond the realm of bioluminescence. This project
will
              be carried out at Connecticut College, a liberal arts college with a strong
              commitment to
undergraduate research experiences. Previous bioluminescence
              work directed by the principal
investigator for approximately 25 years has
              been highly appealing to undergraduate students.
Professional and students
              participants in this project will be involved in modern mainstream
biochemical
              and molecular biology research. It is expected that student participants will
              become
scientists well prepared for entry into graduate programs and
              professional scientific careers.
