Title       : Pokeweed Antiviral Protein and Inhibition of Ribosomal Frameshifting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0130531

Award Number: 0130531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Tumer Tumer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Dinman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), a 29-kDa antiviral protein isolated from
              pokeweed plants catalytically removes two adenines and a guanine from the large
              rRNA and inhibits translation.  PAP depurinates the large rRNA by binding to
              ribosomal protein L3.  The investigators recently demonstrated that expression
              of PAP in yeast led to specific inhibition of +1 programmed ribosomal
              frameshifting (PRF) and interfered with the ability of the yeast retrovirus Ty1
              to retrotranspose.  Using nontoxic PAP mutants, they showed that PAP inhibited
              +1 PRF and Ty1 retrotransposition without inhibiting general translation.  PAP
              had no effect on -1 PRF or maintenance of the yeast killer virus.   These
              results suggested that PAP could be used as a specific probe to dissect the
              mechanisms regulating +1 PRF and as a general tool to study the role of
              translational fidelity in virus maintenance. The primary objective of this
              project is to use recombinant PAP mutants and yeast chromosomal mutants to
              investigate the mechanism by which PAP inhibits +1 frameshifting and Ty1
              retrotransposition in yeast.  PAP sequences critical for inhibition of +1 PRF
              and Ty1 retrotransposition, and  PAP binding sites on ribosomal protein L3 will
              be identified.  It will be determined whether binding of PAP to the ribosomes,
              to the large rRNA, and/or to L3 is critical for inhibition of +1 PRF.   These
              studies provide a unique way to address questions relating to ribosome
              structure and function and may have important implications for understanding
              the unusual mechanism of translation inhibition by ribosome inactivating
              proteins.  Alterations in PRF efficiencies can have profound effects on
              propagation of many important plant and animal viruses.  Information gained
              from these studies could be used to design viral or cell specific translation
              inhibitors and may lead to development of more effective means of disease
              control in agriculture and medicine.  
