Title       : RUI: Use of Transgenic Xenopus Embryos to Study Cell Specification in Eye
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0130086

Award Number: 0130086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc D. Servetnick servetni@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cell specification in eye development

Eyes in vertebrates develop from cells
              in two regions of the forebrain, and these cells specialize (or differentiate)
              to generate many cell types.  The cell types include photoreceptor cells (which
              detect light), many types of neural cells (which integrate signals from
              photoreceptor cells and send signals to the brain), and several types of
              supporting cells.  The mechanisms by which regions of the brain become
              specified to form eyes, and cells in these region become specified to form
              different cell types, are not well understood.  

The proposed research will
              examine eye development in a model laboratory organism, the frog Xenopus
              laevis.  Cells within the developing eyes communicate by releasing specific
              signaling proteins; these proteins bind to receptors on other cells,
              influencing cell determination.  One group of signaling proteins, called FGFs,
              is used in several processes during eye development.  FGFs can bind to, and
              activate, any of four different FGF receptors (FGFRs), but it is not clear
              whether activation of specific FGFRs affects cell differentiation in the
              eye.

Experiments will be conducted to test the hypothesis that activation of
              different FGFRs causes eye cells to differentiate in different ways. 
              Inhibitory FGFRs will be expressed in the developing eye; it will then be
              possible to compare the effects of blocking signaling through, say, FGFR-1 with
              the effects of blocking other FGFRs.  This analysis will show whether different
              FGFRs play distinct roles in eye development.  The experiments will utilize
              recently developed transgenic technology in frogs, which makes it possible to
              introduce specific genes into frog embryos.  The introduced genes will consist
              of DNA that directs the gene to be expressed only in the eye, coupled to DNA
              encoding an inhibitory FGFR. .  

These studies will lead to a better
              understanding of the mechanisms by which vertebrate eyes develop, and which
              processes may be disrupted when eyes develop abnormally.   Finally, comparison
              of eye development in different organisms will contribute to a better
              understanding of how eyes have evolved.

Undergraduate students will be
              strongly involved in the proposed research.  This research will thus serve, in
              part, to train the next generation of scientists.  

