Title       : Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Hybrid Testbed for Evaluation
               of Cell-Cell Communication Models in Prokaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0130843

Award Number: 0130843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris D. Cox ccox9@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Sayler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Fleming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130843  Chris D. Cox   University of Tennessee  Hybrid Testbed for
              Evaluation of Cell-Cell Communication Models in Prokaryotes
	Information
              processing strategies utilized by biological cells are fundamentally different
              than those used for silicon-based computing and thereby hold great promise for
              the development of improved algorithms, software, and hardware.  However, our
              understanding of how genetic networks control information flow in biological
              systems needs to be further developed.  To this end, various research programs
              are underway to develop models of genetic networks; however, the success of
              this effort could falter unless tools to directly observe cell processes and
              validate the models are developed and integrated into the model development
              process.  The proposed research program seeks to develop a hybrid testbed to
              calibrate and validate models of genetic regulatory networks controlling quorum
              sensing behavior in prokaryotic organisms.  The benefits or [sic] this project
              to biological information technology include: i) development of a system for
              calibration and validation of genetic regulatory models leading to a better
              understanding of intracellular information flow; ii) improved technologies for
              silicon-to-cell and cell-to-cell silicon information transfer; and iii) a
              better understanding of information transfer between cells through chemical
              signaling.  Project objectives, methods, and impacts are described below.

