Title       : Evolution of Coloration and Mate Preferences Along Resource Availability
               Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0130893

Award Number: 0130893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory F. Grether ggrether@obee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gita R. Kolluru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Evolution of coloration and mate preferences along resource availability
              gradients

Gregory Frank Grether (PI)
Gita Raman Kolluru (co-P)

The only
              barriers to reproduction between some closely related species are female mate
              preferences for male secondary sexual characters.  Factors that cause female
              mate preferences to evolve (i.e., change over generations) can lead to the
              formation of new species.  Scientists are just beginning to understand the role
              of the environment in this process.
	In guppies, a small stream-dwelling fish
              native to Trinidad, females prefer males with larger and "brighter" orange
              spots. The orange spots contain two types of pigments, one which males can
              synthesize (drosopterins) and another which they must ingest (carotenoids).
              Guppies acquire carotenoids from algae, which grow on rocks in the streambed.
              Algae availability for guppies is strongly influenced by forest canopy cover
              and therefore by stream width (wider streams create larger gaps in the forest).
              The proposed project will expand and strengthen efforts to understand how
              variation among streams in forest canopy cover affects the evolution of male
              coloration and female mate preferences. In addition, new experiments will be
              carried out to determine (1) whether carotenoid consumption influences parasite
              resistance, (2) whether transfer of carotenoids from mothers to offspring
              affects offspring viability, and (3) whether males also express
              carotenoid-based mate preferences. The methods will include field experiments,
              laboratory breeding experiments, color measurements and biochemical
              analyses.
	The broader goal is to develop a deeper understanding of how the
              environment affects the evolution of mate preferences and the traits they
              favor. This study will contribute to our knowledge of biological diversity.

