Title       : Incorporating the Uncertainty of Atmosphere-Land Surface Interactions into
               Ensemble Forecasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0130154

Award Number: 0130154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hamill hamill@cdc.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Georg A. Grell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas T. Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A common problem with ensemble weather forecasts is the insufficient spread of
              the ensemble members so that often the true state lies outside the span of the
              ensemble forecasts.  Previous studies indicate that this "lack of spread" is
              worse near the surface than it is in mid-troposphere, suggesting that part of
              the problem may be due to the land surface conditions in the model.  The PIs
              seek to improve this situation by perturbing the land surface condition and
              treating the insolation (incoming solar radiation at the surface)
              stochastically in the ensemble forecasts.  The research has two components:
              first, an observational/diagnostic study geared toward the understanding of the
              spatial and temporal characteristics of errors in surface fluxes and
              insolation.  The second component is to design methodologies to link the errors
              of the surface fluxes to the surface moisture and perturb it.  The isolation
              will be perturbed with stochastic noise.  Once suitable candidate methods have
              been developed, they will be tested in the Rapid Update Cycle or Weather
              Research and Forecast model ensemble runs by the Forecast System Laboratory,
              NOAA.  Results from this research have the potential of finding their way into
              operational ensemble weather forecasts.

Probabilistic forecasts generated by
              ensemble predictions are increasing used for a wide variety of purposes, from
              flood forecasting to assessing the demand for electricity.  This research is
              aimed at improving the quality of ensemble forecasts and enhancing their
              usefulness.  The training that the graduate students receive will help to
              prepare them for careers in ensemble forecasting where there is a shortage of
              talented manpower.
