Title       : Morph-Dependent Cyclic JH Titer in a Wing-Polymorphic Insect: Adaptive
               Significance and Underlying Causes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0130665

Award Number: 0130665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Zera azera@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Some insects, such as the cricket (Gryllus firmus), are wing polymorphic (i.e.,
              they contain both flight capable and flightless morphs).  Wing polymorphism has
              been extensively used to investigate the hormonal control of dispersal and the
              evolution of endocrine regulation in insects.  However, all previous studies
              have focused exclusively on the hormonal control of flight capability (e.g.,
              growth of wings and flight muscles) in  the laboratory.   No study has
              investigated the endocrine regulation of flight itself, and no study has
              investigated the hormonal regulation of wing polymorphism in the field.  Recent
              studies indicate that the endocrine regulation of morph-specific traits is more
              complex than previously expected.  The key regulator of wing polymorphism is
              juvenile hormone (JH).  In the cricket, Gryllus firmus, the mean concentration
              of JH is similar in the flight capable and flightless morphs, but the morphs
              differ in how the level of this hormone varies over time.  The JH titer changes
              10-50 fold during the day in the flight capable morph, but it is relatively
              constant in the flightless morph.  This study focuses on the underlying causes
              and adaptive significance of daily changes in the JH titer.  Prolonged
              elevation of the JH titer is associated with ovarian growth and with the
              breakdown of flight muscles--changes that are detrimental with respect to
              flight.  This study will test the hypothesis that brief elevation of the JH
              titer is of sufficient duration to cause the expression of flight behaviors but
              of insufficent duration to cause ovarian growth or the breakdown of flight
              muscles.  Studies will involve direct comparisons of hormone titers between
              morphs throughout the day and evening.  The JH titer will be experimentally 
              manipulated, and its effect on flight propensity will be monitored.  Finally,
              physiological processes (hormone biosynthesis and degradation) that regulate
              morph-specific daily changes in the JH  titer will be investigated. 
              Importantly, these studies will be undertaken in both the laboratory and the
              field.  This study will substantially enhance our understanding of the
              endocrine regulation of dispersal and evolution of dispersal in insects.  
