Title       : CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for Communications Research in Wireless
               Ad-Hoc Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0130599

Award Number: 0130599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198977             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Krogmeier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ness B. Shroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darcy M. Bullock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Zoltowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2885,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130599   
James Krogmeier
Purdue University

CISE Research Resources: 
              Instrumentation for Communications Research in Wireless Ad-Hoc
              Networking

The Schools of ECE and Civil Engineering at Purdue University
              will purchase radio frequency test equipment (a network analyzer, an
              air-interface measurement tool, and radio frequency channel emulators),
              workstations, Bluetooth Developer's Kits, laptops, and supporting electronic
              and interface supplies to enhance the capabilities of the Wireless
              Communications Research Laboratory and the Harold L. Michael Traffic Operations
              Laboratory in the area of experimental wireless communications research and
              intelligent transportation systems. 

Four research projects will be directly
              enhanced by the availability of the above resources: 1) Wireless ad-hoc
              networking for dedicated short range communications applications in intelligent
              transportation systems, 2) Reduced complexity receivers for continuous phase
              modulations, 3) Reduced-dimension decision feedback equalizers for high-speed
              wireless communications, and 4) Embedded signal processing for intelligent
              transportation systems.

The communications research involved in the projects
              above is focused on synchronization, channel estimation and equalization, and
              low complexity receivers for both linear and non-linear modulations. End-to-end
              network performance is also considered, as is the design of simplified
              protocols for use in ad-hoc networking. The signal processing research is
              largely experimental involving the integration of different intelligent
              transportation subsystems including communications and embedded signal
              processing for traffic signal control and weigh-in-motion.

