Title       : Function of the Phytotoxin Coronatine in P. syringae DC3000/Plant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0130693

Award Number: 0130693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $517831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara N. Kunkel kunkel@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Coronatine (COR) is a phytotoxin produced by the plant pathogenic bacterium
              Pseudomonas syringae. COR contributes to the virulence of P. syringae; however,
              a precise mode of action for COR has not been defined. COR has a unique
              structure consisting of two distinct compounds: (1) coronafacic acid (CFA), and
              (2) coronamic acid (CMA). CFA is structurally similar to jasmonic acid (JA), a
              plant hormone involved in plant defense, and functions as a molecular mimic of
              this endogenous plant signaling molecule. CMA is a structural analog of
              aminocyclopropyl carboxylic acid (ACC), the immediate precursor to ethylene,
              another endogenous plant hormone involved in plant defense. The structural and
              functional similarities between COR and compounds involved in plant defense
              signaling (JA and ACC/ethylene) suggest that COR may promote pathogen virulence
              by interfering with host defense responses and/or with other physiological
              processes in the plant.  Furthermore, we have previously shown that COR is
              important for early colonization events in host plants, a finding consistent
              with the suppression or modulation of host defense responses.  In the proposed
              work, a genetic approach that encompasses both host and pathogen will be used
              to define the role of COR in the pathogenesis of Arabidopsis and tomato. For
              this purpose, the PI and Co-PI have developed the first well-defined CFA- and
              CMA- mutants of P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000, a pathogen of Arabidopsis and
              tomato. The unique expertise and tools in the PI and Co-PI's laboratories will
              be used to integrate studies of the host (how does COR modulate
              susceptibility?) with the pathogen (how does COR contribute to virulence?).
              Specifically, we will: 1) characterize the COR genes in P. syringae pv. tomato
              strain DC3000 and study the structure and regulation of these genes; 2)
              investigate the role of COR, CFA and CMA in the pathogenesis of Arabidopsis and
              tomato by utilizing mutants deficient for production of CFA, CMA, or both
              molecules; 3) utilize functional genomics (microarray studies) and the DC3000
              COR- mutants to investigate the role of COR, CFA, and CMA on modulating host
              cell processes and defense responses; and 4) analyze the effect of COR, CFA,
              and CMA on plant cell biology.
These studies will contribute to our
              understanding of the mechanisms involved in disease development in plants.  By
              taking advantage of a system where we can simultaneously study both the
              pathogen and plant host we will be able to identify and study the mechanisms by
              which COR alters normal plant cell processes.  These studies will provide
              insight into the molecular basis of COR function in other plant hosts, a
              contribution that could result in the development of improved strategies for
              preventing or controlling plant disease in agricultural and horticultural
              systems.

