Title       : Compact-AGEP Partnership (CAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0130459

Award Number: 0130459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1630347            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ansley Abraham ansley.abraham@sreb.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken Pepion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southn Reg Ed Board
	      592 Tenth Street NW
	      Atlanta, GA  30318    404/875-9211

NSF Program : 1515      MINORITY GRADUATE EDUC ACTIVIT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1515,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              COMPACT-AGEP PARTNERSHIP
This proposal seeks to expand a pilot project begun
              two years ago between the Minority Graduate Education (MGE) program and the
              Compact for Faculty Diversity's Institute on Teaching and Mentoring. The
              proposed project would continue and expand Institute participation to all AGEP
              programs, as well as provide the full array of program activities and services
              that have contributed significantly to the Compact' s success.

The Compact
              is a nationwide program initiated in 1994 involving three regional
              organizations, the New England Board of Higher Education (NEBHE), the Southern
              Regional Education Board (SREB), and the Western Interstate Commission for
              Higher Education (WICHE). The goal of the program is simple; to increase the
              number of minority graduate students who earn the doctoral degree and seek
              careers as college and university faculty.

Extending the experiences of the
              pilot group to scholars in every AGEP program and expanding the services these
              scholars receive is what this initiative will accomplish.  Specifically, the
              proposed Compact/AGEP partnership will achieve two broad goals: 1) provide AGEP
              scholars with knowledge, skills, academic mentoring, and support that will
              increase the likelihood of success in graduate school; and 2) enhance
              preparation for a career as a college or university faculty member. The project
              has five key objectives:

Objective 1: To provide an array of direct support
              services to AGEP scholars that will increase the likelihood of completion of
              the doctoral degree. These services include regular contact by staff; review of
              student progress and grades; a newsletter; academic counseling and advocacy;
              mentoring, and professional development opportunities.
Objective 2: To provide
              training in skills and techniques of succeeding in a Ph.D. program in
              SEM.
Objective 3: To prepare AGEP scholars for successful transition from
              graduate school to a faculty position.
Objective 4: To provide expanded
              networking and academic community building support to AGEP scholars.
Objective
              5: To provide training to the faculty mentors of AGEP scholars in effective
              mentoring techniques and practices.

The Compact's annual Institute on
              Teaching and Mentoring is clearly the "centerpiecel" of Compact activity. This
              three-day, fall meeting of more than 500 participants provide a forum for
              students and faculty mentors to discuss issues critical to success at the
              doctoral level. Attendees participate in workshops and seminars that range from
              how to survive graduate school to what is expected of a junior faculty member,
              with particular attention given to enhancing research, teaching, and mentoring
              skills, career preparation, proposal writing, negotiating the first job, and
              networking. With the majority of Compact scholars representing science,
              engineering, and mathematics (SEM) disciplines, particular attention is paid to
              the issues specific to scholars and faculty. 

