Title       : Mechanisms of Long-Term Monogamous Relationships in Zebra Finches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0130986

Award Number: 0130986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth K. Adkins-Regan er12@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PI: Elizabeth Adkins-Regan

This project will explore the mechanisms of the
              lifetime pair bond that forms between male and female zebra finches.  Biology
              seeks to explain not only general features of most organisms (fundamental
              processes of life) but also the diversity in organismal forms and lifestyles.
              There is great diversity in animal mating systems.  This diversity includes
              interesting variation in whether males and females form long-term close social
              relationships in order to reproduce. Long-term monogamous relationships,
              including pairing for the life of the animals, are scattered throughout the
              animal world (including some human populations) but are most common in birds.
              This kind of mating system is poorly understood. The objective of this research
              is to explain the function (how such relationships lead to better reproduction)
              and the physiology responsible for the formation and maintenance of these
              relationships using a species, the zebra finch, that pairs for life. The
              research will answer questions such as: are the birds more reproductively
              successful if they continue with the same partner rather than choose a new
              partner? Are sex hormone actions required for birds to pair and to remain
              paired? Do pubertal sex hormones have any long-term effect on pairing? Are they
              responsible for the transition from attachment to the parents to attachment to
              the pairing partner? What is the role of the physiological stress response
              following separation of the pair in re-pairing following loss of the partner?
              Are physiological changes following separation part of the costs that normally
              prevent separation? The methods will include hormonal and social manipulations
              during juvenile development and adulthood, behavioral testing designed to
              measure pairing preference and status, and determination of reproductive
              success and hormone levels. By discovering what is responsible for pairing and
              remaining together, this research will answer important questions and will
              offer and test new hypotheses about the physiology of ecologically relevant
              behavior applicable to a broad array of socially monogamous animals. The
              research will also provide valuable training and an important start to a
              scientific career for a large number of undergraduate and graduate students of
              both genders and of diverse backgrounds and origins.

