Title       : Excavations at Cave 13B, Pinnacle Point at Mossel Bay, South Africa: Faunal
               Exploitation, Raw Material Procurement, and Organization of Domestic Space
               During the Middle Stone Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0130713

Award Number: 0130713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Marean curtis.marean@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Curtis Marean conducted
              exploratory archaeological investigations in July of 2000 of three caves near
              Mossel Bay in the Western Cape province of South Africa.  That project was
              funded by the high risk exploratory grants provided by the Archaeology Program.
               The goal of those investigations was to evaluate the suitability of several
              caves for more intensive excavations.   Two of those caves proved to have very
              well preserved archaeological sediments dating to the Middle Stone Age, with
              excellent fossil bone preservation.  Two hominid fossils were found, suggesting
              that further investigations could yield more and contribute to a currently
              small sample.  Furthermore, features such as hearths are well preserved, and
              ochre pencils were found, suggesting that the occupants had been involved in
              symbolic activities.  Based on those results, Dr. Marean will conduct with
              National Science Foundation support more intensive excavations at one of those
              caves, named Cave 13B.

This study is part of a wide ranging international
              and interdisciplinary research effort that seeks to understand the cultural
              transition from "archaic" to "modern" human behavior.  This research effort,
              focusing on the interval of time between about 250,000 and 30,000 years ago,
              involves scholars working primarily in Eurasia and Africa.  To date the
              evidence has been dominated by that from Europe, where scientists have been
              working intensively for the last 100 years.  The results of that research have
              led many scientists to argue that those aspects of modern human culture that we
              associate with modern people appear first shortly after 40,000 years ago. 
              These indicators of modernity include such things as symboling behavior as
              suggested by the presence of artistic expression and religion, and complex
              social structures such as trade networks as indicated by the presence of raw
              materials from distant sources.  Recently, new results from the poorly sampled
              African continent, particularly in coastal South Africa, suggest that these
              indicators of modernity may have appeared earlier there than in Eurasia, and
              that this once-secure Rubicon at 40,000 years ago may be an artifact of an
              empirical record weak in African evidence.  

This project seeks to expand
              the African record for this crucial transition.  The excavations at Mossel Bay
              should help provide a more secure understanding of the timing of these events
              in Africa.  The analysis of the excavated materials will focus on geochemical
              analyses of raw materials to investigate trade networks, spatial analysis of
              the artifacts and faunal remains relative to hearth placement to investigate
              the organization of social activities, and faunal remains to understand the
              sophistication of hunting behavior.


