Title       : Effects of Foraging on the Lipid Biochemistry of Freely Diving Weddell Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0130417

Award Number: 0130417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Castellini mikec@ims.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lorrie D. Rea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this program is to quantify the dynamics of lipid uptake and
              utilization in a naturally foraging mammalian carnivore by examining freely
              diving Weddell seals in Antarctica. This species offers a unique opportunity to
              follow the biochemistry and physiology of nutrient utilization in a large
              carnivore that may not be possible in any other system. This is due to the
              essentially impossible logistics of working with large predators such as
              free-ranging felids (e.g, lions, tigers) or ursids (bears) and obtaining
              multiple blood samples and measuring digestive chemistry while the animal is
              actively foraging. While such studies can be conducted in laboratory or zoo
              settings, they are necessarily limited to using captive animals where feeding
              times are typically constrained by husbandry requirements and to
              human-determined diets. However, a unique opportunity to perform digestive
              chemistry experiments in actively foraging large carnivores in the wild exists
              in the Antarctic. For several decades, the Weddell seal has been the focus of
              studies on natural diving physiology because of the ability to work with the
              species using isolated holes in the sea ice near McMurdo Station, Antarctica.
              In that system, the seal has access to a single ice hole where it routinely
              returns to breathe, sleep, digest, etc. With the use of blood-sampling
              catheters, serial samples of blood can be collected whenever the seal returns
              to the surface between diving bouts. Seals rely primarily on lipid metabolism
              for their daily energy demands and in this new program, nutrient metabolism in
              predatory carnivores will be studied by examining the kinetics of lipid uptake
              and utilization during active foraging bouts. Labeled blood samples from freely
              diving animals will be used to quantify lipid turnover rates and to
              characterize the various components of the lipid pool. Adult seal lipid uptake
              and utilization will be compared to similar processes in pups, which are
              biochemically adapted for massive and rapid lipid utilization while nursing.
              This project will provide rare and perhaps unparalleled data on the foraging
              biochemistry of freely living carnivores. Results will also provide insight not
              only to Antarctic ecosystem studies, but to the entire field of lipid
              metabolism in mammals and to the study of carnivore biology.



