Title       : Structure/Function Analysis of the TEV IRES and its Interaction With eIF4G,
               eIF4A, and eIF4B
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0130664

Award Number: 0130664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Gallie drgallie@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tobacco etch virus (TEV) is a potyvirus, a member of the picornavirus supergroup
              of positive-strand RNA viruses, which infects plants.  Like
              encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and poliovirus, the genomic RNA of TEV is a
              polyadenylated mRNA that naturally lacks a 5' cap structure but is nevertheless
              efficiently translated.  The TEV 5'-leader is sufficient to confer
              cap-independent translation to an mRNA and it is functionally analogous to a
              cap in that it interacts with the poly(A) tail to promote efficient
              translation.  The TEV 5'-leader also promotes translation of the 5'-distal
              (i.e., second) cistron of a dicistronic mRNA in vivo when it is present in the
              intercistronic region, an observation indicating that the TEV 5'-leader
              functions as an internal ribosome entry site (IRES).  The translation
              initiation factor eIF4G is required for TEV IRES function.  The mechanism
              underlying IRES-mediated cap-independent translation has not been investigated
              for TEV or any other plant virus.  The observation that the TEV is a naturally
              uncapped mRNA that has evolved a 5'-leader sequence that confers
              cap-independent translation, functions even when positioned in the
              intercistronic region of a dicistronic mRNA to promote internal initiation, and
              requires eIF4G for IRES function suggests that this member of the picornaviral
              superfamily may share similarities to IRES function described for animal
              picornaviruses such as EMCV and FMDV.  

The goal of this project is to
              determine the mechanism by which TEV IRES function promotes cap-independent
              translation in plants.  This project will be the first to establish whether a
              plant viral IRES functions like animal picornaviral IRES.  Because of the
              mechanistic differences among animal picornaviral IRESs, the research will
              determine whether the evolution of the TEV IRES is more similar to the IRES of
              EMCV (which can recruit eIF4G directly) or poliovirus (which may require the
              assistance of other factors to recruit eIF4G).  The research will determine the
              structure of the TEV IRES and investigate whether eIF4G binds directly or is
              recruited to the TEV IRES by an additional trans-acting factor.  The IRES of
              TEV is substantially smaller than animal picornaviral IRESs, suggesting that an
              IRES does not require extensive sequence to recruit the translational
              machinery.  Elucidation of how such a simplified IRES can efficiently recruit
              the translational machinery in a cap-independent manner will provide important
              insight into the minimum requirement for IRES function in a higher eukaryote.
