Title       : Molecular Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of the Fimbrin Gene Family From
               Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0130576

Award Number: 0130576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Staiger cstaiger@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David McCurdy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The central importance of the actin cytoskeleton to plant development has been
              widely accepted for some years now; however, little detailed biochemical
              analysis of the individual components that regulate actin-based function has
              been performed. This project addresses this deficiency by characterizing at the
              biochemical, cellular and  genetic levels, the family of fimbrin-like actin
              filament crosslinking proteins from Arabidopsis thaliana. A major component of
              this project will exploit reverse-genetic approaches by identifying knockout
              mutants for each of the five fimbrin sequences. Phenotypic analysis of these
              knockout lines will include determining whole plant defects and examining the
              detailed structure of the actin cytoskeleton in different cell types by using
              immunofluorescence and GFP technology. Specific actin-based functions such as
              chloroplast orientation, cytoplasmic streaming, determination of division
              planes, response to fungal pathogens, and cell expansion will be analyzed in
              the knockout lines. Collectively, this study will test the hypothesis that
              Arabidopsis contains members of the fimbrin family with distinct biochemical
              and cellular properties and which, therefore, have the potential to contribute
              to the diversity of actin-based function within individual plant cells. 
              Furthermore, this potential for diverse functions will be tested directly by
              exploiting the power of reverse genetics. The results obtained will provide
              important insight into fundamental mechanisms that underpin cellular
              morphogenesis and responses to extracellular stimuli.
