Title       : Monitoring the Human Impact and Environmental Variability on Adelie Penguins at
               Palmer Station, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0130525

Award Number: 0130525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544639             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Fraser bfraser@3rivers.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polar Oceans Group
	      PO Box 368
	      Sheridan, MT  597490368    406/842-7442

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0130525
Fraser

The potential consequence of human impact on wildlife in
              Antarctica  has been debated for many decades. Scientists, support staff and
              visitors in Antarctica may have an effect on the behavior and population
              dynamics of marine mammals and seabirds. Since the early 1970's, shipboard
              tourism has expanded to the point where it is timely to address the question,
              using a scientific research approach. The focus of this study is to examine the
              potential effect of tourist activities on the Adelie Penguins (Pygoscelis
              adeliae) in the Antarctic Peninsula. The topic has gathered the interest and
              opinions of those in private industry, the scientific community, government
              organizations and environmental groups. A key concern is that increases in
              these activities may eventually overcome the ability of research to address
              critical issues in a timely and biologically meaningful manner. The approach to
              understanding how tourism might affect Adelie Penguins must involve both a
              study of human activity and a study of natural variability in the physical
              environment. The ongoing Palmer Long Term Ecological Research program focuses
              on the ecosystem and its components and thus addresses the issues of natural
              variability. This project focuses on the human dimension and continues a
              tourist-monitoring program begun as a pilot project near Palmer Station. This
              site is in a geographic location that mirrors current patterns in tourism and
              tourist-wildlife interactions in the western Antarctic Peninsula. It also
              offers a setting that provides unique opportunities for human impacts research.
               This includes the presence of long-term databases that document environmental
              variability over multiple time and space scales in both marine and terrestrial
              habitats,  and the ability to examine potential tourist impacts as part of
              controlled experiments. The results of the study will have important
              implications to understanding interactions between climate change and ecosystem
              response, and for detecting, mitigating and managing the consequences of human
              activities such as tourism.

