Title       : High Performance Algorithms for Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0130395

Award Number: 0130395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Chelikowsky jrc@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1682,1753,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is supported by the Divisions of Materials Research and Advanced
              Computational Infrastructure and Research.  The research is in the area of
              computational materials research and involves a collaborative effort in both
              materials research and computational science.  The overall goal of the research
              is to exploit high performance computers for solving large scale and complex
              problems that arise in modeling real materials.  The research will center on
              electronic materials with extended and point defects, and non-ideal interfaces
              and in the form of amorphous solids, atomic clusters, liquids, and
              glasses.

The continuing evolution of high performance computers is creating
              new opportunities for the application of sophisticated electronic structure
              techniques to the study of technologically important materials.  A few orders
              of magnitude improvement in speed are feasible in the near future and will
              enable us to step beyond the current computational limits in materials science
              and achieve an unprecedented understanding of the physical and electronic
              properties of materials.  Such achievements are not made by progress in
              computer hardware alone, but depend more so on innovations in algorithms.  The
              development of new algorithms in multidisciplinary research requires an
              understanding and appreciation of the different disciplines involved by the
              collaborating members.  Based on prior experience of this group, progress can
              be best made by a close collaboration between computer scientists and materials
              scientists.  Thus, algorithms will be developed, implemented and applied to a
              number of materials problems.

Applications will include: localized systems,
              atomic clusters and quantum dots; liquids and disordered semiconductors; dilute
              magnetic semiconductors.  Algorithms to be developed include: out-of-core
              methods; special methods for computing eigenvectors and eigenvalues; avoiding
              eigenvectors and eigenvalues.
%%% 
This grant is supported by the Divisions
              of Materials Research and Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research. 
              The research is in the area of computational materials research and involves a
              collaborative effort in both materials research and computational science.  The
              overall goal of the research is to exploit high performance computers for
              solving large scale and complex problems that arise in modeling real materials.
               The research will center on electronic materials with extended and point
              defects, and non-ideal interfaces and in the form of amorphous solids, atomic
              clusters, liquids, and glasses.

The continuing evolution of high performance
              computers is creating new opportunities for the application of sophisticated
              electronic structure techniques to the study of technologically important
              materials.  A few orders of magnitude improvement in speed are feasible in the
              near future and will enable us to step beyond the current computational limits
              in materials science and achieve an unprecedented understanding of the physical
              and electronic properties of materials.  Such achievements are not made by
              progress in computer hardware alone, but depend more so on innovations in
              algorithms.  The development of new algorithms in multidisciplinary research
              requires an understanding and appreciation of the different disciplines
              involved by the collaborating members.  Based on prior experience of this
              group, progress can be best made by a close collaboration between computer
              scientists and materials scientists.  Thus, algorithms will be developed,
              implemented and applied to a number of materials problems.
***

