Title       : Cargo Recognition and Regulation of the Ncd Motor Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0130910

Award Number: 0130910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Walker rawalker@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microtubule-dependent motor proteins of the kinesin and dynein superfamilies are
              essential components of mitotic and meiotic spindles, the complicated cellular
              machines that power chromosome segregation. For kinesins at least, there is now
              a fairly good understanding of how these motors move along microtubules, but to
              understand completely the role that a given motor plays in the cell and how the
              protein performs its role, additional questions need to be answered for each
              motor. These questions include: What is the motor's cargo and how is that cargo
              recognized? Are non-motor subunits associated with the motor subunits and if
              so, what is their role?  How is the motor's location and function regulated?
              For most kinesins, the answers are likely to be interdependent, but a major
              stumbling block in answering these questions is that the identity of the cargo
              is unknown for many kinesins. However, certain kinesins, including members of
              the C-terminal, MKLP-1, and bimC subfamilies, recognize and transport a
              well-known and well-characterized cargo: another MT. Study of these motors,
              which are thought to drive MT sliding, should facilitate answering the above
              questions.  

The overall objective of this projectis to understand how the
              Drosophila C-terminal Ncd motor functions during the meiotic divisions of
              oogenesis and the early mitotic divisions of the embryo. Ncd is perhaps the
              best-characterized C-terminal kinesin, yet much remains to be learned about how
              this protein recognizes cargo, whether the motor slides or simply bundles
              adjacent MTs, the composition of native Ncd, and how it is regulated to produce
              appropriate forces at appropriate times during cell division.  

There are
              two specific objectives. The first will examine the ATP- independent binding of
              the Ncd tail to cargo microtubules. Experiments will determine if recombinant
              Ncd can slide MTs past each other, what specific residues are involved in
              binding cargo microtubules, and how dimeric Ncd tail domains interact with
              cargo microtubules.

The second objective will examine the subunit
              composition of native Ncd and characterize the activity of native Ncd. Ncd,
              like majority of kinesins, has never been purified from native sources and
              working knowledge of the protein is based on recombinant motor subunits
              expressed in bacteria. To determine if native Ncd also contains non-motor
              subunits, a combination of ion exchange chromatography and microtubule affinity
              techniques will be used to purify the native motor. In addition, the motor
              properties of native Ncd will be determined to determine if previous work with
              recombinant Ncd motor subunits is an accurate reflection of native Ncd
              activity.  To accomplish these objectives, Dr. Walker will use a combination of
              biochemical, biophysical and molecular biology approaches. Increased
              understanding of Ncd activity and function will shed light of the mechanisms of
              C-terminal kinesins, and ultimately on the fundamental properties of
              microtubule-dependent motors and the cellular processes dependent on these
              proteins.
 
