Title       : Dissertation: Health Care Seeking in Nicaragua: Researching the Interface
               Between Economics, Cultural Understanding, and Practical Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0130306

Award Number: 0130306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nichter mnichter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Health and disease are experienced within social contexts.  For people living in
              poverty, health care seeking decisions are made in conjunction with
              considerations of how to allocate scarce resources to meet the needs of
              multiple household members.  Much of the international health literature has
              focused on sociocultural factors that impact health care seeking. Yet little
              research has been conducted on the ways that economic factors directly and
              indirectly constrain or facilitate health care seeking strategies in poor
              households.  The proposed study will examine how sociocultural factors,
              economics, and social relations articulate in health care and resource
              decision-making among poor and lower middle income households in Nicaragua, a
              country with high rates of child morbidity and mortality as well as high rates
              of maternal mortality.  Utilizing participant observation and semi-structured
              interviews, the researcher, an anthropology graduate student at the University
              of Arizona, will prospectively follow fifty rural households in a municipality
              of the department of Masaya over the course of a year.  Ethnographic research
              is needed in local contexts to assess how multiple factors impacting on health
              seeking articulate during actual illness episodes.  In addition to providing
              doctoral training for a promising woman scientist, the proposed study will help
              fill the gap in the paucity of ethnographic research into contemporary health
              issues for Nicaraguans living in poverty, and assess the cross-cultural
              applicability of theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of
              health care seeking.
