Title       : Reconnaissance of the Geotechnical Aspects of the February 28, 2001 Nisqually
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0130889

Award Number: 0130889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Bray bray@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1576,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is to support a study to complete the post-earthquake reconnaissance
              effort begun the day after the February 28, 2001 Nisqually Earthquake, and to
              further document observations of important cases of ground failure and building
              damage from this event.

Well-documented case histories of building
              performance at sites undergoing severe and minor ground failure will be
              developed through selected field and laboratory testing.  These case histories
              will be documented at the website developed during the post-earthquake
              reconnaissance of the Nisqually earthquake, and in a paper to be published in
              the Journal "Spectra" of the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI). 
              Timely reporting of these results will enable researchers to incorporate these
              data into ongoing studies and identify additional work resulting from this
              important Pacific Northwest earthquake. 

Professor Bray and some of his
              colleagues and graduate student researchers traveled immediately to the
              affected area of the Nisqually earthquake, and as part of a larger
              reconnaissance team completed documentation of some of the more important
              geotechnical aspects of this event.  This included conducting detailed surveys
              of ground deformation from a significant lateral spread involving the Deschutes
              Parkway, mapping of ground deformation at the Martin Way embankment failure,
              documentation and sampling of sediment ejecta in several building foundations
              in South Seattle, and surveying of the Highway 101 embankment failure.

The
              goals of this follow-up study will be met in part by completing documentation
              of these important case records, with emphasis on the Deschutes Parkway in
              Olympia and the building foundations performance in South Seattle.  Stephen P.
              Palmer, Washington State Department of Natural Resources, assisted during the
              post-earthquake reconnaissance effort and who will be involved in this current
              project.


