Title       : A Genetic Stock Center for Peromyscus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0130348

Award Number: 0130348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Dewey dewey@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award renews support of the Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center at the
              University of South Carolina at Columbia. The deer mouse (Peromyscus
              maniculatus) and congeneric species are among the most abundant, speciose, and
              widely distributed North American mammals. They range from Alaska to Central
              America and occur in many natural habitats. They are frequently used as models
              to study the fundamental processes underlying speciation, adaptative
              physiology, behavior, and community ecology. Laboratory stocks of both
              wild-type and genetically variant Peromyscus are used for investigations in
              which laboratory-based studies are interfaced with those of natural
              populations. The Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center was established in 1985. Today
              it provides a reliable source of Peromyscus and related materials to the
              national scientific and education communities. The Center currently houses
              seven species of Peromyscus and more than 35 distinctive mutant and other
              genetically defined stocks, primarily of the deer mouse. The Stock Center
              supplies researchers and educators with live animals, and with selected
              biological materials including fresh or preserved tissues, molecular probes and
              libraries of cloned Peromyscus DNA. It also functions as a clearinghouse for
              information by sponsoring an Internet database, maintaining a reference
              collection of reprints, standardizing the genetic nomenclature for the genus
              and publishing a semi-annual Peromyscus Newsletter. The Peromyscus Genetic
              Stock Center continues to be widely used throughout the U.S. and elsewhere.

