Title       : Research Agenda for Open Source (Workshop - January 2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0130029

Award Number: 0130029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Kahin bk90@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An agenda-setting workshop of 25-30 invited participants wil be held by the
              Center for Information Policy a the University of Maryland.  This workshop will
              bring together diverse shcolars and practitioners to explore social and
              economic issues raised by open source software development.  These issues
              include its relationship to other forms of hybrid enterprise (such as standards
              development and scientific research), and implications for institutions and
              policies ina digital society.  Particpants will submit sohor statments in
              advance to structure the substantive discussion and these statements later will
              be edited and published on the Center's web site.  The workshop will consider
              the feasibility and design of a future international conference that brings
              together U.S., European, and developing world perspectives and research.

The
              qualities and values claimed for open-source software-security reliabilty,
              adaptability, extensibility, low cost, and openness-create marketing
              opportunities and pose policy questions.  The latter include how the government
              develops or licenses software for its own use, how marketplace competition is
              regulated to promote economic growth and consumer welfare, and arguments for
              making the Internet and the benefits of the digital economy more broadly
              accessible, in lesser developed countries as well as in the United States.  The
              success of the open source invites far-ranging speculation and debate about
              information architectures, contracts, institutional economics, and the
              configuration of intangible assets and innovation processes.  Expected
              outcomes, include a prioritized set of questions for future research, a web
              site for academic research on open source, a bibliography and summary report of
              the workshop publicly available on th Center's website along with edited
              contributions of participants and links to related other workshops and
              research.  The workshop wil seek to promote new channels of communication among
              researchers and between the practitioner community and academic researchers,
              and to elicit broader academic understanding and interest in the issues
              surrounding open source.  The workshop will consider the feasibility and design
              of an international conference that brings together U.S., European, and
              developing world research on open source.
