Title       : Collaborative Research: Measurement and Analysis of the Preconvective Boundary
               Layer and Convection Initiation during International H2O Project (IHOP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a0130307

Award Number: 0130307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Markowski marko@mail.meteo.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project between the University of Oklahoma and the
              Pennsylvania State University is part of the International H2O Project (IHOP). 
              The IHOP is a large multi-agency, multi-investigator project that focuses on
              the measurement of water vapor and water vapor variability.  The goal of this
              project is to improve understanding of convective initiation, increase
              short-term precipitation forecast skills and test the capabilities of various
              instruments to measure the four dimensional characteristics of water vapor. 
              The field phase of the IHOP will be conducted during the Spring and Summer of
              2002 and will provide a wide range of mesoscale meteorological observations for
              studies to gain a better understanding of the scales of, and processes
              influencing, water vapor variability.

The goal of this hypothesis-driven
              research is to improve understanding of the processes leading to the initiation
              of deep, moist cumulus convection.  Though several studies have examined
              certain aspects of boundary layer structure little is known about what causes
              convective initiation.  IHOP will provide the comprehensive data sets needed to
              begin evaluating and revising hypotheses concerning convection initiation
              processes and the role of boundary layer water vapor.  The Principal
              Investigators will acquire and analyze three dimensional radar-derived boundary
              layer airflow and in-situ measurements of winds and thermodynamic parameters
              from mobile facilities.  The combination of boundary layer airflow with in-situ
              measurements of absolute humidity and virtual temperature provides the only
              means of documenting the dynamical and transport processes acting in the
              boundary layer to regulate precipitable water and force the development of
              secondary circulations.  Thus these observations are essential for evaluating
              hypotheses concerning the impact of water vapor supply and airflow evolution on
              boundary formation and convection initiation.

Detailed observations will be
              analyzed in several different ways.  Subjective analyses and visualizations
              will be produced incorporating all available data on relevant scales for
              convection initiation.  Observation density will be enhanced utilizing an
              advanced time-to-space conversion scheme by distributing nearly conservative
              variables along Lagrangian trajectories based on multi-Doppler wind syntheses. 
              Finally, these enhanced observations will be assimilated into mesoscale models
              to determine the dynamical forcing processes controlling the development of
              localized boundary layer circulations that either promote or prevent convection
              initiation.

This effort will result in the collection and analysis of an
              unprecedented data set at scales previously not observed.  Through this work, a
              completely new understanding will emerge regarding the processes occurring near
              low-level boundaries and how these processes regulate the formation of
              thunderstorms.  The knowledge will be useful for developing new advances, both
              numerical and subjective, in quantitative precipitation forecasting by
              improving the ability to forecast if, when, and where convection will develop.
