Title       : South Pole Observations to Test Cosmological Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0130612

Award Number: 0130612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16576276           (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Carlstrom jc@hyde.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Ruhl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Mohr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antony A. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Holzapfel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Chicago will lead a consortium of six institutions to design
              and utilize an eight-meter off-axis telescope at Amundsen-Scott South Pole
              Station in order to carry out a unique and powerful survey of galaxy clusters
              to unprecedented red shifts. This survey will allow the study of integrated
              cluster abundance and its red shift evolution, and will give us precise
              cosmological constraints, which are completely independent of those from
              supernovae distance and Cosmic Microwave Background anisotropy measurements.
              The sample size and redshift depth will be ideally suited for using cluster
              abundance evolution to determine the equation of state of the dark energy
              component of the universe.
One of the most important discoveries in cosmology
              is that it appears that much, if not most, of the mass in the Universe is made
              not of stars and glowing gas that is familiar to us from astronomical images of
              the sky, but of what has been termed dark matter. This dark matter emits little
              or no light or other electromagnetic radiation, and so far makes its presence
              known only through the gravitational force it exerts upon the luminous matter.
              There is some indication that the dark matter may in fact not even be baryonic.
              Just what fraction of the mass is in the form of non-interacting non-baryonic
              particles is of great interest to cosmologists and physicists.
Measuring the
              mass in baryons along with the total mass in a region of the Universe that
              could be considered a "fair sample" would provide a crucial direct
              determination of the dark matter content. In recent years, just such a test-bed
              has been found in the guise of massive clusters of galaxies. These clusters
              contain large amounts of gas (baryons) in the form of a highly ionized
              atmosphere of gas at temperatures of millions of degrees, which emit X-rays.
              Nearly all of the baryons in the clusters are believed to be in the hot phase,
              and so it is likely that we are truly measuring the baryonic mass in the
              cluster.
In addition to emitting X-rays, the hot cluster gas also scatters the
              cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation. This scattering, called the
              Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect (SZE), is measurable using radio telescopes. The CMB
              has a blackbody temperature of 2.7 K which and a radiation spectrum that peaks
              at a wavelength of around lmm. Observations at centimeter wavelengths see the
              SZE as a distortion of the spectrum, i.e. as a reduction in the brightness
              toward the cluster as the photons are scattered toward a higher energy level.
              The observed decrement is proportional to the integrated electron density along
              the line-of-sight through the cluster.
The Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect is
              important to the study of cosmology and the CMB for two main reasons. 1) The
              observed "hotspots" created by the kinetic effect will distort the power
              spectrum of CMB anisotropies. These need to be separated from the primary
              anisotropies in order to probe properties of inflation. 2) The thermal SZ
              effect can be measured and combined with x-ray observations in order to
              determine values of cosmological parameters, in particular the Hubble
              constant.

