Title       : Collaborative Research: Scale-Recursive Estimation of Precipitation for
               Applications to Quantitative Precipitation Forecast (QPF) Verification and
               Multisensor Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0130396

Award Number: 0130396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin K. Droegemeier kkd@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric precipitation, whether in convective storms or quasi-uniformly
              stratified cloud layers, generally is highly inhomogeneous and exhibits
              considerable natural variability at scales ranging from a few meters to several
              hundreds of kilometers.  A variety of sensors (e.g. rain gauges, radars, and
              satellites) are used to monitor precipitation rate and total accumulation and
              provide both direct and indirect measurements at different scales based upon
              instrument resolution and sampling or analysis strategies.  Physically-based
              computer models, both of the atmosphere and solid earth, rely upon these
              observed data for initialization/assimilation as well as forecast validation. 
              However, owing to the tremendous scale-dependent variability of precipitation
              and the discrepancies in scale and resolution among different types/sources of
              data, merging or comparing observations at different scales, or comparing model
              outputs to observations, is difficult.  Yet, quantitative precipitation
              estimation (QPE) and model forecast verification are foundational aspects of
              both atmospheric and hydrologic prediction.

In an effort to address issues
              associated with both scale variability and scale discrepancy in merging or
              comparing information from multiple sources, the Principal Investigators seek
              to use a recently-developed scale-recursive estimation (SRE) framework.  They
              will utilize the SRE framework for (1) Quantitative Precipitation Forecast
              (QPF) verification when observations are available at one or more scales
              different than the scale of the numerical model; (2) derivation of products or
              analyses in situations where observations and model outputs at different scales
              are to be merged to produce a single field; and (3) estimation of background
              error covariances from fields produced via the comparison of observations and
              model outputs at different scales. 

The problems to be addressed require
              combined expertise in statistical multi-scale analysis of precipitation,
              optimal estimation theory, radar data analysis and interpretation, data
              assimilation, and numerical weather prediction modeling.  This collaborative
              team involves two statistical hydrologists and two meteorologists having
              demonstrated expertise in the above areas, and builds upon a previous
              successful collaboration in the analysis of the spatio-temporal structure of
              forecasted and observed precipitation at the scale of individual convective
              storms.  

In previous collaborative research, an extensive analysis was made
              of the spatio-temporal structure of forecasted and observed precipitation with
              an emphasis on one fundamental question: Do storm-resolving forecast models
              produce precipitation fields that exhibit the same scale invariant structures
              as observations, and if not, why?  The shortcomings of typical distance-based
              deterministic interpolators (or averaging operators) for converting data from
              one scale to another, i.e., downscaling (up-scaling), were documented, and the
              need for a rigorous methodology capable of handling scale-dependent variability
              and uncertainty in observations was demonstrated.

The present
              interdisciplinary proposal builds upon this body of previous work and proposes
              to explore a framework within which issues of variability and scale-dependency
              can be properly addressed for the purpose of QPF verification and multi-sensor
              rainfall estimation.
