Title       : RUI: m-Survivin Expression in Differentiating Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0130982

Award Number: 0130982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Owen jowen@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1136,1141,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is utilized extensively in the functioning
              immune system.  During development, cells which express potentially auto-immune
              or functionally irrelevant receptors are excised before they reach maturity. 
              In addition, once a lymphocyte has participated in an antigen-specific
              response, it may be eliminated either passively, following growth factor
              withdrawal, or actively, after interaction with cells bearing death-inducing
              signals.  In this project, the role of the IAP (Inhibitors of APoptosis) family
              of anti-apoptotic proteins will be explored in normal lymphocytes.  IAPs share
              a unique, 70 amino acid BIR (Baculovirus Inhibitor of apoptosis Repeat) domain
              and most function by inhibiting some of the caspase enzymes which play a
              central role in apoptosis.  Mouse- (m)-survivin, the central focus of this
              work, is the smallest and simplest of these interesting IAP proteins.  The
              thesis to be investigated is that different anti-apoptotic molecules may
              function at particular stages in the lymphocyte life-cycle.  In particular, it
              is posited that survivin acts to preserve lymphocyte viability in cells which
              are undergoing rapid proliferation and/or are subject to active selective
              pressure. The signals and conditions which induce m-survivin expression in B
              and T lymphocytes, both in vivo and in vitro will be investigated and the
              relative kinetics of IAP expression will be compared with those of other
              anti-apoptotic proteins.  The lymphocyte subpopulations in which m-survivin is
              expressed will be defined, and the experiments will also explore the effects of
              over-expression of survivin on the capacity of lymphocytes to withstand
              induction of cell death. Finally, a novel modification of mRNA differential
              display methodology, first developed by the PI's laboratory will be employed to
              characterize the expression of multiple members of the BIR-containing family in
              differentiating lymphocytes.  

This research will be conducted at an
              undergraduate institution.  The primary participants will be senior year and
              summer research  undergraduates in the PI's laboratory at Haverford College. 
              Significant contributions to the work are expected from undergraduate students
              who are members of under-represented groups.  Students are involved at every
              stage of the research, from selection of their individual projects to
              presentation of the work, either at local or national meetings or in final
              written form. The control of apoptosis is a burgeoning field of research with
              major implications for the regulation of cellular proliferation across the
              eukaryotic kingdom.  	
	


