Title       : RUI: Using Direct Evidence to Determine the Energetic and Ecological
               Significance of Dissolved Organic Matter (DOM) for the Bryozoan Bugula Neritina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0130634

Award Number: 0130634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean E. Wendt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              All organisms ranging from the simplest bacterium to the most sophisticated
              multicellular animal need energy for metabolic maintenance, growth, and
              reproduction.  It is thus not surprising that a wide variety of mechanisms have
              evolved for acquiring the energy needed to carry out these vital processes. 
              One such system that has developed among aquatic organisms involves cellular
              transport and utilization of dissolved organic matter (DOM) directly from the
              surrounding medium.  The work from this project will add much needed direct
              evidence on the ecological and energetic role of DOM for marine invertebrate
              animals. Most of the current studies examining use of DOM by marine
              invertebrates are limited to indirect evidence based on comparisons of
              metabolic expenditure and potential contribution of DOM calculated from uptake
              rates of dissolved compounds.  Although this approach is useful in determining
              the theoretical contribution of DOM, it does not directly characterize the
              realized contribution to an animal's energy budget.  A more direct approach
              based on comparisons of metabolic expenditure of animals in the presence versus
              absence of DOM is needed.  The proposed work seeks to establish this for the
              bryozoan Bugula neritina through a series of laboratory and field experiments
              examining how the availability of DOM during larval swimming and metamorphosis
              effects ecological relevant parameters such as, larval swimming duration,
              metamorphic competence, size after metamorphosis, adult growth rate, and onset
              and amount of reproduction.  In addition, direct evidence for incorporation of
              DOM into larval tissues and those of early post-metamorphic stages will be
              established through autoradiographic techniques.  These data will provide
              insight into how and when the transported compounds are being used (e.g., for
              swimming, metamorphosis, early juvenile growth).  Taken together, the proposed
              experiments will provide direct evidence on the realized contribution of DOM to
              the nutritional biology of invertebrates, adding significantly to our current
              understanding of the ecological and energetic importance of DOM.

