Title       : BITS: Reconfigurable and Multifunctional Behavioral Pattern Generators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0130773

Award Number: 0130773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Beer beer@alpha.ces.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hillel J. Chiel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reid Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Branicky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130773 Randall D. Beer-Case Western Reserve-Reconfigurable and
              Multifunctional Behavior Pattern Generators 

We propose to develop new
              theories and models that extend current computational frameworks by
              understanding and implementing the dynamically reconfigurable and
              multifunctional information processing architectures of biological systems.  We
              will address this challenge through a collaborative interdisciplinary research
              program focusing on multifunctional neuromechanical components and their
              reconfiguration into multiple behavioral patterns in animals.  The ultimate
              goal of our proposed research is to abstract general design principles that can
              eventually be applied in a variety of other contexts.  Specifically, we propose
              the following four closely intertwined experimental and modeling/theoretical
              projects:

1)We will undertake a detailed experimental analysis of the
              feeding system of the mollusk Aplysia California, which dynamically
              reconfigures its feeding behavior in response to changing environmental
              circumstances, and does so through the multifuntionality of its neuromechanics.
               First, we will characterize the conditions under which the animal switches
              between distant behavioral patterns.  Second, we will examine the neural and
              mechanical basis of these switches.

2)We will create and analyze models of
              behavioral pattern switching as the basis for new design principles.  First, we
              will construct interconnected semi-Markov models to capture behavioral pattern
              reconfiguration observed in biological systems.  Second, we will pursue the
              development of a systematic design methodology for engineered systems, with
              potential applications to robotic assembly.

3)We will create and analyze
              models of multifunctional pattern generations in order to identify general
              design principles.  First, we will use genetic algorithms to evolve
              multifunctional neural pattern generators that can switch between distinct
              behavioral patterns.  Second, we will undertake a detailed study of the "design
              space" of these model pattern generators.

4)We will explore the
              implementation of multifunctional neural pattern generators in analog VLSI. 
              First, we will develop compact, low-power pattern generators based on the
              experimental and theoretical work proposed above.  Second, we will study the
              effects of noise and component mismatch on the performance of these
              networks.


