Title       : Characterization of a Vertebrate Sperm Chemoattractant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0130001

Award Number: 0130001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Chandler dchandler@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Rawls  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan L. Bieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. McGaughey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0130001
Chandler

Critical steps in sperm-egg interaction during
              fertilization in animals include initiation of sperm motility, sperm chemotaxis
              toward the egg, sperm penetration of the extracellular matrix layers
              surrounding the egg, and binding and fusion of sperm with the egg plasma
              membrane.  This proposal focuses on the important step of sperm chemotaxis, a
              process that has been widely studied in invertebrates such as the sea urchin
              but which has received little attention in vertebrates including mammals and
              humans.
 
Dr. Chandler and Collaborators have now purified and sequenced
              allurin, a 21 kD protein obtained from the egg jelly layers of Xenopus laevis
              that represents the first vertebrate sperm chemoattractant to be isolated. 
              Phylogenetic analysis of the allurin sequence suggests that this protein is
              related to the cysteine-rich secretory protein (CRISP) family of mammals,
              members of which are known to bind to sperm.  They propose to molecularly clone
              the cDNA coding for allurin, to express recombinant allurin in bacteria, and to
              determine whether native and recombinant allurin both have  chemoattractant
              activity for Xenopus sperm.  Chemoattractant activity will be quantitated in
              vitro using a two chamber assay in which sperm cross a porous polycarbonate
              membrane barrier, and sperm will be observed microscopically by using a
              "choice" assay in which sperm swimming behaviors and trajectories are monitored
              by video microscopy as they approach agar wells filled with the chemoattractant
              protein.  In addition, they plan to study the mechanism by which allurin acts
              on sperm with goals of 1) identifying and characterizing a sperm-surface
              receptor for allurin, and 2) determining what types of intracellular signals
              are elicited in sperm by allurin.  Finally, they will determine the range of
              allurin expression in both reproductive and non-reproductive tissues.  Protein
              expression will be assessed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting while
              expression of mRNA coding for allurin will be detected by Northern blots and in
              situ hybridization.  They anticipate that allurin-like proteins will be found
              in the reproductive tracts of both female and male amphibians.




