Title       : Statistical Bases of Reading and Spelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0130763

Award Number: 0130763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Treiman rtreiman@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett Kessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1311,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research is to learn more about the relationships between
              spellings and sounds in English and to use this information as a basis for
              studying the processes that are involved in spelling and reading.  Most
              previous studies of English reading and spelling have concentrated on short,
              simple words, those that contain a single syllable.  This research will go
              beyond past work by studying words that are longer and more complex.  Such
              words are frequently encountered by children and adults, and it is important to
              understand how they are dealt with.  Computer methods will examine the links
              between spellings and sounds in a comprehensive database of English words.  The
              research is based on the hypothesis that, even when it is not possible to
              predict exactly how a given sound will be spelled or how a given letter will be
              pronounced, there are a number of factors that can help narrow the range of
              alternatives.  For example, consideration of a unit's position in the word and
              the identity of the surrounding units can help decrease the degree of
              uncertainty.  The research will study these factors in both the adult
              vocabulary and the words that are seen by children of various ages.  The
              results of this phase of the research are expected to show that the English
              writing system, although complex, is more systematic than commonly believed.  A
              series of behavioral studies will examine children's and adults' use of the
              statistical patterns.  In addition, analysis of data from an extensive study of
              adults' reading of a very large number of words is expected to find that adults
              and even children are sensitive to the statistical patterns in the input. 
              However, the research is further guided by the hypothesis that learners pick up
              some types of patterns in the system more easily than others.  For example,
              patterns involving letters that are not adjacent to one another may be
              difficult for children to learn.  The results should thus help to show which
              aspects of the English writing system are especially difficult to master and
              why.  The findings should shed light on the nature of the English writing
              system and the way in which it is learned and used.  They should have
              implications for theories of literacy and literacy development and for the
              understanding and prevention of reading difficulties.
