Title       : RUI: Infrared Spectroscopy as a Probe of Active Site Structure and Molecular
               Mechanism in the Hydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0130905

Award Number: 0130905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Bagley bagleyka@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project infrared difference spectroscopy will be used to study the
              active site structure and molecular mechanism of hydrogen binding and
              activation in the hydrogenases.    Previous infrared spectroscopic studies have
              shown that both the [NiFe] hydrogenases and the Fe-only hydrogenases display
              intense infrared bands in the 2100-1800 cm-1 spectral region.  The groups
              responsible for these infrared bands have been identified as arising from
              intrinsic carbon monoxide and cyanide molecules coordinated to Fe ions in the
              active site of these enzymes.  The primary objectives of this research are: 1)
              Utilization of infrared spectroscopy for delineating the active site structure
              of the [NiFe] hydrogenase from Desulfovibrio vulgaris. The enzyme from
              Desulfovibrio vulgaris has been proposed to have a NiFe (CO)(CN)(SO) cluster at
              its active site rather than the NiFe (CO)(CN)2 cluster shown to exist in other
              [NiFe] Hydrogenases. 2)  Utilization of infrared difference spectroscopy to
              explore the molecular changes accompanying  reductive activation in the [NiFe]
              hydrogenases.  3) Utilization of the infrared spectral signatures, combined
              with isotopic labeling,  for determining the  active site structure of Fe-only
              Hydrogenases I and II from Clostridium pasteurianum.    4)  Utilization of
              mid-infrared difference spectroscopy to examine the role amino acids play in
              the activation of hydrogen. The research will involve undergraduate students
              pursuing degrees in chemistry and chemistry-related fields.

It is
              anticipated that this work  will have important consequences for understanding 
              the mechanism underlying the hydrogenases' ability to split molecular hydrogen
              into protons and electrons, or conversely, to produce hydrogen from protons and
              electrons. Such knowledge has consequences for the design of cheap catalysts
              for the production of hydrogen, a clean burning fuel source.  The proposed
              research will involve the participation of undergraduate students, both during
              the academic year and during the summer.   Student participation in this
              project will afford undergraduate students a unique opportunity to apply skills
              and knowledge they have learned in their coursework, while contributing to an
              exciting project in modern physical biochemistry.


