Title       : Investigating Genetic Mechanisms of the Baboon Dentition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0130277

Award Number: 0130277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslea Hlusko hlusko@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The primate dentition has been studied for many reasons ranging from
              phylogenetic reconstruction to dental development to functional morphology. 
              Because of their composition, teeth are the most frequently preserved parts of
              fossil primates and the only ones known for some extinct taxa.  Teeth are
              adapted for many functions - e.g. mastication, food preparation, and social
              interactions - but also contain a record of their growth, which all means that
              a great deal can be learned from their fossilized forms.  The dentition is also
              important from the developmental and evolutionary perspective.  Only wear,
              breakage and caries alter the morphology of primate teeth once eruption has
              occurred, and the effects of these processes are fairly easy to identify. 
              Teeth are thus relatively less affected by environment and behavior than are
              bones.  Consequently, teeth have a reduced nongenetic component to their
              variation and are more tractable for determining underlying genetic mechanisms.
               Combining all these characteristics of teeth, the dentition is a prime
              candidate for investigating the genetic evolutionary history of a complex
              phenotype.  This project proposes research into the genetic evolutionary
              history of the primate dentition using a baboon model.
	This project is a
              novel integration of the usually disparate fields of quantitative genetics and
              paleontology in order to investigate and identify the genetic mechanisms
              underlying evolutionarily significant morphological variation.  This project
              identifies dental traits from the last five million years of baboon evolution
              in Africa that also vary in a genotyped pedigreed colony of modern savanna
              baboons at the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research in San Antonio,
              Texas.  This variation will then be studied using modern quantitative genetic
              analyses to identify the genetic mechanisms that underlie this variation in
              modern baboons, and thereby, probably represent the same mechanisms that
              determined this variation in past baboon species.
	This project represents a
              unique opportunity to integrate the power of modern genetics with the time
              depth of the fossil record to investigate the genome and anatomy
              simultaneously, rather than as separate entities.  Results from this study have
              broad implications for evolutionary and developmental biology, as well as for
              anthropology and primatology.  This study will provide insight into the genetic
              mechanisms that underlie tooth development and patterning in baboons,
              mechanisms likely to be involved in the evolution of teeth of other primates,
              including humans and their ancestors.  Thus, the results of this study will be
              immediately applicable to the study of human dental evolution, as well as the
              evolution of many other primates.  

