Title       : FASEB Conference: Transcriptional Regulation During Cell Growth, Differentiation
               and Development; June 29 - July 4, 2002, Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0130853

Award Number: 0130853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marian B. Carlson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1119,1136,1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This project provides partial funding for a conference on "Transcriptional
              Regulation During Cell Growth, Differentiation, and Development" to be held
              under the auspices of FASEB at Saxtons River, Vermont, from June 29-July 4,
              2002.  Gene regulation through transcription is a fundamental process common to
              all biological systems.  Transcriptional regulation underlies critical aspects
              of cell behavior including proliferation, response to environmental signals,
              differentiation, and the development of multicellular organisms.  The intent of
              this conference is to bring together researchers engaged in studying a broad
              range of transcriptional processes in different biological systems and using
              different methodologies.  The sessions are designed to communicate recent
              advances in knowledge of fundamental mechanisms of transcriptional activation
              and repression, chromatin structure, and long-range and epigenetic effects on
              gene expression, and the relationship of these mechanisms to the biology of
              response to environmental signals, development, and cell-cycle control.  The
              conference will underscore the important role that transcriptional regulation
              plays in normal differentiation and development and the manner in which
              aberrant gene expression is involved in cancer and other diseases.  This
              conference differs from other transcription meetings in that it does not focus
              simply on molecular mechanisms but rather emphasizes how transcription is used
              by cells to solve particular problems of development and differentiation.  As
              such, the meeting will include problems encountered and solved across a wide
              range of species, including yeast, worms, flies, and mammals, such that the
              similarities and differences can be appreciated.  The meeting will include
              formal talks, discussion periods, two informal 2-day poster sessions, and
              excellent opportunities for interaction among the attending scientists. 
              Attendees will include principal investigators, postdoctoral fellows, and
              graduate students.  33% of the invited speakers and 8/9 session chairs are
              women, and 54% of the invited speakers are new to this meeting.  The conference
              will provide an up-to-date overview of one of the most fundamental and rapidly
              moving fields in biology and is expected to generate new directions for future
              research.
