Title       : CAREER: The Evolution of Cooperative Breeding, Reproductive Suppression, and
               All-Male Groups in a Southern African Ground Squirrel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0130600

Award Number: 0130600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Waterman waterman@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The evolution of cooperative breeding, reproductive suppression, and all-male
              groups in a southern African ground squirrel.  Jane M. Waterman
	In highly
              social species, reproduction is often monopolized by a few individuals, yet
              species with more breeding individuals offer an alternative approach to
              understanding the costs and benefits of sociality.  Although most cooperative
              groups are composed of close relatives, examining sociality among unrelated
              individuals enables other selective advantages for grouping to be evaluated.
              The Cape ground squirrel (Xerus inauris) lives in the arid regions of southern
              Africa in clusters of related females and associated bands of apparently
              unrelated males.  Females and their young are considered to be cooperative
              breeders because of the delayed dispersal and reproductive suppression of young
              that help care for offspring.  Males live independently of females in amicable
              all-male bands that persist throughout the year, and only interact with females
              during breeding.  Thus, two different social systems (male and female) coexist
              in this species, resulting in a social organization unlike that described for
              any other mammal and providing a unique model for testing hypotheses on the
              costs and benefits of grouping.  
	This project will test critical hypotheses
              about the evolution of social behavior in Cape ground squirrels using a
              combination of behavioral, molecular and hormonal techniques.  To understand
              the evolution of cooperative breeding in females, reproduction, survival, and
              offspring care of breeders and non-breeders will be examined in groups that
              differ in size and habitat quality.  The reproductive suppression of subadult
              females will be monitored using hormone assays and correlated with number and
              behavior of breeders. Genetic relationships of males and the paternity of
              offspring within the band's home range will be correlated with dominance
              status.  Predator mobbing experiments will examine mobbing as a form of helping
              behavior in females and a form of paternal care in males (related to the number
              of offspring in the area).  Delayed dispersal by young males will be examined
              to compare the reproductive payoff of this strategy to that of early
              dispersers.
	The research and educational objectives of this project will be
              highly integrated in a collaboration between the University of Central Florida
              and the University of Pretoria in South Africa.  Much of the research will be
              conducted by graduate students from both schools who will develop thesis
              projects based on this proposal.  A field course on the ecology and behavior of
              small mammals in South Africa will be developed for senior undergraduates and
              beginning graduate students from both schools.  This course will use web-based
              distance learning and an intensive field component to expose students to the
              theory, methods and analytical tools used in mammalogy, behavioral ecology, and
              research in general.  Thus, this project will lay the foundation for a
              long-term study of African ground squirrels and collaboration with the
              University of Pretoria in both research and education.  

