Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Social and Biological Determinants of
               Cardiovascular Risk among Urban and Rural Yakut: The Impact of Socioeconomic
               Upheaval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0130761

Award Number: 0130761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10027              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Leonard w-leonard1@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The collapse of the Soviet Union was a watershed event that resulted in a
              catastrophic decline in longevity and health status for indigenous Siberians.  
              The social and economic disintegration following the breakup of the Soviet
              Union resulted in epidemic mortality from cardiovascular diseases.   This study
              will investigate the social, behavioral and physiological phenomena underlying
              this higher mortality.  This research uses an urban-rural design to investigate
              major determinants of cardiovascular risk in the Yakut, an indigenous Siberian
              group.  The hypothesis will be tested that rapid social change has lead to
              dietary changes, producing a gene-diet interaction leading to high cholesterol
              levels among urban subjects and increased incidence of cardiovascular disease. 
               Approximately 500 adult subjects will be recruited from the city of Yakutsk,
              the village of Tiungiuliu and surrounding settlements.  Serum lipids and
              C-reactive protein will be used as markers of cardiovascular risk and will be
              measured using dried blood spots.   Dietary intake of saturated fats and
              cholesterol will be assessed using a food frequency questionnaire.  Data on
              health behavior (alcohol consumption, smoking) and sociodemographic dimensions
              will be collected by questionnaire.  This research will enhance international
              collaboration and the exchange of scientific knowledge between U.S. and
              international scientists and will provide essential training for future
              scientists in the United States.  This research is significant in that it
              explains the health consequences of failed modernization, estimates the effect
              of gene-diet interactions, and increases our knowledge of how rapid
              epidemiological change can occur within the context of rural-urban social
              change.   
