Title       : Ligand Translational Mobility and Concentration Near Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0130589

Award Number: 0130589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Thompson nlt@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The hypothesis of this project is that local deviations from ideal, bulk
              translational mobilities and concentrations of ligands near membrane surfaces
              exert critical influences on the kinetics of ligand-receptor interactions and,
              as a consequence, biological function.  To test this hypothesis, three groups
              of specific aims will be pursued.  In the first group of aims, physical factors
              (electrostatic, hydrodynamic and entrapment) governing the translational
              mobilities and concentrations of fluorescent ligands in regions of solution
              that are very close to model and natural cell membranes deposited on
              transparent planar substrates will be examined.  These measurements will be
              carried out by using total internal reflection with fluorescence correlation
              spectroscopy as developed during the last funding period.  In the second group
              of specific aims, three technological innovations will be implemented.  These
              innovations will provide distance-dependent, rather than distance-averaged,
              information about local ligand dynamics.  First, the distance-dependence of the
              local ligand translational mobility and concentration will be probed by
              changing the evanescent depth. Second, photon counting histograms obtained with
              evanescent illumination will provide a direct measure of the manner in which
              the ligand concentration and therefore potential depend on the distance from
              the membrane surface. Third, high order autocorrelation will be employed to
              further confirm and understand the effects of the nearby membrane surface on
              the local ligand concentration and mobility.  The goal of the final specific
              aim is to correlate local changes in ligand concentrations and dynamics, as
              they are observed, with specific ligand-receptor kinetics.  The interaction
              kinetics will be monitored with a well-established method, total internal
              reflection with fluorescence photobleaching recovery.
