Title       : Molecular/Biochemical Investigations of PEPC (and its Novel Ser/Thr-Kinase) and
               SuSy (Nodulin-100), Two Phosphorylated Metabolic Enzymes in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0130057

Award Number: 0130057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $582024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Chollet RCHOLLET1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This basic research project is focused on this laboratory's long-standing
              interest in plant metabolic enzymes and their regulation by the ubiquitous
              process of "reversible protein phosphorylation". The overall investigation
              deals specifically with phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) and sucrose
              synthase (SuSy), two "target" enzymes that undergo phosphorylation in
              photosynthesizing leaves and/or nitrogen-fixing root nodules of soybeans, peas,
              and other legumes. While PEPC is best known for its cardinal role in the
              initial fixation of atmospheric carbon dioxide during photosynthesis by such
              crop plants as sorghum, corn, sugarcane and pineapple, it also functions in a
              diverse array of non-photosynthetic contexts, e.g., carbon/nitrogen-metabolism
              in legume root nodules and unicellular green algae. This "multifaceted" nature
              of plant PEPC makes it an extremely attractive subject for continued study of
              its (a) intricate control by "PEPC-kinase" (PpcK), the novel, highly regulated
              protein-kinase enzyme that phosphorylates/activates PEPC, and (b) emerging
              biochemical structure-function relationships. Along these lines, two of the
              three specific experimental objectives of this renewal project focus on the
              molecular/biochemical analysis of plant PpcK, and sorghum-leaf and green-algal
              PEPC. The third and final focus of this investigation is SuSy, likely the major
              sucrose-metabolizing enzyme in a variety of non-photosynthetic "sink" tissues
              in plants, including legume root nodules, developing leaves, fruits and seeds,
              and tubers. Continued interest in this metabolic enzyme largely stems from the
              fact that, like PEPC, it is one of but a handful of phosphorylated plant
              enzymes with a specific "target" amino-acid residue(s) identified both in
              planta and in vitro. In addition, this "target" enzyme has the documented
              potential for phosphorylation at multiple sites by at least two distinct
              subfamilies of plant protein kinases. However, neither the exact role of this
              phosphorylation event(s) nor its dynamic reversibility in planta is
              established. These uncertainties will be addressed experimentally during this
              project by a combination of biochemical, immunological and mass-spectroscopic
              approaches.

The significance of this multi-pronged, basic research and
              discovery project is that it will (a) enhance the fundamental understanding of
              two important enzymes involved in plant primary metabolism in terms of their
              intricate regulation and structure-function relationships, and (b) provide
              detailed molecular insight into the unique protein kinase that "targets" one of
              them exclusively. As such, the results from this research will contribute
              significantly to the requisite underpinning for the constructive manipulation
              of plant carbon/nitrogen-metabolism and its control mechanisms in leaves and
              legume root nodules by biotechnological approaches.

