Title       : Bayesian Formulations for Model Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0130819

Award Number: 0130819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward I. George   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues consider new directions for the development
              of default model uncertainty input specifications for Bayesian model selection
              and model averaging.  For the problem of model space prior specification,
              distributions are developed that dilute probability within neighborhoods of
              redundant models, thereby providing a more appropriate representation of
              ignorance.  For the problem of parameter space prior specification, the
              predictive properties of model averaging are investigated for various prior
              formulations.  In particular, focusing on the frequentist consequences of prior
              misspecification, new formulations are developed that maintain near-minimax
              behavior with only a minor degradation of predictive potential.  For Bayesian
              modeling of large data sets, new adaptive formulations are developed that
              accommodate local as well as global structure.  This includes new adaptive
              hierarchical modeling formulations as well as a new framework for simultaneous
              model and data selection.  The goals of theoretical optimality and practical
              feasibility are considered throughout. 

The ultimate objective of this
              research is to enhance the potential of Bayesian statistical methods for
              discovering and modeling systematic relationships between variables in large
              multi-variable data sets.  The explosive growth of information technologies has
              led to the proliferation of such data sets across widely diverse fields in
              business and science.  Such methods offer a general approach towards improving
              explanations and predictions of many varied phenomenon such as, for example,
              consumer behavior, disease incidence, financial turbulence, industrial
              pollution and school efficiency.  Bayesian statistical methods, in particular,
              offer the promise of optimally distinguishing systematic structure from random
              noise, which is of critical importance for effective mining of large, detailed
              data sets.  The main thrust of this research is on the development of automatic
              implementations and richer formulations of these methods that will more fully
              exploit their statistical potential. 
