Title       : Disadvantaged Second Generations: The Socioeconomic Incorporation of Mexicans in
               the U.S. and Maghrebins in France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0130372

Award Number: 0130372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Alba r.alba@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project, a collaboration between U.S. and French researchers, is an attempt
              to conduct systematic comparative research on second-generation incorporation
              of immigrants in the US and France. Examination of a wider range of contexts
              than can be found in one society alone can help to clarify the circumstances
              under which each of the competing theoretical models of
              incorporation--classical assimilation, segmented assimilation, and ethnic
              pluralism-best applies and the causal mechanisms involved. 
The intent is to
              study the socioeconomic incorporation of the second generation of the largest
              immigrant groups in France and the U.S.- Maghrebins, i.e., Muslim North
              Africans, in the former and Mexicans in the latter. A number of similarities in
              the situations of these two groups suggest that they may be on more or less
              parallel tracks of incorporation. The societies they have entered both have
              strong histories of assimilation as the principal mode of incorporating the
              descendants of immigrants, but the groups in question come from countries that
              have endured colonial or semi-colonial relationships to the host societies.
              Both impressionistic and systematic evidence indicate that they suffer from
              prejudice and discrimination and that their second generations (and, in the
              case of Mexicans, their third) evidence a variety of disadvantages, from higher
              rates of early departure from school to concentration in low-skill jobs. Thus,
              the evidence to date leaves it unclear which of the models of classic and
              segmented assimilation better applies and under what circumstances. If the
              socioeconomic trajectories of Mexicans and Maghrebins turn out to be similar in
              a systematic comparison, this could lead to a re-evaluation of the
              understanding of the position of the groups in both societies-in the U.S., this
              could entail some revision in the segmented-assimilation model, which is so far
              tied to features specific to the U.S. (e.g., racial segregation); and in
              France, to a revision in the understanding of the source of Maghrebin
              disadvantage, which is heavily colored by religious distinctiveness. 
The
              research will be based on analysis with multi-level models of a number of
              micro-level data 
sets in both countries-in the U.S., we will use the National
              Longitudinal Study of 1979 and the National Educational Longitudinal Study of
              1988; in France, we will use four different studies,  including the FQP
              ("Fonnation-Qualification-Professionelle") of 1993 and the "Generation 1992" of
              Cereq.  All the studies offer a comparable range of variables measuring family
              origins, school achievement, and early labor-market  experiences on major
              variables.. 

