Title       : Mechanism of Flavobacterium johnsoniae Gliding Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0130967

Award Number: 0130967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. McBride mcbride@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9178,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Gliding motility (the active movement of cells over surfaces without the aid
              of
flagella) is a trait shared by diverse bacteria. Gliding motility was first
              observed nearly
200 years ago, yet the mechanisms responsible for cell
              movement are still largely
unknown. Flavobacterium johnsoniae is a convenient
              model organism for studies of
bacterial gliding motility. Techniques to
              genetically manipulate F. johnsoniae have
recently been developed and used to
              characterize a number of genes that are required
for gliding (gld genes). The
              proteins encoded by these genes appear to localize to the
cell envelope, where
              the motility apparatus is expected to reside. GldA, GldF, and
GldG are thought
              to interact to form an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter. Most
of the
              other Gld proteins do not exhibit significant similarity to proteins of
              known
function. The role of the Gld ABC transporter in gliding is not known
              and will be
investigated. Wild-type and mutant cells are being biochemically
              characterized to identify
the cargo of the transporter and determine the role
              of the transporter in gliding.
Additional genes required for gliding will also
              be identified by cosmid complementation
and transposon mutagenesis. These
              genes will be cloned, sequenced, and analyzed to
determine possible functions
              for the individual components of the gliding machinery.
Mutations will be
              created in individual gld genes and the effects on cell motility will
              be
assessed. The genes will also be cloned into expression vectors to
              allow
overproduction of Gld proteins. These proteins will be used to raise
              antibodies, which
will allow localization of the Gld proteins by cell
              fractionation and by immuno-electron
microscopy. This may allow visualization
              of the motility machinery at high resolution for
the first time, and will be
              an important step toward determining the mechanism of
gliding. Bacteriophages
              that infect only motile cells will also be used as tools to aid
              in
identification of the outermost components of the motility machinery. These
              studies
will lead to a better understanding of the mechanism of Flavobacterium
              gliding motility. In addition to expanding our knowledge on this common but
              little understood means of bacterial locomotion, these studies could have more
              practical value since gliding bacteria related to F. johnsoniae are important
              as pathogens of plants, animals, and humans, as agents of biodegradation, and
              as producers of enzymes, antibiotics and other secondary metabolites.

