Title       : Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Information Processing in
               Designed Neuronal Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a0130828

Award Number: 0130828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1155999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Wheeler bwheeler@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130828 -Bruce C. Wheeler-University of Illinois-BITS:  Information
              processing in Designed Neuronal Circuits

BITS:  Information processing in
              Designed Neuronal Circuits

The aim of this project is to enhance our
              understanding of information processing by small numbers of neurons arranged in
              designed circuits.  This is an ideal time for this initiative because:
  
We
              can intentionally design neuronal microcircuits due to progress in serum free
              media to support relatively pure neuronal populations, in microlithgraphy as
              applied to the deposition of proteins and other biomolecules to surfaces, and
              in understanding of the conditions under which sparse pattern populations of
              neurons become functionally active in culture.

We can study the information
              processing capabilities of these neuronal circuits due to advances
              microelectrode array technology, permitting both stimulation and recording of
              electrical activity, as well as the supporting real-time data acquisition
              technology.	

We can analyze the data utilizing theories of neural coding
              derived as applications of rich theoretical foundations in signal processing
              and communications theory.

We have three specific goals, creation of
              reliable, repeatable, robust neuronal circuits of cultured hippocampal neurons.
                Stable circuit behavior is essential to further investigation of information
              processing.

The first aim emphasizes geometric properties, including guiding
              axonal extension, the second aim emphasizes functional properties, and the
              third aim is neuronal information processing.  Models to be evaluated include
              rate codes, precise timing codes and phase synchronization codes. 

