Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating the Development of
               Agriculture in the Salta Puna, Northwestern Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0130421

Award Number: 0130421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer m.aldenderfer@ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Mark Aldenderfer, Claudia U. Rumold will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation which will examine the adoption of agriculture in
              the high Andes of northwestern Argentina.  She will participate in the
              archaeological investigation of two sites, Ramadas and Matansillas 2, located
              in the San Antonio de los Cobres River Valley.  The sites, dating from circa
              5240 to 2040 BP, span the period in which agriculture developed in this region
              and current evidence indicates that they will provide data regarding this
              process.  Both sites contain evidence for the cultivation, processing, or
              consumption of plants (e.g., hoes, grinding stones, plant remains). 
              Significantly, sites as early as Ramadas are rare in the south-central Andes
              and may provide key insights into the first stages of agricultural adoption. 
              

Within the last ten thousand years, agriculture appeared independently
              among many societies inhabiting distinct environmental settings around the
              world.  The widespread adoption of an agrarian economy had and continues to
              have a far-reaching impact - contributing to increasing sociopolitical
              complexity, sedentarization, rapid population growth, urbanism, and large-scale
              human transformation of the environment.  In view of its pivotal role,
              archaeologists wish to understand agriculture's origins and development - how
              and why it diffused so successfully throughout the globe.  Clarification of the
              fundamental variables underlying the shift from hunting-gathering to farming
              hinges on careful comparison of case studies.  Northwestern Argentina possesses
              many of the variables closely linked with the appearance of agriculture (e.g.,
              the domestication of autochthonous plants and animals and the appearance of
              pottery and settled village life).  Rumold's research here will therefore
              provide new data critical to the comparative process.  

Four analyses will
              be carried out with the aim of characterizing the emergence of farming at the
              sites in question.  Grinding stone and ceramic use-wear analysis will elucidate
              the nature and intensity of plant processing techniques.  Examination of
              charred plant remains will illuminate the use of seed plants.  Roots and tubers
              (e.g., potato) - the most important economic plants domesticated
              prehistorically in the Andes - do not often preserve in charred form;
              therefore, starch grain analysis will be conducted in order to clarify their
              economic role.  As this technique is relatively new to archaeology, Rumold's
              research will help to expand its empirical base in highland South America.  On
              a theoretical level, data regarding the use of roots and tubers will be
              essential to correcting the present bias in theories of agricultural origins,
              which primarily concern seed plants.  

