Title       : Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Modeling and Analysis of
               Biological and Information Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0130797

Award Number: 0130797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey Rubin rubinh@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajeev Alur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Goulian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Pappas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Vijay Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130797 -Harvey Rubin-University of Pennsylvania-Modeling and Analysis of
              Biological and Information Networks 

The overall goals of our research are
              to:  1) create enabling technologies and experimental systems that are
              necessary to understand and predict the integrated functions of two bacterial
              sensing and regulatory networks--porim osmo-regulation in E.coli and oxygen
              sensing regulation of DNA synthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis; 2) model and
              abstract principles of organization, design control and coordination of
              biological systems.  We believe that a better understanding of networked,
              hybrid models in biology will provide deeper insights into networked, embedded
              systems.  No systematic approach to designing and developing such hybrid
              systems exists today.

Our research on the porin osmo-regulatory system in E.
              coli will investigate crosstalk between the porin osmo-regulatory system and
              other signaling systems.  We suggest that the ability of the sensing element of
              the system, EnvZ, to act as both a kinase and phosphatase is crucial for the
              control of information flow and to minimize crosstalk.  We will extend our
              models in a related series of experiments on the PhoQ/PhoP two component
              systems, which responds to changes in the extracellular magnesium
              concentration.  Since the levels of the histidine kinase PhoQ and response
              regulator PhoP are modulated by the concentration of phosphorylated PhoP, we
              will be able to establish the effect of this feedback and its influence on
              robustness of the overall system behavior.

