Title       : Energetics of Protein Metabolism during Development of Antarctic Echinoderms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0130398

Award Number: 0130398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $472369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donal T. Manahan manahan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Maxson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0130398
Manahan

Larval forms are dominant in the life history strategies of
              invertebrates in marine environments. In Antarctica, energy budget calculations
              have shown that larval stages of echinoderms have the capacity to survive
              without food for periods of several months to years. This has led to the
              speculation that mechanisms of energy metabolism are more efficient in these
              larval forms, and that this "enhanced efficiency" might be unique to life in
              extreme cold. Recent studies on the biochemical bases of developmental
              physiology in Antarctic marine invertebrates have revealed some novel aspects
              of metabolism in the cold. Contrary to expectations of low metabolism and low
              rates of macromolecular synthesis in the cold, embryos and larvae of an
              Antarctic sea urchin have high rates of protein synthesis, while maintaining
              low rates of metabolism. This apparent paradox was resolved with the recent
              finding that the cost of protein synthesis in this Antarctic sea urchin is one
              twenty-fifth of that reported for other animals. This is the highest efficiency
              for protein synthesis reported for an animal and has important implications for
              the physiology of growth and development in cold environments. This unique
              biochemical efficiency of protein synthesis in the cold is the subject of
              detailed investigation in the current project. The research team will combine
              expertise in Antarctic larval physiology and biochemistry and molecular biology
              of sea urchin development to address an experimental plan that is based on
              three major objectives. (1) The generality of the recent finding of the low
              cost of protein synthesis in Antarctic sea urchin larvae will be tested by
              measuring metabolism and protein synthesis during development of other
              Antarctic echinoderm species. (2) The prediction of a high rate of protein
              synthesis with low metabolic cost is that growth efficiencies will be high in
              such organisms. This will be tested by measuring the physiology of protein
              growth efficiencies in larvae. (3) The unique high efficiency of protein
              synthesis in Antarctic sea urchin embryos will be studied using specific
              molecular biology approaches. The combination of these quantitative analyses
              will enable us to pinpoint those aspects of protein metabolism that result in
              such extremely high energy-efficiencies. Understanding metabolic efficiency in
              polar organisms is required to help resolve long-standing questions regarding
              temperature compensation and adaptations to food limitation in polar regions.
              The unique approach here is the emphasis on the cellular and sub-cellular
              levels of biological analysis to understand the relationship among development,
              growth, metabolic rate, and rates and costs of protein synthesis in the
              Antarctic organisms we propose to study. 

