Title       : "Statistical analysis of cross-language color naming data."
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0130420

Award Number: 0130420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Kay kay@cogsci.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry Regier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1390,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Paul Kay and Terry Regier will
              build a web-accessible database to test the hypothesis of universal constraints
              on color naming across languages. Anthropologists and linguists used to think
              that the meanings of color words (e.g., "red", "black", etc.) differ
              arbitrarily from language to language. It was also thought that these words,
              rather than being constrained by biological constants of human color
              perception, vary arbitrarily across cultures and that the words cause speakers
              of different languages to see color differently. A 1969 study by Kay and
              colleagues challenged this view, maintaining that patterns in color naming
              across languages reveal certain constants. That study was followed up by the
              NSF-supported World Color Survey, in which data on color naming in 110
              unwritten languages were gathered in the field by linguists highly familiar
              with the languages. The World Color Survey resulted in a number of
              publications, generally supporting the view of universal constraints on color
              naming. Because these data were collected in the early days of computers, they
              were not entered into a uniform database that would make them amenable to
              comprehensive statistical testing or to web publication. The current project
              will (1) convert the World Color Survey data to a uniform database, (2) make
              this database available to everyone via the web, and (3) perform comprehensive
              statistical testing on the data to test hypotheses about color naming.

The
              question of universal constraints on systems of color naming has broad
              implications. Color words provide a natural laboratory in cross-language
              comparison of meanings because their meanings - colors - can be specified in a
              scientific system of description that is independent of any particular natural
              language. Color has thus been the vocabulary domain most often cited both by
              proponents of linguistic/cultural relativity and by their opponents, who tend
              to emphasize biologically and evolutionary based universals in human behavior.
              As a consequence, color words have come to occupy a special position in the
              very general nature versus nurture debate, a controversy within the biological
              and social sciences, as well as the general educated public and many issues of
              public policy, at least since Darwin. Increased scientific clarity with regard
              to universality versus arbitrariness in color naming is consequently of general
              interest.

