Title       : Subsistence Changes and Community-based Craft Production in Prehistoric Central
               Thailand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0130371

Award Number: 0130371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent C. Pigott vcpigott@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Mudar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy A. Sabloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Between 1990-1994,with NSF funding, Dr. Vincent Pigott and colleagues excavated
              a cluster of three prehistoric copper producing sites in the small, ore-rich
              Khao Wong Prachan Valley in central Thailand.  While occupation began ca. 2300
              B.C., copper metallurgy did not appear until ca. 1500 B.C. at Non Pa Wai, Nil
              Kham Haeng and Non Mak La.  With pending support from the NSF, Dr. Pigott and
              Co-PI Dr. Karen Mudar will oversee a program of analysis of the excavated
              organic remains from these three sites. 

The goal of the analytical program
              is to establish and assess the evidence for subsistence and subsistence change
              through analysis of the floral, faunal, and human skeletal remains. We seek to
              measure possible agricultural instability based on evidence for marginal soils,
              erratic rainfall, and drought potential. These analyses will be used to test
              our working model that links agricultural instability to the specialized
              production of copper in explaining the nature of economic and social relations
              within this prehistoric context.

Massive copper production in the valley,
              but little indication of local use, suggests that copper was being produced for
              exchange, most  probably for food. We argue that copper production was a
              strategy to buffer unpredictable shortfalls in local agriculture. Evidence
              suggests that environmental changes brought on by humans as well as
              agricultural instability occurred in concert with the intensification of copper
              production. The correlation of changes in both subsistence and production will
              contribute to an understanding of subsistence strategies that, we argue,
              motivated long-term, non-hierarchical, egalitarian, social and economic
              relations in this region.

Dr. Mudar will conduct the analysis of all
              excavated faunal remains. Dr. Anagnostis Agelarakis (Adelphi University) will
              study the forty-eight human skeletons from the site of Non Mak La. Dr. Steven
              Weber (Washington State University, Vancouver) will  study all excavated
              samples of botanical remains and Dr. Lisa Kealhofer (Santa Clara University)
              will study all samples taken for phytolith analysis including those from swamp
              corings. 
With the analytical results in hand, the PI's will examine potential
              links between craft specialization, unreliable agriculture, and egalitarian
              social organization; evidence which should provide an important alternative to
              current models. We anticipate that the results of this study will have a major
              impact on how archaeologists view craft production and social complexity.


