Title       : SYMPOSIUM: New Perspectives on the Origin of Metazoan Complexity, held at (SICB)
               meeting in Anaheim, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0130902

Award Number: 0130902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Ann Dewel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. McShea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Q. Martindale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The symposium, New Perspectives on the Origin of Metazoan Complexity, will be
              held at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
              Biology (SICB) meeting, January 3-6, 2002, in Anaheim, California.  Funding for
              the symposium will provide a stimulus for research on the early diversification
              of metazoans.  The vast majority of living organisms, bacteria, algae, and
              "protozoans", consist of single cells or even when multicellular of only a few
              different types of cells. What distinguishes metazoans from these organisms is
              that they have not just many cells, but many different types of cells.  Their
              cells, moreover, are organized in complex patterns, forming tissues and organs.
              Exactly how metazoan complexity evolved is a daunting problem in evolutionary
              biology.  The goal of this symposium is to examine how the morphological and
              theoretical aspects of metazoan complexity relate to the growing evidence that
              genomic complexity increased very early and rapidly and may predate even the
              origin of the clade.  Such a view challenges the idea that metazoan ancestors
              were simple and that complexity has arisen incrementally.  The symposium will
              bring together a select group of biologists and paleontologists to identify
              promising areas for research and promote greater cooperation between their
              respective disciplines.  The program includes promising young investigators at
              the Masters, PhD, and postdoctoral levels as well as senior investigators with
              established research programs.  The symposium is also designed to encourage
              gender diversity, with 7 women as presenting authors, and promote foreign
              collaborations, with 12 of the participants coming from countries other than
              the United States.

    



