Title       : Evolution of Axis Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0130375

Award Number: 0130375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans R. Bode hrbode@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0130375
Hans Bode

	During the last 20 years a great deal has been learned
              about the genes and the molecular mechanisms that regulate the processes
              underlying the development of an embryo into a functioning animal.  One of the
              most interesting aspects of the accumulating knowledge is that similar sets of
              genes and mechanisms underlie similar developmental processes in many of the
              diverse animals studied so far.   These common features raise a number of
              important questions.  When during animal evolution did these genes arise?  Were
              they already present in the earliest metazoan?   To what extent has the
              function of a particular gene, or pathway of genes been conserved throughout
              metazoan evolution?
	One approach to these issues is to study these genes and
              their functions in organisms that belong to groups of animals that arose very
              early during metazoan evolution.  One of the earliest groups is the Cnidaria,
              whose members include jellyfish, sea anemones, and the freshwater hydra.  Of
              these, hydra, is particularly useful since the developmental processes are
              well-understood. 
	The overall aim of the proposed work is to determine the
              extent that the genes and mechanisms underlying axis formation in hydra are
              similar to those found vertebrates and arthropods.  Though hydra, and all
              cnidarians, have a single axis compared to the two axes [anterior-posterior and
              dorsal-ventral] in bilaterians, a number of genes known to be involved in axis
              formation in vertebrates and arthropods play similar roles in hydra.
	A
              specific problem that needs to be addressed concerns the genes and mechanisms
              involved in the initiation of axis formation.  In vertebrates, a region termed
              the organizer plays a central role.  Recently, a region of the hydra head, the
              hypostome, has been shown to have clear similarities with this vertebrate
              structure.  Thus, the focus of this proposal is to isolate genes from the hydra
              organizer, determine their roles, and determine to what extent the same or
              similar genes are involved in hydra and vertebrate organizers as well as
              arthropod organizing regions.
	The common approach is to look for homologues
              of genes that function in the organizer activity of a vertebtate or the fruit
              fly, Drosophila.  This approach has been very successful but is slow and
              tedious.  DNA array analysis provides a means for identifying a subset of genes
              among several thousand that are candidates for roles in organizer activity in
              hydra.  Sequence analysis will reveal which are homologues of known genes,
              which belong to a specific class of gene and which are novel genes. 
              Thereafter, the role of each of these genes will be analyzed by examining their
              expression patterns during the development and functioning of the organizer
              region as well as with the use of a functional assay.
	The information gained
              will provide (a) a more detailed understanding of the organizer in hydra, (b) a
              more detailed understanding of the molecular evolution of this structure, (c)
              and possibly the identification of novel genes that may generally be involved
              in organizer development and activity.


