Title       : Riparian Plant Genotype by Environment Interactions:Eeffects on Leaf Litter
               Quality, in-Stream Decomposition, and Aquatic Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0130487

Award Number: 0130487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane C. Marks jane.marks@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Hungate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Whitham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Litterfall from riparian vegetation provides a critical energy source for many
              stream food webs. The quality of those litter inputs strongly influences their
              rate of decomposition in the stream and the diversity and productivity of
              aquatic organisms they support. The extent to which genetic variation within a
              single species or hybrid complex contributes to variation in litter quality is
              not well understood, but could be critical, particularly in high-elevation
              riparian ecosystems in the southwest, where two species of cottonwoods and
              their hybrids constitute 80-95% of the riparian vegetation. Furthermore, the
              effects of environmental stress such as insect herbivory and drought are known
              to depend on cottonwood genotypes, but how such genotype by environment
              interactions affect leaf litter quality and in- stream processing is not known
              for cottonwoods, nor, to our knowledge, for any other riparian species.

This
              study will determine whether aquatic biodiversity and ecosystem processes are
              similarly linked to cottonwood hybrid zones. Common gardens with pure and
              hybrid cottonwoods of known genotypes will be used to determine how genetic
              variation within the cottonwood hybrid complex affects litter quality, in-
              stream decomposition (including mass loss and nutrient release), and
              colonization and diversity of microbial decomposers (bacteria and fungi) and
              invertebrates. This experimental work will be supplemented with natural surveys
              of litter entering streams to determine the importance and distribution of
              litter from each of four cottonwood cross-types (Fremont, narrowleaf, F1, and
              backcross) that are naturally ubiquitous in watersheds from Colorado to Mexico.
              Finally, controlled experiments crossing cottonwood cross-types and
              environmental stress (drought and herbivory) will be used to determine how
              genetic by environment interactions alter litter quality and litter processing
              and biodiversity in streams. This research will address these critical unknowns
              in our understanding of aquatic community and ecosystem processes and
              terrestrial-aquatic interactions.

