Title       : Mapping Galactic Magnetic Fields with SPARO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0130389

Award Number: 0130389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giles Novak g-novak@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will continue the operation of the Submillimeter Polarimeter
              for Antarctic Remote Observations (SPARO) at the South Pole for the next three
              winter seasons.  The SPARO instrument is operated on the Viper 2-meter
              telescope, and has recently been upgraded following its first year of
              observations. In the exceptionally transmissive and stable winter-time skies
              over the Antarctic plateau, SPARO provides a powerful probe of magnetic fields
              in interstellar regions.
     Measurements at submillimeter wavelengths
              provide a method for mapping magnetic fields in the denser interstellar regions
              of the galaxy by measuring the linear polarization of thermal emission from
              magnetically aligned interstellar dust grains. Interstellar magnetic fields are
              generally difficult to observe, but they can contribute to our understanding of
              two general problems in which interstellar gas (and thus probably also magnetic
              fields) play important roles: the study of the galactic center, and star
              formation.
     The galactic center is a highly radiationally active region. 
              In some centers, known as "active galactic nuclei" (AGN), the nucleus or
              central core produces more radiation than the entire rest of the galaxy.  The
              size of an AGN can be smaller than the size of our solar system, and current
              theory suggests that there is a supermassive black hole at the center of an
              AGN.
     Observations proposed here are aimed at (a) confirming SPARO's
              recent discovery of a large-scale toroidal magnetic field at the galactic
              center, (b) testing a magnetic outflow model for the "Galactic Center Lobe" - a
              radio structure possibly tracing gas that has been ejected from the galactic
              nucleus, and (c) mapping large-scale magnetic fields in a sample of star
              forming clouds in order to study the relationship between the elongated shapes
              of these clouds and their magnetic fields.

