Title       : Preparative Electron Transfer Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0130943

Award Number: 0130943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Mariano mariano@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The emphasis of this work is on the development of new single electron transfer
              initiated photochemical reactions.  Photochemical group transfer reactions
              which result from the formation of reactive dipolar intermediates will be
              investigated in detail.  Photochemical preparation and trapping of 1,3 dipoles
              such as azomethine and carbonyl ylides will be studied as will 1,4 dipole
              forming and trapping reactions of alpha ketoamides and alpha ketoesters. 
              Single electron transfer initiated photomacrocyclization reactions will also be
              studied, first using phthalimides.  Photomacrocyclization of phthalimides will
              be used to determine the factors which govern efficiencies and
              regioselectivities of photocyclizations then that information will be applied
              to macrocyclic polyether, polyamide and polypeptide syntheses.    

With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Patrick S. Mariano of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of New Mexico.  Dr. Mariano will explore photochemical group
              transfer, cyclization and redox reactions.  The photocyclization reactions
              studied  will serve as the foundation for new polyether, polyamide, and
              polypeptide syntheses and thus have potential applications for the preparation
              of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals.  Discovery of selective,
              photochemical amine oxidation reactions has potential applications in the
              design of inactivators of flavoenzymes such as monoamine oxidase. Students
              trained during the course of this work will be broadly trained in preparative
              organic chemistry and preparative photochemistry and gain skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical industry. 




