Title       : New Reagents for Asymmetric Organic Synthesis from Engineered Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0130315

Award Number: 0130315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Stewart jds2@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work are two fold.   Professor Stewart first proposes to
              use metabolically active but nongrowing E. coli cells to effect stereoselective
              organic functional group reduction reactions.  E. coli cells will first be
              engineered to produce yeast reductases with desirable properties then
              quantities of the desired cells will be grown and used to effect syntheses of
              enantiomerically enriched, biologically relevant targets.  The principal
              investigator will then investigate NADPH-dependent enzyme reactions again using
              nongrowing E. coli cells with the aim of developing whole cells capable of
              effecting either oxidation or reduction reactions depending on the amount of
              NAD/NADPH present. 

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Jon D. Stewart of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida.  Dr. Stewart will work on
              the development of E. coli cells capable of catalyzing a number of chemical
              reactions.  This group will explore stereoselective reduction reactions using
              enzymes contained in these whole cells.  These reduction reactions produce
              molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
              only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this
              family of reactions is one of the most important problems facing the
              pharmaceutical industry today.  When developed, Dr. Stewart's work could be
              applied to the environmentally friendly syntheses of a number of biologically
              active molecules.  Students trained during the course of this work will gain
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of
              single enantiomer compounds. 


