Title       : RUI - Nitric Oxide Inhibition of Metamorphosis in a Marine Snail
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0130677

Award Number: 0130677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther M. Leise Esther_Leise@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Hens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During development, the cells of the nervous system go through periods of growth
              and proliferation and are often produced in excess.  As cells become connected
              into their adult circuits, excess cells and cells in temporary structures die
              and are removed by a naturally occurring process called apoptosis.  This
              process is regulated, in part, by diffusible signaling molecules that also act
              as neurotransmitters in adults.  Neurotransmitters are small compounds that
              nerve cells use to communicate with each other.  One such molecule is the
              diffusible gas, nitric oxide.  Once inside a cell, the interaction of nitric
              oxide with its target molecule sets off a cascade of biochemical events.  While
              nitric oxide has been implicated in  regulating both cellular proliferation and
              apoptosis, little information exists about its role in the regulation of
              nervous system development. 
Previous work in Dr. Leise's laboratory has
              indicated that nitric oxide acts as a natural inhibitor of metamorphosis in a
              species of marine snail.  During this process, one cluster of neurons in the
              brain, the so-called apical ganglion, disappears. Drs. Leise and Hens 
              hypothesize that the disappearance of this ganglion is a result of apoptosis. 
              They will use a histochemical test to look in apical ganglion cells for the
              presence of DNA fragments which form during apoptosis.  They will also conduct
              related pharmacological and anatomical investigations to determine if nitric
              oxide regulates this process.  They will investigate the relationship of nerve
              cell proliferation to metamorphosis and will determine if nitric oxide also
              controls the birth of new neurons. Finally, they will use molecular and
              immunocytochemical methods to identify regions of the embryonic brain that
              produce the  enzyme that generates nitric oxide and determine when the
              production of the enzyme, and thus nitric oxide, cease during development. 
              Nitric oxide occurs naturally as a neurotransmitter in the brains of adult
              humans, and its importance in the function of the adult brain is widely
              accepted.  However, little is known about the role of this important molecule
              in embryonic development.  These studies will further our understanding of
              nitric oxide in the embryonic brain and its importance for the regulation of
              neural development. 

