Title       : Technician Support: Syracuse University Noble Gas Isotope Research Laboratory
               (SUNGIRL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0130833

Award Number: 0130833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne L. Baldwin sbaldwin@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Fitzgerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0130833
Baldwin

This NSF award supports a technical position in Syracuse
              University's Noble Gas Isotope Research Laboratory (SUNGIRL).  The position,
              currently filled by Dr. Laura Webb, is cost shared with contributions from
              Syracuse University.  SUNGIRL consists of 1) a state-of-the-art Micromass 5400
              noble gas mass spectrometer and extraction line used primarily for 40Ar/39Ar
              analyses, and 2) a quadrupole mass spectrometer and automated extraction line
              for He analysis in conjunction with (U-Th)/He dating. The laboratory is shared
              by two faculty members in Earth Sciences, Suzanne Baldwin and Paul Fitzgerald,
              whose research focuses on the thermochronologic evolution of crustal terranes.
              The award will initially allow timely completion and commissioning of the lab,
              including automation of the noble gas extraction line. During the course of
              this award we also plan to build a laser system for in situ analysis of
              minerals in thick sections, as well as outgassing of mineral grains in
              conjunction with (U-Th)/He and 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology. The laboratory will
              be utilized by Syracuse University faculty, researchers, post-doctoral fellows,
              graduate and undergraduate students, and visiting U.S. and international
              researchers.  Under the general direction of the PIs, Dr. Webb will be
              responsible for the day-to-day management and operation of the laboratory
              including maintenance of equipment, design modifications, and development of
              noble gas mass spectrometric techniques.  Dr. Webb will also participate in
              ongoing NSF-sponsored research which presently includes thermochronologic
              analyses (40Ar/39Ar, (U-Th)/He, and fission track) in areas of continental
              extension (Basin and Range Province, Transantarctic Mountains) and oblique
              convergence (Southern Alps of New Zealand). We are also dating late Quaternary
              volcanic ashes from the Peruvian-Bolivian Altiplano in collaboration with Geoff
              Seltzer and colleagues in order to provide a geochronological framework for
              paleoclimatic research of the tropical Andes utilizing drill cores obtained
              through NSF funded research.  Pending NSF proposals that will utilize SUNGIRL
              include thermochronologic research in the Pyrenean collisional orogen and in
              the active metamorphic core complexes of the Western Woodlark Basin of Papua
              New Guinea. 


