Title       : CISE Research Resources: Instrumentation for a Virtual Environment Laboratory to
               Study Human Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0130864

Award Number: 0130864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66665              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Cremer cremer@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jodie M. Plumert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph K. Kearney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2885,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130864   
James Cremer
University of Iowa

CISE Research Resources: 
              Instrumentation for  a Virtual Environment Laboratory to Study Human
              Behavior

The University of Iowa will purchase equipment supporting
              multidisciplinary research on the use of virtual environments as a medium for
              the study of human behavior.  The primary components of the equipment include a
              PC-based, real-time image generation system for use in the existing immersive
              display environment, and hardware for instrumented bicycle and wheelchair
              interfaces to the virtual environment.  The equipment will replace outdated and
              unstable equipment currently in use, and greatly improve the computational
              foundation of the virtual environments laboratory.

The supported research
              has two primary thrusts: (1) a computational component directed at advancing
              scenario modeling techniques to meet the special needs of experiments for
              replicable experiences that adapt to subject behavior and (2) an experimental
              component investigating children's bicycle riding behavior in simulated
              traffic.  Experiments conducted in virtual environments will be compared with
              experiments conducted in real environments to validate the use of simulators as
              laboratories for the study of human behavior.  The work integrates research on
              high-fidelity simulation, control of complex behaviors of simulated agents,
              human factors, and developmental psychology.  This research will advance
              virtual environment technology, experimental methods, and simulator validation,
              and increase the understanding of a leading cause of childhood injuries.

