Title       : Recovery of Replication Following UV-induced DNA damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0130486

Award Number: 0130486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin Courcelle jcourcelle@biology.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Inaccurate replication in the presence of DNA damage is often responsible for 
              cellular rearrangements and mutagenesis.  Nevertheless, the cellular mechanisms
              by which replication-blocking lesions are processed and repaired remain largely
              uncharacterized.  UV-induced DNA damage severely inhibits chromosomal
              replication.  In Escherichia coli, the recovery of replication following UV
              irradiation is dependent on nucleotide excision repair proteins and some
              proteins of the recF pathway.  It is speculated that several additional genes
              may be involved in replication recovery but they have not been examined
              directly in vivo.  This project will determine the cellular mechanism by which
              chromosomal replication recovers when it is blocked by UV-induced DNA damage.  
              The investigator will identify the structural properties of lesion-arrested
              replication forks throughout replication recovery.  This portion of the project
              will be done by isolating the post-irradiation DNA from uvr mutants in sucrose
              gradients to quantitate the number of UV-induced lesions that can be bypassed
              (or skipped) by DNA replication machinery before replication arrest occurs.  
              Post-irradiation DNA synthesis will then be analyzed using strand-specific
              32P-labeled probes to determine on which template strand replication blockage
              occurs. In addition, the investigator will use two-dimensional agarose gel
              electrophoresis to characterize the structural integrity of the replication
              fork throughout the recovery process and identify the structural intermediates
              that arise at blocked replication forks during recovery.  He will further
              identify which candidate genes are directly involved in the resumption of
              replication at DNA damage-blocked replication forks and characterize at which
              step they act.  This will be done by isolating DNA synthesized during the
              period of replication recovery in CsCl gradients and quantifying it. The role
              that these candidate genes play in replication recovery will further be
              characterized by examining the nascent DNA degradation at blocked replication
              forks following UV irradiation.  
	Through an understanding of how faithful
              replication resumes when it is blocked by DNA damage, the investigator hopes to
              identify the conditions and events which can lead to illegitimate recovery,
              genomic rearrangements, and lethality in the presence of DNA damage.   Because
              changes in DNA affect all aspects of biology, these insights could profoundly
              affect human interactions with the natural world. 


