Title       : Operation of UTEX Culture Collection of Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0130647

Award Number: 0130647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $883980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry J. Brand jbrand@utxsvs.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award renews support to the UTEX Culture Collection of Algae (UTEX) at the
              University of Texas at Austin. The UTEX algal collection includes a variety of
              mostly unicellular, freshwater algae, including diatoms and blue-green algae. 
              The collection provides several thousand sample cultures every year to academic
              scientists (for basic research), to governmental agencies (for research and
              water quality analysis), to companies (for aquatic animal food, applied
              research, and biotechnology development), and to educators and students (for
              teaching and learning). Over 1600 UTEX strains are currently cryopreserved.
              Cryopreservation minimizes the cost of maintaining strains, and reduces the
              risk of genetic drift which may occur when strains are maintained using serial
              culture. The collection maintains a web site that includes a database listing
              all cultures in the collection, strain histories, and recipes for culture
              media. UTEX acts as a resource for information about the culture of algae, and
              provides opportunities for short-term visits to learn methods and techniques
              needed for use of algae in research. Awarded funds cover approximately
              two-thirds of the cost of operation of the collection with the remainder
              covered by the University and by user fees.  Planned improvements within the
              next five years include cryopreservation of nearly all UTEX strains,
              development of a reservoir of whole genomic DNA, and addition of images of many
              UTEX algae to information provided on the web site.
