Title       : Models for Classification and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0130512

Award Number: 0130512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76935              (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Estes wkestes@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work involves the continued development and application of models for
              recognition memory.  The first phase included formulation of the architecture
              and basic processing modules of a recognition model based on general theories
              of classification and memory; the model has been formulated with special
              attention to usefulness in increasing the informativeness of measures extracted
              from recognition data.  A major published application reported a study of how
              performance on a test of recognition of an item or event depends on past
              frequencies of encounters with the same or similar stimuli and on presence or
              absence of positive or negative payoffs for correct responses on previous
              tests.  The major result reported was that performance in recognition is not
              simply a matter of matching perceived with remembered stimulus patterns, but is
              influenced by many of the same conditions that control goal-directed behavior. 
              At this juncture, a new set of benchmark experiments has been completed and is
              ready for model-based analysis.  Several of the experiments were addressed to
              the problem of how prior familiarity with stimuli such as words or faces
              affects their recognition in a new situation; others deal with ways of
              enhancing the precision of measurement of the way factors such as stimulus
              frequency, stimulus exposure duration, and retention interval affect
              performance in situations that simulate eyewitness identification.  Results
              from this series of experiments are ready for model-based analyses, which will
              be very computationally demanding, because all models and model versions
              examined will be fitted to the data of individual subjects, typically 30 to 80
              in number per experiment.  In all of this work, there will be major attention
              to advancing methodology for dealing with artifacts of averaging data and to
              communicating theoretical results in forms available to potential users in
              education, medicine, and technology.
