Title       : Effects of Developmental Changes on the Physiological Processes that Regulate
               Photosynthetic Responses to Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0130885

Award Number: 0130885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224967             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Lewis jdlewis@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Tissue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin L. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4651

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations and other atmospheric and
              climate changes may substantially alter plant growth.  Differences in growth
              responses within and between plant species may have substantial impacts on
              biodiversity, carbon sequestration and other ecosystem functions by altering
              community composition and changing the movement of carbon, nutrients and water
              through ecosystems.  However, despite extensive research over the last several
              decades, fundamental problems remain with predicting effects of climate change
              on plants.  For example, carbon dioxide uptake by plants, a standard measure of
              climate change effects on carbon sequestration potential, has been found to
              vary substantially from carbon accumulation in plants.  

	To account for
              this variability, a source-sink feedback mechanism is frequently invoked that
              links changes in carbon uptake (photosynthesis) with developmental changes that
              affect carbon accumulation.  This mechanism is driven by changes in the balance
              between source activity (carbon uptake) and sink capacity (carbon
              accumulation).  However, few studies have actually manipulated plant
              development to analyze the effects of normal developmental changes on
              physiological processes that regulate photosynthetic responses to climate
              change.  As a result, the role of plant development in regulating
              photosynthetic responses to climate change is poorly understood.  The overall
              goal of the proposed research is to develop a mechanistic understanding of the
              effects of developmental changes as plants age on the physiological processes
              that regulate photosynthetic responses to climate change.  

	To identify key
              developmental and physiological processes that regulate photosynthesis, two key
              developmental processes, plant ontogeny (the timing and duration of
              developmental events) and morphological changes as plants age, will be
              independently manipulated.  Planting cohorts of plants on different dates and
              inducing all cohorts to flower simultaneously will independently manipulate
              ontogeny and plant size.  To avoid the confounding effect of accelerated
              ontogeny induced by growth in elevated carbon dioxide concentrations, a
              developmentally determinate, short-day species (Xanthium strumarium L.) will be
              used.  In addition, because temperature is a key component of climate change
              and nitrogen supply is a critical factor regulating interactions between
              developmental and physiological processes, these factors will be manipulated to
              examine how they mediate the effects of developmental changes on
              photosynthesis. 

The results of this study will increase our understanding
              of the effects of changes in plant ontogeny and morphology on photosynthetic
              responses to climate change.  More broadly, this study will increase our
              understanding of the links between carbon uptake and growth responses of plants
              to environmental change.

