Title       : Hormone Regulation of Gap Junction Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0130625

Award Number: 0130625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra A. Murray smurray@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Little is known about the regulation of gap junction assembly and even less is
              known about gap junction removal from the cell surface. Such information is
              critical to the understanding of gap junctions and the role of hormonal control
              of cell-cell communication. In this proposal, the  hypothesis that gap junction
              function may be regulated by the assembly and removal of gap junction protein
              from the  plasma membrane will be tested. It is proposed that gap junction
              protein assembly and degradation are regulated by peptide hormone stimulation.
              Specifically,  the role of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) and cyclic adenosine
              monophosphate (cAMP) in regulating connexin 43 (Cx43) gap junction protein
              intracellular movement, channel assembly, and degradation will be studied in
              adrenal cells. Adrenal cortical cells that have gap junctions (SBAC and  SW13
              cell cultures) and those that lack gap junctions (H295 cells) will be
              transfected to express cDNA encoding for green, red or yellow protein Cx43. Gap
              junction protein processing (synthesis, trafficking, degradation and function)
              will be characterized by immunocytochemistry, live-cell imaging, western blot
              analysis and Lucifer yellow dye transfer. The spacial and temporal distribution
              of the Cx43 gap junction protein in secretory pathway organelles and in the
              plasma membrane will be determined in treated and nontreated cultures. Analysis
              of gap junction protein processing is an essential step in understanding the
              dynamics of gap junction and peptide hormone interaction.     More importantly,
              this work will have a broad impact on the field of cell biology since it will 
              provide a clearer understanding of the mechanisms by which hormones regulate
              organ function.  In addition to the scientific impact, this study will provide
              a training environment for high school students, undergraduates, graduates, and
              postdoctoral fellows. 



