Title       : Multi-Functional Activities of a Group I Intron-encoded Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0130991

Award Number: 0130991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Waring waring@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to understand the relationship between two
              activities of a
protein encoded by a group I intron. The protein facilitates a
              splicing reaction that excises the
intron from its precursor RNA and also acts
              as a DNA endonuclease, cleaving DNA at a specific
sequence. It is commonly
              believed that the RNA splicing activity evolved from a protein that
originally
              functioned solely as a DNA endonuclease. However it is unlikely that this
              new
function arose simply by fusion of an additional gene sequence.
              Preliminary evidence indicates
that the DNA and RNA substrates bind to
              distinct or partially overlapping sites on the protein.
The question then
              arises as to how a protein acquires a new function and how easily this can
              be
detected. This is particularly relevant to annotating genomes. Attributing
              a single function to a
gene may constitute only partial characterization of
              the sequence since an unknown number of
proteins may "moonlight" and perform a
              second, unrelated and unforeseen task. Group I introns
can catalyze their own
              excision from RNA precursors. An intron-encoded protein, called a
maturase,
              significantly facilitates removal of such an intron in Aspergillus nidulans. It
              also has
DNA endonuclease activity. The three-dimensional structure of the
              protein has been obtained
with the help of a collaborator and the region which
              binds the cleavable DNA sequence has been
identified. Guided by this model,
              the relationship between the binding sites of the RNA and
DNA substrates will
              be studied biochemically and genetically. Current diffraction data
              from
crystals of group I introns are of insufficient quality to reveal
              structural details at the atomic
level. Co-crystallizing RNA with a protein
              can often solve this problem. A collaboration will be
performed to obtain a
              high-resolution structure of the intron-maturase complex. This will not
only
              reveal the RNA binding site on the protein and help to determine how the RNA
              binding site
arose, but also provide a wealth of structural information about
              the group I intron RNA itself.
