Title       : Acquisition of a 40Ar/39Ar Dating Laboratory at Rutgers University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0130292

Award Number: 0130292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl C. Swisher cswish@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0130292
Swisher 

This NSF Instrumentation and Facilities award provides
              funds for equipment required for the completion of a "state of the art"
              40Ar/39Ar dating facility at Rutgers University designed to address a diverse
              array of geochronological issues in geology, paleontology and anthropology. 
              The Rutgers facility centers around a Mass Analyzer Products 215-50 mass
              spectrometer recently acquired with the closure of the Princeton University Ar
              laboratory.  The MAP 215-50 is well suited for 40Ar/39Ar research, however,
              ancillary sample extraction, gas purification, and computer systems were needed
              to make the Rutgers facility fully operational. NSF funds from this award will
              provide necessary CO2 laser and resistance furnace sample heating systems, and,
              an automated, low volume, ultra low background extraction system for gas
              purification.  Sample extraction and gas purification systems necessary for the
              completion of the Rutgers 40Ar/39Ar dating system are not available, for the
              most part, as single off the shelf items; rather individual components and
              parts must be purchased, assembled, integrated calibrated and tested. Thus, in
              addition to equipment, funding of additional technical support during
              build-out, testing and calibration phases is also required.  As part of cost
              sharing between NSF and Rutgers University, Rutgers has committed two years
              salary and benefit support for a permanent Ph.D. level, Research Associate
              faculty position for development and technical assistance during the tenure of
              this proposal.  Thereafter, Rutgers will continue to support this position at
              the 50% level, the remaining time to be allotted to research initiatives,
              collaborative projects and university lectureships. Rutgers has also committed
              funds for the purchase of the MAP 215-50 mass spectrometer, over $145,000 on
              upgrades and modernization of research facilities and fixed equipment, and
              committed permanent academic year salary and benefits for the P.I. to oversee
              and develop these facilities.  Ongoing and proposed research by the P.I.,
              Research Associate and numerous Rutger's faculty and students will benefit
              immediately from implementation of the new instrumentation. The new Ar facility
              will serve as a catalyst, bringing together two unique working groups of
              Rutger's scientists; a timescale group consisting of faculty Swisher, Aubry,
              Berggren, Kent and Miller, and a geological paleoanthropology group of Swisher,
              Anton, Ashley, Blumenschine, Feibel, and Harris.  Collaborative research with
              faculty and student investigators in geology and anthropology at Rutgers and
              Princeton universities is anticipated, as is continued collaborative research
              with other national and international colleagues. 
***

