Title       : Bio-QuBIC: Designer Gene Networks for Biocomputing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0130331

Award Number: 0130331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Collins jcollins@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Cantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1659,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130331
James.J. Collins
Boston University

Title: Designer Gene
              Networks for Biocomputing Applications

Many fundamental cellular processes
              are governed by genetic networks which employ protein-DNA interactions in
              regulating function. The biochemistry of the feedback loops associated with
              protein-DNA interactions leads to nonlinear effects, and the tools of nonlinear
              analysis become invaluable. This project involves the use of techniques from
              nonlinear dynamics and molecular biology to model, design and construct
              synthetic gene networks for biocomputing applications.  Here biocomputing is
              defined as representing the ability of cells to make decisions based on
              external stimuli, and in this context, synthetic gene networks can be viewed as
              "controllers" for living cells.  In this project, a rapidly switching genetic
              toggle switch is being modeled and constructed in bacterial cells.  The genetic
              toggle switch, which is a fundamental unit of biocomputing memory storage, can
              be flipped between two stable expression states using transient chemical or
              thermal stimuli.  In addition, as part of this project, synthetic gene networks
              based on more complicated logic gates (i.e., AND and OR gates) are being
              designed, modeled and constructed in bacterial cells.  These circuits can
              function as sensors of multiple transient signals, and form the basis for
              general control schemes requiring an "if/then" structure.

Synthetic gene
              networks represent a first step towards logical cellular control, whereby
              biological processes can be manipulated or monitored at the DNA level.
              Ultimately, synthetic gene circuits encoded into DNA, might be "downloaded"
              into cells creating, in effect, a "wet" nano-robot.  These cellular robots
              could be utilized for a variety of functions, including in vivo biosensing,
              autonomously synthesizing complex biomaterials, executing programmed cell
              death, and interfacing with microelectronic circuits by transducing biochemical
              events to and from the electronics.


