Title       : RCN: The North Atlantic Project: Historical Ecology of the Trans-Atlantic Biota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0130275

Award Number: 0130275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford W. Cunningham cliff@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1174,1650,1664,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0130275
Cunningham
     Although the North Atlantic is the best-studied ocean
              in the world, there is no coordinated effort to study its ecology and
              evolutionary history.  This research coordination network will bring together
              ecologists, paleontologists, oceanographers, and evolutionary biologists.  In
              particular, the group will focus on the many marine taxa that are hypothesized
              to have invaded from the North Pacific following the opening of the Bering
              Strait in the late Pliocene.  This invasion placed closely related organisms on
              both coasts of the North Atlantic in a grand natural experiment. Although there
              is great potential to compare the ecology of taxa found on the very different
              coasts of the NW and NE North Atlantic, this is rarely done. The major goals of
              this network are to encourage trans-Atlantic ecological and evolutionary
              research when closely related taxa are found in the NW and the NE Atlantic. 
              This research will be placed in a historical context by coordinating literally
              hundreds of molecular phylogeographic and systematic studies of the North
              Atlantic flora and fauna, with an emphasis on taxa found on both coasts.  These
              historical molecular studies will then be placed in the context of knowledge
              about oceanography, paleoclimatology, and paleontology. Although a
              comprehensive study of the North Atlantic requires cross-disciplinary and
              international cooperation, currently there is no annual meeting devoted to
              basic research by significant subsets of these fields and attended by
              scientists from both sides of the Atlantic. Even within specific fields,
              scientists who study marine animals and plants rarely interact. This network
              brings together 76 scientists from 12 countries bordering the North Atlantic,
              and has already generated considerable excitement at the opportunity to carry
              out trans-Atlantic, multi-disciplinary collaborations.
     Because of its
              central location between Europe and North America, the North Atlantic is
              strongly affected by human activities.  Overfishing and pollution have led to
              population crashes in important species such as cod and lobster.    Since both
              cod and lobster have close relatives on both coasts of the North Atlantic,
              there is much to learn about their ecology by comparing populations on both
              coasts.  This can help to explain why, for example, lobsters (genus Homarus)
              are so much more common in America than in Europe.  By placing this research in
              an evolutionary context, the research coordination network will examine what
              organismal characteristics allowed taxa to survive the last glaciations in the
              northern hemisphere.  This information will help explain why some species are
              more resistant to local extinction than others, which will help in conservation
              efforts.



