Title       : Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Neurobiological Nonlinear
               Dynamics for Biomimetic Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0130883

Award Number: 0130883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $947711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Berger berger@bmsr.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michel Baudry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vasilis Z. Marmarelis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Armand R. Tanguay, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130883-Theodore W. Berger-University of Southern California-Title: 
              Neurobiological Nonlinear Dynamics for Biomimetic Signal Processing-Title-The
              fundamental goal of the proposed research is to derived a new generation of
              temporal and spatio-temporal pattern recognition systems based on the nonlinear
              dynamics, network architecture, and synaptic plasticity properties of the
              hippocampus, a cortical brain system responsible for the formation of new
              pattern recognition memories.  From a neurobiological perspective, the proposed
              experimental/modeling work promises to generate (1) first-characterizations of
              high-order nonlinearities of cortical brain tissue, i.e., predictive models of
              the input/output transformations in spatio-temporal activity performed by
              individual hippocampal neurons, and to (2) investigate the increasingly likely
              possibility of dynamic neural "learning rules", i.e., requisite conditions for
              the induction of synaptic plasticity that depend on the past history of
              activity.  In addition, the proposed research will investigate (3) the role of
              known hippocampal network topology in neurobiological signal processing and
              hierarchical feature extraction.  From a theoretical/computational perspective,
              the proposed work is designed to (4) develop novel methodologies essential for
              characterizing nonlinearities of neurobiological systems, as well as to (5)
              further expand a newly developed paradigm for biologically realistic neural
              system modeling (the "dynamic synapse neural network architecture") that has
              already demonstrated a heretofore unmatched capability for identifying optimal
              feature sets for temporally and spatio-temporally coded information.

