Title       : Conference: RNA Transport, Sorting and Localization to be held June 21-26, 2003
               in Snowmass Village, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0130722

Award Number: 0130722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Macdonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1119,1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award is in partial support of a conference on Intracellular RNA Sorting,
              Transport and Localization.

The purpose of the meeting is to stimulate
              further progress in understanding what is now recognized as an essential form
              of post-transcriptional gene regulation in germ cells, embryos, and somatic
              cells. This conference is one of the series of summer FASEB-sponsored meetings,
              to be held in 2002 at the Big Mountain Resort in Whitefish, Montana. The
              meeting has been held in alternate years since 1994. It provides a unique
              opportunity to bring together researchers who have common interests in RNA
              transport and localization but use a wide range of experimental systems to
              study what are often quite different aspects of development or cellular
              function. The meeting serves to inform researchers about the most recent
              advances from all experimental systems in a setting that is extremely conducive
              to interactions. The cross-fertilization of ideas from scientists who otherwise
              attend different meetings and thus do not interact extensively has been
              extremely beneficial. Approximately 120-150 participants are expected. Speakers
              will be scientists with recent significant research contributions, and will be
              assembled by both invitation and evaluation of submitted abstracts. The major
              session topics will be: 1) Defining roles for mRNA localization in somatic
              cells; 2) Comparing mechanistic strategies for mRNA transport and localization;
              3) Tracing mRNA movements in vivo to define mechanisms of localization and
              transport; 4) mRNA localization signals: structural organization and function;
              5) Proteins that recognize mRNA localization signals ; 6) Role of the
              cytoskeleton in mRNA localization; 7) Molecular motors and moving mRNAs; 8)
              Coordination of mRNA localization with other post-transcriptional control
              points; and 9) Local regulation of mRNA translation. There will also be two
              poster sessions.

