Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Tuberculosis and Gender in the Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0130281

Award Number: 0130281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn F. Sargent csargent@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Philippines has one of the highest tuberculosis mortality and morbidity
              rates in the world.   Recent research suggests that Filipino women are infected
              less often but experience more mortality than do men.  This dissertation
              research project, conducted by a graduate student in cultural anthropology at
              Southern Methodist University, will address two main issues: How do patients
              and their families perceive and understand tuberculosis? and How does gender
              influence treatment decision making and outcome?  The project is divided into
              three phases: descriptive, instrument development, and explanatory.  Phase I
              involves interviews 80 individuals regarding their perceptions, knowledge and
              attitudes about illnesses, including tuberculosis. Methods will include
              semi-structured interviews, true/false questions, and pile sorting exercises. 
              In Phase II, a questionnaire will be developed for use in the final phase of
              the project.  The sample size for Phase III is 280 male and female TB patients.
               This phase will determine how gender and the type of health care delivery site
              (public or private) are correlated with a number of factors associated with
              treatment.  These factors include time of initial treatment, first type of
              health care delivery site approached, number of times treatment was stopped,
              presence of another family member with tuberculosis, etc.  In addition to
              providing doctoral training for a promising woman scientist, this study will
              contribute to our understanding of gender complementarity and equality in
              Southeast Asia as it relates to health and health care decision making.  It
              will also assist health care policy makers in developing programs that would
              specifically address the needs of women and men.  
