Title       : Protein-Protein Interactions in DNA Precursor Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0130760

Award Number: 0130760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Mathews mathewsc@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Enzymes catalyzing sequential reactions are increasingly found to be associated
              within cells. Sometimes the association involves multifunctional proteins, such
              as those in eukaryotic fatty acid synthetase complexes, sometimes tightly
              linked enzyme complexes, such as the glycine cleavage system, and sometimes
              membrane-associated complexes, such as mitochondrial respiratory complexes.
              Most enzymes, however, are soluble proteins, readily isolated free of other
              proteins. At the high protein concentrations found within cells, such enzymes
              can associate into loosely bound complexes, which the late Paul Srere termed
              metabolons. A complex that has favorable properties for structural and kinetic
              analysis of the metabolon concept is the bacteriophage T4 dNTP synthetase
              complex. Previous research from this laboratory has demonstrated a complex
              containing at least eight phage-coded proteins and two of host cell origin.
              Individual activities within the isolated complex are kinetically linked.
              Indirect evidence suggests that the complex is associated with the DNA
              replication apparatus and that it plays an important role in delivering
              deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) to replisomes fast enough to sustain
              DNA chain at rates of 500-800 nucleotides per second. All of the enzymes known
              to be in the complex and all T4 DNA replication proteins are available as
              purified recombinant proteins, allowing numerous approaches to identifying
              specific protein-protein interactions and analysis of kinetic coupling through
              studies on partially reconstituted forms of the complex. This project includes
              the following specific aims: (1) To identify direct and indirect interactions
              among proteins in the T4 dNTP synthetase complex and interactions with T4
              replication proteins shown to associate with the complex. This involves
              analysis in an optical biosensor, as well as protein affinity chromatography
              and nondenaturing gel electrophoresis; (2) To define effects of substrates and
              allosteric effectors upon protein-protein associations. Evidence suggests that
              small molecules have dramatic effects upon protein associations in the dNTP
              synthetase complex; (3) To define effects of protein-protein interactions upon
              kinetic behavior of individual enzymes and linked multi-step reaction pathways.
              Kinetic analysis of partially reconstituted complexes explores the nature of
              kinetic coupling. Steady-state analyses, and, in collaboration with a
              colleague, pre-steady-state analyses using quench-flow techniques are being
              used; (4) To ascertain whether the dNTP synthetase complex is associated with
              the replication machinery in vivo. These experiments involve immunolocalization
              of E. coli dNTP-synthesizing enzymes, specifically, ribonucleotide reductase
              and thymidylate synthase, and are also being done in a collaborative effort.
              Crystal structures of some of the enzymes in the complex have been determined
              and other structure determinations are under way. As structural information
              about proteins and docking sites emerges, these data will be merged with the
              enzymological data from this study, in an attempt to develop a unified picture
              of this particular metabolon. 

