Title       : Neuroendocrine Determinants of Mating in The Day Versus Night
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0130977

Award Number: 0130977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Smale smale@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl L. Sisk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristine M. Krajnak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Animals have internal biological clocks that enable them to coordinate
              physiological and behavioral rhythms relative to the time of day, termed
              circadian rhythms.  In mammals, a key part of clock in the brain is the
              supra-chiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus.  In nocturnal rodents,
              which are widely used in the laboratory, the SCN is known to be important for
              the timing of female reproductive behavior and a surge in the luteinizing
              hormone (LH) that triggers ovulation.  However very little is known about
              diurnal rodents, which have evolved from nocturnal species.  This project asks
              how the neural mechanisms responsible for circadian control of the female
              reproductive cycle have changed in diurnal compared to nocturnal rodents.  The
              model animal is the unstriped Nile grass rat, which is related to common
              laboratory rats, but has a virtually complete reversal in the timing of a
              variety of events associated with female reproduction, including morning
              instead of evening timing for both mating behavior and for the surge in LH. 
              Cytochemical, anatomical and behavioral approaches will be used to distinguish
              whether the SCN itself changes signal timing, whether there is instead a change
              in the timing of receptiveness of target sites to SCN signals, or whether there
              is a change in the neuroanatomy connecting SCN to different targets in
              nocturnal and diurnal species.
    The results will have an impact beyond
              neuroendocrinology to chronobiology, hypothalamic physiology, and evolutionary
              physiology.  In addition, training of students and researchers at several
              levels is an important part of the project.


