Title       : Quantum-QuBIC: Deterministic Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics for Quantum
               Information Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0130414

Award Number: 0130414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan M. Stamper-Kurn dmsk@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1708      REVOLUTIONARY COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1659,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0130414
Dan M. Stamper-Kurn
University of California-Berkeley

Title:
              Deterministic Cavity quantum Electrodynamics for Quantum Information
              Studies

In the young field of quantum information science, theoretical
              investigations have quickly identified potentialities which are so astounding
              in scope (exponential speed-up of computation, the insecurity of current
              cryptographic schemes) that a focused experimental activity must be undertaken.
              This project is pursuing a fundamental experimental advance in one potential
              arena for the implementation of these theoretical ideas is proposed: the
              synthesis of optical and atomic quantum information resources through cavity
              quantum electrodynamics (CQED). While theoretical developments indicate that
              CQED devices offer a scalable and powerful architecture for quantum information
              processing, a key missing element which stands in the way of further progress
              is the deterministic loading of the atom-cavity system.  To mend this gap, a
              powerful yet straightforward integration of the experimental techniques of
              laser cooling, magnetic trapping and Bose-Einstein condensation with cavity
              quantum electrodynamics is underway.  This synthesis is clearly beneficial to
              quantum information processing, combining well controlled, stationary qubits
              comprised of trapped atoms wherein quantum information is stored in long-lived
              internal states, "flying qubits" in the form of photons emitted from the
              cavity, and a means of strongly coupling the two.  This ambitious effort will
              enable a broad range of breakthroughs and innovations in the field of quantum
              information science.

For this project, an evaporatively-cooled, and at times
              quantum degenerate, atomic gas is produced outside the confines of a
              high-finesse optical cavity, and then adiabatically placed inside the cavity to
              provide a reservoir of ultracold atoms.  Single atoms, or a countable number of
              atoms, are "activated" from this "passive" reservoir by a transition between
              atomic hyperfine states, and are then used for a wide range of basic
              applications with direct relevance to quantum information and communication
              schemes. These applications include the generation of single photons on demand,
              the generation of non-classical number states of the optical field, the
              implementation of Raman CQED by which the atom-cavity system can be
              programmatically switched on and off, and an exploration of quantum and
              non-linear optical properties of quantum degenerate gases at the single photon
              level.


