Title       : SOFTWARE: Advanced Capabilities for Netlib Computational Software Repositories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0130499

Award Number: 0130499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Dongarra dongarra@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Grosse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley V. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The proposed research will lead to the creation of next-generation Netlib
              (Netlib.ng). While preserving and strengthening Netlib's ability to provide its
              traditional services: reliable, fast access to latest and best computational
              software packages, we will explore technologies that adapt Netlib repositories
              to the new challenges presented by today's computing environment. We will first
              enhance Netlib's traditional services for both users and developers,
              principally by using the Repository in a Box (RIB) toolkit to upgrade Netlib's
              catalogue technology for improved usability and interoperability. Applying RIB
              tools to Netlib will make it compliant with IEEE metadata standards,
              substantially improve user interfaces, accelerate repository updates, simplify
              and decentralize administration, and enable for Netlib.ng to participate in
              larger virtual repositories without compromising its high standards for quality
              control.  The second part of research aims to automate the full software
              deployment and management process, i.e. its compilation, installation,
              configuration, and management. When this work is completed, we believe
              Netlib.ng will leverage the power of this major community asset to create a
              rich and scalable solution to some of the complex problems of software
              deployment and management in the new era of high performance distributed
              computing we have entered. 
