Title       : RCN: Communication, Training and Resources for the Phytophthora Molecular
               Genetics Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0130263

Award Number: 0130263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno W. S. Sobral sobral@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett M. Tyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1664,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Because of their economic impact as plant pathogens, Phytophthora species are
              being intensively studied through molecular genetic and genomics approaches.
              These organisms have served as lead species for the entire Stramenopiles
              lineage, a major radiation of crown eukaryotes distinct from plants, animals
              and fungi.  The Phytophthora molecular genetics community has developed a
              strong culture of collaboration, communication, and  sharing techniques and
              resources. With the recent blossoming of genetic and genomic tools for
              Phytophthora, many new investigators from a variety of backgrounds have become
              interested in Phytophthora molecular genetics. This award will facilitate the
              integration of these investigators into the community and will further
              strengthen the cooperative culture of this community. The specific goals of the
              network follow:
1. To promote communication and collaboration, and to minimize
              duplication of effort, within the worldwide Phytophthora molecular genetics
              community by means of an annual workshop, exchange visits among laboratories,
              and a community web site.
2. To produce and distribute research resources
              including libraries, specific DNA clones, genetic strains and cDNA microarrays,
              that will benefit the whole community,
3. To promote the entry, participation
              and training of students, postdoctoral fellows, junior faculty, and more
              established faculty in the field of Phytophthora molecular genetics.  The
              network is especially interested in facilitating the participation of minority
              individuals and those from predominantly undergraduate institutions,
              institutions with high percentages of students from groups underrepresented in
              the U.S. research infrastructure, and institutions in states that have
              traditionally received lower amounts of federal funding for research and
              development. This will be done by means of travel awards to the annual
              workshop, training internships, and facilitated access to techniques and
              resources.  Faculty from nations without established research infracstructures
              will also be eligible for some support.

This Research Coordination Network
              is open to all researchers with an interest in Phytophthora molecular genetics.
              It promises to broaden the diversity of scientists working  in this field and
              to advance our understanding of the biology of these important plant pathogens.
              


