Title       : Collaborative Research: RUI:Linking Xylem Functional Traits to Life-History Type
               in California Chaparral
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0130870

Award Number: 0130870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The climate of southern California is a Mediterranean-type, characterized by
              mild winters, protracted summer drought, and periodic wildfire.  The dominant
              vegetation is chaparral, which is uniquely adapted to summer dehydration and
              fires.  There are three strategies by which chaparral survive and persist
              through periodic fire: non-sprouters after fire, facultative sprouters after
              fire, and obligate sprouters after fire.  We hypothesize that these three
              strategies are coupled to dehydration tolerance.  We will estimate dehydration
              tolerance by determining the threshold in dehydration that causes the water
              transport system of plants to fail.  This failure is caused by xylem embolism
              formation under severe water stress, that is, when the plumbing system (xylem
              conduits) of plants become blocked by air bubbles, cutting off water flow to
              leaves, leading to shoot death.

The primary objective of our research is to
              elucidate the mechanisms linking xylem functional traits to life history type
              among diverse species of chaparral shrubs.  We hypothesize that there are
              trade-offs among xylem embolism-resistance, xylem conductivity efficiency and
              xylem mechanical strength and these depend on the three life history strategies
              that chaparral species have in response to wildfire.

Issues related to
              recurrent wildfire, water conservation, erosion control, urban expansion and
              recreation are more pronounced in regions of chaparral than in any other type
              of wild land in California.  Results from the research will be disseminated
              widely to local agencies responsible for management and conservation of natural
              resources in the Santa Monica Mountains, and to educational groups including
              docents for the State Park Service and the National Park Service.  The findings
              will allow generalizations to the broader chaparral community of California and
              to the other four Mediterranean-type climate regions of the world.  Results
              from the proposed work will refine predictions of expected shifts in chaparral
              distribution and community structure over the next century in response to an
              anticipate climate change to a warmer, drier California with increased episodic
              Santa Ana winds and wildfire.

