Title       : Physiological Responses to Predators and Their Consequences for the
               Growth/Predation Risk trade-off
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0130021

Award Number: 0130021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. McPeek mark.mcpeek@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many organisms respond to the threat of predators by altering their physiology,
              behavior and morphology.  These attempts to reduce their likelihood of being
              killed by a predator, often come at the cost of reducing growth.  Although
              organisms from bacteria to plants and animals show such responses, the
              underlying reasons for this trade-off are poorly understood.  Reduced growth in
              the presence of predators may result in part from behavioral responses to
              reduce feeding, but physiological changes also may play a major role.  

This
              research will explore the differences among species and genera of larval
              damselflies (Hexapoda: Odonata) in physiological response to predators, the
              consequences of these differences for metabolic resource allocation and
              behavior, and the evolution of these traits.  Five studies will be performed to
              examine the physiological responses of species and the allocation of ingested
              resources to various molecules in the body.  The first study will survey 12
              species to measure natural growth rates and the amount of glucose, glycogen,
              triglycerides and protein in the organism's body.  The second will
              experimentally determine alterations in growth and allocation to these
              molecules under treatments of  predator presence and food availability in the
              lab.  The third is a field experiment to test whether the results obtained in
              the controlled  laboratory experiment are substantiated in real lakes.  The
              fourth tests hypotheses about the proximate differences between the genera that
              induce the physiological response.  Finally, the fifth examines the broader
              evolutionary history of this physiological response to predators.

This work
              explores the physiological mechanisms underlying a fundamental difference in
              ecological performance between two groups of insects.  This is critical to
              understanding how an individual's phenotype shapes its ability to engage in
              interactions with its environment and with other species.  Also, examining how
              this physiology has evolved provides valuable insights into how species adapt
              to various environments and to natural and anthropogenically-induced
              environmental change (e.g., natural habitat shifts, climate change, habitat
              degradation). 

