Title       : SGER: Homology-Based Gene Targeting in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0130598

Award Number: 0130598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina V. Fedoroff nvf1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dissection of biochemical functions and developmental pathways by mutating genes
              is central to functional genomics. Genes can be mutated by nucleotide sequence
              changes, insertions or deletions. Insertional mutagenesis with T-DNA and
              transposons has become the most widely used method for mutating plant genes. By
              contrast, homology-dependent gene targeting, a powerful technique that permits
              precise changes to be made in either coding or regulatory sequences, has not
              yet become a useful technique in plants.  A number of factors have been
              identified that may contribute to the lack of gene targeting success or which
              can be optimized to enhance the frequency and increase the ease of detecting
              homology-based recombinational events in plants. This information has been used
              to design a new gene targeting strategy for plants.  This project utilizes a
              high-risk strategy, however if successful, it will lead to the rapid
              development of a practicable system for homologous gene targeting in plants,
              which will have a very high pay-off in plant research.   The strategy for plant
              gene targeting seeks to 1) enhance the probability of identifying
              homology-based interactions by detecting both gene conversion and
              recombination, 2) minimize illegitimate recombination associated with both
              naked DNA and T-DNA transformation, 3) make use of the observation that
              double-stranded DNA breaks stimulate recombination in plants and 4) enrich for
              plants in which the recombination donor molecule has been released from the
              chromosome.  Because evidence has already been obtained indicating that all of
              the sub-components of the present strategy work in plants, putting the whole
              system together and testing it is the next step. The results of these
              experiments will provide the preliminary data for subsequent research to study
              molecular mechanisms in plant recombination and to identify favorable genetic
              backgrounds for gene targeting.
