Title       : Synaptic Organization of the Primate Pulvinar Nucleus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0130954

Award Number: 0130954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha E. Bickford   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emil Chris Muly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay summary
In a world that continually supplies us with a multitude of sensory
              information, the selection and enhancement of important signals is crucial.
              There is general agreement that the pulvinar nucleus is uniquely involved in
              this process. However the mechanisms by which the pulvinar carries out this
              function are, as yet, unknown. Several models of directed attention have
              proposed that the pulvinar nucleus acts as a hub in a network that integrates
              inputs from widespread cortical areas to direct attention to salient visual
              targets. Such models predict that neurons that project to and from different
              cortical areas, are synaptically connected within the pulvinar nucleus to link
              diverse signals related to visual spatial location, memory, and motivation. To
              test this theory, the investigators propose to examine, at the ultrastructural
              level, connections between the pulvinar nucleus the posterior cingulate gyrus,
              and the inferior parietal lobule. In addition, they propose to examine the
              synaptic targets of subcortical inputs from the pretectum, and the
              pedunculopontine tegmentum. These areas, in which activity is correlated
              respectively with eye movements and attentional state, are also predicted to
              contribute to networks underlying visual attention. The results of these
              studies will help to understand how cortical and subcortical inputs
              structurally interact within the synaptic circuitry of the primate pulvinar
              nucleus. By studying these neural circuits in experimental animals, we can
              begin to understand the mechanisms underlying normal attentional processes, and
              how they are affected by disease.






