Title       : Using Physiological Structure to Model Individual Production: Determinants of
               Female Reproductive Effort
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0130633

Award Number: 0130633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Beaupre sbeaupre@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Current scenarios of predicted environmental change raise fundamental
questions
              about the expected responses of animal populations to changes in
local climate
              and food availability.  Animal responses to environment are
mediated by
              physiological functions such as metabolism, digestion, growth
and
              reproduction.  Using parallel simulation modeling and experimental
studies in
              the laboratory and in nature, the PI will investigate the effect
of food
              availability on reproduction in the timber rattlesnake (Crotalus
horridus) in
              northwest Arkansas.  Rattlesnakes are excellent subjects for
these studies
              because of their abundance and large size which allows the
use of
              radio-transmitters (for location and body temperature information).
The
              simulation model is based on information about energy flow through
timber
              rattlesnakes discovered under a previous grant (IBN 9728470).  New
studies
              will build upon and complement previous work.  A laboratory
population of
              snakes will be maintained under three feeding regimes
designed to produce
              variation in reproduction.  In nature, an experimental
food manipulation will
              test model predictions by comparing reproduction
between supplementally fed
              and control groups of radio-tagged female
rattlesnakes.  Information gathered
              from these experiments will be used to
test previous predictions made by the
              simulation model, and then to refine
and improve the simulation.  The results
              of this study will enhance our
ability to predict the responses of animal
              populations to environmental
change.  The described studies will also provide
              multiple opportunities to
enhance science literacy and involve students (from
              grade school to
graduate school) in the process of science. 


