Title       : CISE Research Resources: Information Visualization and Incremental Knowledge
               Discovery in a Cluster Computing Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0130857

Award Number: 0130857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elise H. deDoncker elise@cs.wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Li Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karlis Kaugars  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mukesh K. Mohania  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2885,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0130857   
Elise deDoncker
Western Michigan University

CISE Research
              Resources:  Information Visualization and Incremental Knowledge Discovery in a
              Cluster Computing Environment

This proposal seeks funding to enhance a
              64-node PC cluster at Western Michigan University, obtained in part on a
              previous National Science Foundation grant and university funding. Improving
              the cluster will give hardware support for on-going research and education on
              parallel and distributed algorithm design and development.  Although the
              cluster is currently used for various research efforts by different groups in
              the university, this proposal focuses on two of these projects: parallel
              integration and distributed incremental knowledge discovery. 

The requested
              infrastructure includes a networking upgrade to support the current
              communication intensive (high bandwidth/low latency) projects.  These include
              the tailoring of load balancing methods underlying the migration of regions in
              adaptive partitioning.  The system will also provide a better environment for
              our study of the scalability of task partitioning methods in numerical
              integration and other areas.  The proposed project on the development of
              methods for incremental knowledge discovery from large databases will further
              be supported by the visualization components of the infrastructure.  This
              effort includes 3D interactive visual exploration of large relational data
              sets.  The techniques will be incorporated in a systematic way into a software
              system for incremental knowledge discovery, and evaluated for effectiveness and
              suitability in different scenarios.

