Title       : RUI: Regulation of Gene Expression by the Nonsense-mediated mRNA Decay Pathway
               of Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0326029

Award Number: 0326029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey N. Dahlseid dahlseid@gustavus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) accelerates the degradation of mRNAs that
              undergo premature translation termination due to a nonsense mutation.  NMD
              exists in all eukaryotes thus far examined, from yeast to man, and safeguards
              cells against the accumulation of potentially deleterious protein fragments
              encoded by so-called nonsense mRNAs.  In budding yeast, the UPF1, UPF2, and
              UPF3 genes are required for NMD.  These genes also affect the accumulation of
              hundreds of wild-type mRNAs, which suggests that NMD is an important part of
              the natural cellular repertoire for regulating wild-type gene expression.  The
              primary objective of this research is to study the role of NMD in regulating
              the expression of wild-type genes.  NMD affects the mRNA accumulation of
              several wild-type genes that encode proteins involved in chromosome
              transmission and stability.  The mRNAs for CTF13, which encodes an essential
              protein of the CBF3 kinetochore complex, two additional kinetochore proteins,
              and five proteins that affect telomere function are elevated in upf mutant
              yeast strains.  The three specific aims of this research are to determine if
              NMD directly affects the stability of these mRNAs, to characterize the
              recognition and degradation of any that are wild-type mRNA targets of NMD, and
              to investigate potential coordinate regulation of wild-type gene expression by
              NMD.  Analysis of expression from promoter-reporter gene fusions and
              measurement of mRNA decay and transcription rates will be used to determine
              whether NMD directly affects mRNA stability or exerts indirect influence upon
              mRNA transcription.  Decay of many wild-type yeast mRNAs involves deadenylation
              followed by decapping and 5'->3' exonucleolysis, whereas nonsense mRNAs bypass
              deadenylation but then undergo the same decay.  Analysis of deadenylation rates
              and susceptibility to decapping and 5'->3' exonucleolysis will be used to
              determine whether NMD degrades wild-type mRNAs through deadenylation-dependent
              or -independent decapping and 5'->3' exonucleolysis or some other mechanism. 
              Sequences or structures necessary for recognition of wild-type mRNAs by NMD
              will be identified using deletion mutations and gene fusions.  The possibility
              that kinetochore- and/or telomere-related genes may be coordinately regulated
              by NMD will be investigated through analysis of mRNA from synchronized cell
              cultures and genetic approaches to identify putative regulatory genes, which
              may encode mRNA targets of NMD.  This project serves as an important starting
              point to increase understanding of the cellular role of NMD in regulating the
              expression of wild-type genes and, ultimately, the mechanism for recognition
              and decay of specific wild-type mRNAs by NMD.  In summary, protein molecules
              are functional components of nearly all the molecular processes in biological
              systems.  Instructions for protein formation are stored in the DNA of genes and
              are provided as a chemical information intermediate, known as messenger RNA
              (mRNA), when genes are expressed.  To achieve normal growth and development,
              cells must regulate the expression of genes.  Selectively degrading the mRNA of
              a wild-type gene is an important mechanism for cells to regulate its
              expression.  This research aims to increase understanding of the cellular role
              for specialized mRNA degradation pathways in regulating wild-type gene
              expression and the mechanisms involved in recognizing specific wild-type mRNAs
              for selective degradation.
