Title       : Equipping a New Oceanographic Vessel for Students at Inland Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9551345

Award Number: 9551345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yin S. Soong   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie W. Ambler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Sci Consortium
	      
	      Wallops Island, VA  23337    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A complete oceanographic Conductivity-Temperature-Depth (CTD)  instrument
              package, a winged current meter, and two computers  equip a new vessel at the
              consortium.   With this new  oceanographic vessel, the instruments are used for
              undergraduate  courses in oceanography during summer sessions and weekend field
               trips.   The basic unit in the new instrument package is a CTD  logger, which
              is battery powered and records data in solid-state  memory.   The CTD
              measurements provide depth profiles to identify  density differences between
              the surface photic layer and bottom  layer in local coastal waters.  
              Biological and chemical  variables are measured simultaneously by adding
              sensors to the  CTD for dissolved oxygen, turbidity (by optical
              backscattering),  photosynthetically active light (PAR), and chlorophyll
              biomass  (by in vivo fluorescence).   To measure tidal water exchange  through
              Chincoteague Inlet and thus determine fluxes of  chlorophyll, nutrients, and
              zooplankton biomass, the consortium  uses a Niskin winged current meter.   One
              laptop computer  initializes the CTD instrument package and provides data
              transfer  at sea, and one desktop computer interfaces winged current meter  and
              data analysis.   With these instruments, students learn  state-of-the-art
              research techniques to prepare them for graduate  school or employment as
              research technicians.   This project  enhances the marine science program at
              the consortium, through  which students at inland institutions are able to gain
              first hand  field experiences in oceanography.
