Title       : Computational Chemistry in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9551452

Award Number: 9551452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41697              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Olsen kolsen@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Boyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Crumrine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willetta Greene-Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is introducing computations into organic, physical,  and
              biochemistry courses for chemistry majors to train students  to visualize and
              understand molecular structure, learn how to  write programs for data analysis,
              and appreciate the dynamic  nature of molecules and their relationship to
              chemical  reactivity.   Students are applying molecular mechanics and semi- 
              empirical molecular orbital methods to organic and small  biological molecules,
              solving physical chemistry problems through  computer programming, and
              observing the molecular dynamics of  proteins.    Specifically, organic
              chemistry students are  studying the conformational equilibria of substituted 
              cyclohexanes, nucleophilic addition to alpha, beta unsaturated  carbonyls, and
              electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions.    Physical chemistry students
              are solving a particle-in-a-box  problem, examining the kinetics of chain and
              oscillating  reactions, and predicting the infrared spectrum of acetic acid.   
              Biochemistry students are examining the allosteric transition of  hemoglobin
              and the induced fit mechanism of carboxypeptidase A,  and comparing nucleic
              acid structures.   Advanced courses are  being developed to address several
              aspects of computational  chemistry, such as molecular modeling and dynamics of
              proteins.    Four advanced graphics workstations provide hands-on experience 
              for students with computers and programs actually used in major  research
              laboratories.   The program greatly reduces the gap  between undergraduate
              education and what is actually done in  academic and industrial laboratories.
