Title       : Vertical Integration of Just-In-Time Experimentation in the Mechanical
               Engineering Curriculum at UNC Charlotte
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9551965

Award Number: 9551965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horacio V. Estrada estrada@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ibrahim N. Bodur  (Principal Investigator former)
              Russell G. Keanini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university is developing a vertically integrated hands-on  component for the
              mechanical engineering curriculum, which  provides timely exposure to
              state-of-the-art equipment and  experimental techniques.   The new approach
              provides for  dovetailing of the experiments with the theory leading to better 
              comprehension and retention of engineering fundamentals for the  students.   It
              also builds on the previous experiments and  theory, enhancing and reinforcing
              those topics.   As such it will  be an application of vertical integration of
              just-in-time  experimentation.   This new program fits well into the overall 
              curriculum revision the Department of Mechanical Engineering and  Engineering
              Science has undertaken.   The faculty of the  department are strongly committed
              to this curriculum revision.    This hands-on component of the curriculum is
              being utilized  starting freshman year and continuilg throughout the rest of
              the  curriculum.   To accomplish their goals, the faculty have  identified
              specific areas and equipment.   These areas are  instrumentation, data
              acquisition, fluid mechanics, heat  transfer, kinematics, controls, and
              manufacturing.   The faculty  believe such a curriculum can benefit the
              students and can be  used as a national model that integrates the various
              curriculum  revision trends.
