Title       : Innovative Introductory Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9551583

Award Number: 9551583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19893              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta R. Pollock pollock@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark O. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diana C. Linden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patty Zwollo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The knowledge of biology is increasing so rapidly that the  breadth of biology
              can no longer be taught in a single course.    The Biology Department has
              addressed this issue by abandoning the  traditional introductory survey course
              and adopting a group of  fundamental courses.   In cell and molecular biology,
              the  fundamental courses are Molecular Biology, Developmental Cell  Biology,
              and Biochemistry.   This opportunity is being taken to  develop innovative labs
              in cell and molecular biology that  demonstrate the principles discussed in
              lecture and that also  allow students to perform the state-of-the-art
              techniques.    Through this project, equipment is obtained that enables faculty
               to teach students state-of-the-art techniques in these  fundamental cell and
              molecular biology courses.   New  experimental modules stress investigative
              approaches.   Labs  include forensic DNA typing, using the polymerase chain
              reaction  technology (Molecular Biology), Western blotting to identify 
              specific proteins expressed during neural development  (Developmental Cell
              Biology), and DNA footprinting to study the  interactions of the lac repressor
              with the lac operon operator.    The strength and uniqueness of this proposal
              come from the  innovative design of the new curriculum.   A large number of 
              frosh and sophomore students use sophisticated equipment to learn 
              state-of-the-art techniques previously not available or only  available in
              upper-level courses.   Early exposure to these  techniques, in experiments
              carefully designed to pique students'  interest, better prepares them for
              upper-level classes and  increases their interest in both research
              opportunities and  graduate school.
