Title       : Automated Lathe Support Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551117

Award Number: 9551117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79797              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Eagle eaglep@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This school maintains a well-equipped manufacturing laboratory  containing both
              manual and computer numerically controlled (CNC)  machine tools.   However,
              while these machines are well suited  for discrete production of parts, they do
              not provide a  continuous process that can be run, altered and monitored.   
              Consequently, laboratory efforts in statistical process control  (SPC), process
              monitoring, and design of experiments (DOE) are  unfortunately artificial.  In
              light of today's increasingly  competitive manufacturing environment, it is
              essential that  engineering students are well trained in the entire
              manufacturing  process and exposed to state-of-the-art process monitoring and 
              control during their education.  Such exposure enables them to  more
              effectively make the transition from student to practicing  engineer.   This
              project has obtained some important components  to an existing CNC lathe in the
              manufacturing laboratory that  will allow a production run of process to be
              executed.   These  components include a wire straightener/cut-off machine and a
               pneumatic bar feeder.   These two pieces of equipment allow the  department's
              Cincinnati Milacron Talon CNC Lathe to be run in a  production mode.   A simple
              part program for a rotational element  (e.g., a screw or an electrical
              terminal) can now be run for  hundreds of pieces without human intervention.  
              Students have  access to a "process" that can be periodically sampled as part
              of  an SPC exercise, disturbed as part of a DOE exercise or  continuously
              monitored as part of a metrology exercise.
