Title       : A Laboratory Technique to Demonstrate the Significance of Stress History on the
               Engineering Properties of Clay Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9551820

Award Number: 9551820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy N. Tyler ftylertn@tristate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tri-State University
	      1 University Avenue
	      Angola, IN  46703    219/665-4100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Civil engineers perform analyses and make design recommendations  for many types
              of structure including buildings, bridges, dams,  highways, water treatment,
              and waste disposal facilities.   A  significant aspect of analysis and design
              is the proper  understanding and evaluation of the stress history of the soils 
              upon which these structures will be built.   Current classroom  teaching
              methods do not fully demonstrate how different stress  histories affect the
              engineering properties of clay soils.  This  project implements a laboratory
              method that physically  demonstrates the significance of the stress history of
              clay soils  to undergraduate civil engineering students.   A clay soil is 
              mixed with enough water to produce a slurry.   This material is  then
              consolidated in four separate batch consolidometers to four  different
              consolidation pressures.   Thus, four quality samples  are produced from the
              same slurry having the same classification  and mineralogy but having different
              stress histories.   The  samples are then removed from the batch
              consolidometers and  tested in standard l-D consolidation, unconfined
              compression, and  triaxial test equipment to evaluate the consolidation and
              shear  strength parameters.   The data from these tests, along with the 
              analyses of problems using these test results, demonstrate the  significance of
              stress history on the engineering properties and  performance of the clay soil.
