Title       : Undergraduate Laboratory and Field Experiences in Environmental Geochemistry and
               Hydrogeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9551133

Award Number: 9551133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36214              (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Long 14790dtl@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grahame J. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is a need to train undergraduates in environmental  global-change issues
              that range from the microscale (e.g.,  pollutants in groundwater) to the
              macroscale (e.g., CO2 and  global climate change) within the context of natural
              Earth  processes.   At the heart of this training is laboratory  experiences,
              particularly those that involve field work.   This  project provides funds to
              develop and upgrade laboratories for  two fundamental courses in the
              Environmental Geosciences Program:  Environmental Geochemistry and
              Hydrogeology.   Environmental  Geochemistry addresses the origin, occurrence,
              distribution, and  flow of chemicals in the water cycle.   This is a relatively
              new  course offering at colleges and universities and one for which  there are
              few textbooks or laboratory exercises.   With these  funds, one of the first
              series of laboratory exercises in this  discipline is being developed.  
              Hydrogeology addresses the  origin, occurrence, distribution, and flow of
              water.   This  laboratory is being upgraded.   A unique and exciting feature of
               this project is that these two laboratory courses are highly  integrated.  
              Integration is facilitated through the study around  a common theme -- the
              hydrologic, chemical, and physical dynamics  of a local watershed.   These
              laboratories give the student  hands-on experience in data collection,
              analysis, and  interpretation.   Students use equipment and technologies in 
              field and laboratory settings that will be useful to them in  graduate study or
              in industry.   After these labs have been  offered for a few semesters,
              students can study temporal changes  in the watershed by comparing their
              results to those from  previous years.
