Title       : Creating Effective Meterology Laboratory Modules to Improve Curriculum and
               Enhance Student Transition into Upper-Division Coursework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9551536

Award Number: 9551536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Sirvatka sirvatka¦cdnet.cod.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Du Page
	      425 22nd Street
	      Glen Ellyn, IL  601376599    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Paul L. Sirvatka                                             DUE 9551536 
              College of Du Page                                           FY1995 $ 305,000 
              Glen Ellyn, IL  60137                                        ILI - Leadership
              in                                                                Laboratory
              Development:                                                               
              Geosciences    Title: Creating Effective Meteorology Laboratory Modules to
              Improve  Curriculum and Enhance Student Transition into Upper-Division 
              Coursework    The operational and research activities within the field of 
              meteorology are undergoing unprecedented and rapid change.  An  effective
              meteorological laboratory curriculum must reflect the  latest innovations and
              theoretical applications of the users of the  science.    This project is
              developing a lower-division undergraduate  laboratory curriculum that prepares
              freshmen and sophomores for  upper-level study, provides these students
              adequate time to begin  learning their chosen field of study, and supplements
              the existing  curriculum by providing a balanced and necessary foundation in 
              understanding the tools used for meteorological study.    The specific
              objectives of the project are to:      Design lower division course work in
              meteorology.      Create a laboratory manual consisting of computer programs
              and  forecasting techniques to be used in lower division courses.  These 
              laboratories also are designed for maximum flexibility and expanded  use in
              upper-division courses.        Provide students with skill for an easier
              transition from  sophomore to junior year.      Encourage other community
              colleges to develop programs in  meteorology.      Encourage students who are
              not adept at mathematics to become  interested in weather.      Motivate
              students to take higher mathematics and physics.    The project is producing
              approximately 20 new computer-based  laboratory curriculum materials.  The
              modules provide the  foundation for the development of courses in  weather
              analysis and  forecasting and create new computer-based laboratory
              opportunities  for existing courses in atmospheric science.    The backgrounds
              of community college students who will benefit from  the proposed project
              include meteorology majors, educators,  aviators and people with an avid
              interest in meteorology.  Self-  paced meteorology modules encompassing new
              technologies with  standard universal concepts allow for individualized
              instruction of  meteorology fundamentals.  The modules contain lessons in 
              understanding numerical models, forecasting techniques and data  acquisition
              and manipulation, are portable to different types of  forecasting laboratory
              environments, give students an opportunity  to begin to understand the broad
              implication of meteorology by  piecing together the atmosphere's subtle
              nuances, and may encourage  students to expand scientific literacy by taking
              mathematics  courses that they otherwise would not have considered.    With the
              rapid change in workforce needs, students of the future  will be prepared to
              enter the workplace only if the evolution of  educational practices parallels
              that of the field of study itself.   The project is designed to provide such
              preparation to freshman and  sophomore level college students with an interest
              in continuing  their studies in meteorology at the upper division.
