Title       : FT-IR in the Introductory Chemistry Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9551637

Award Number: 9551637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Hill 3ay5jva@cmuvm.csv.cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Introduction of Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR)  instrumentation and analysis
              have great educational benefits for  both non-science- and science majors.  
              All students need to have  a realistic awareness of the potential and
              limitations of at  least some of the technologies that underlie current
              scientific  research.   Since non-science-majors may take as few as one  formal
              science course during their 4 years as an undergraduate,  it is critical that
              institutions provide them with exposure to  chemical technologies relevant to
              their future.   Science majors  additionally need an early introduction and
              continued exposure to  modern instrumentation since usage of such
              instrumentation is the  norm in the scientific research community.  The
              university has  chosen FT-IR instrumentation as a way of addressing these broad
               educational goals for all introductory chemistry classes.   
              Non-science-majors learn how infrared spectroscopy may be used  for chemical
              identification in the context of environmental and  pharmaceutical
              applications.   Science majors strengthen their  understanding of principles of
              bonding and molecular structure  through FT-IR.   Students are also shown how
              spectroscopy is the  result of bonding phenomena and, conversely, how the 
              interpretation of spectroscopic phenomena yields information  about bonding and
              structure.   Furthermore, students learn  quantitative applications of FT-IR so
              they may apply this  technique to both qualitative and quantitative tasks of
              analysis.
