Title       : Bioanalytical and Environmental Laboratory Courses for Chemistry and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9551282

Award Number: 9551282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Milofsky milofsky_R@fortlewis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Lewis College
	      
	      Durango, CO  81301    303/247-7661

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the purchase of an HPLC with a diode-array  detector
              (DAD).   Further, the instrument must have the  capability of doing the
              following experiments: quantitative  deconvolution of overlapping
              chromatographic peaks, second  derivative spectroscopy, spectral library
              searches, diode and  multichannel averaging, peptide mapping, microbore
              separations  and post-column reaction detection.   This instrument is an 
              integral part of new experiments being incorporated into  analytical,
              instrumental, organic, biochemistry, molecular  biology, advanced synthesis,
              and undergraduate research.   New  bioanalytical and environmental labs in
              analytical chemistry  introduce students to modern HPLC separation techniques
              and  spectroscopic methods and encourage them to understand the  fundamentals
              of chemical interactions (mobile-stationary phase)  and multichannel devices
              (DAD).   Fundamental principles are  reinforced in upper-division laboratory
              courses.   For example,  students in biochemistry perform a tryptic digestion
              of a reduced  protein, separation of the peptide fragments by RP-HPLC, and 
              identification of coenzyme carrying peptide fragments by their UV  spectra.  
              The HPLC-DAD is also being used for undergraduate  research projects involving
              kinetics and mechanisms of  micellar-enhanced photochemical reactions and
              photoinitiated  peroxyoxalate chemiluminescence.   This instrumentation is
              having  a broad impact on chemistry and biology students and is becoming  an
              integral part of a new macromolecular  characterization/isolation laboratory.
