Title       : Electric Machinery and Drives Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9551291

Award Number: 9551291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Mayer mayer@toolbox.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electric drives, which are composed of electric machines supplied  by power
              electronic converters, are an integral part of  high-performance and
              high-efficiency electromechanical systems  used in manufacturing automation and
              many industrial processes,  as well as in consumer products and transportation
              systems.   The  increased performance and energy efficiency of processes and 
              products that utilize electric drives combined with the steadily  decreasing
              cost of power and micro electronics promise to  accelerate the use of these
              systems.  Consequently, the demand  for engineering graduates familiar with
              electric drives is sure  to grow.  Motivated, in part, by this demand the
              university has  moved to strengthen this area of undergraduate study.   This 
              project implements an Electric Machinery and Drives Laboratory  (EMDL).   This
              facility is a multipurpose educational laboratory  for examining fundamental
              principles of electric machinery in a  junior-level course and the analysis and
              design of electric  drives in a senior-level course.   The equipment used in
              the EMDL  includes fractional horsepower electric machines, power  electronic
              converters, microcmmputers, and data acquisition  systems.   Juniors using the
              EMDL are able to use an innovative  "Field Observer" to visualize the magnetic
              fields within  operating machines and study the transient response of machines 
              experimentally and using PSPICE simulation.   Seniors using the  EMDL are able
              to study the operation of electric drives and  experiment with new control
              strategies.
