Title       : Separations and Structures Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum: GC/MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9551027

Award Number: 9551027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Hansen jhansen@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan A. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bridget G. Dibble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene P. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The concepts of separations and structure are enhanced in the  chemistry
              curriculum at all levels by the purchase of a GC/MS.   The GC/MS allows the
              study of more interesting and relevant  topics (such as pesticides in the
              environment or drug testing),  making chemistry more accessible to a wider
              range of students.    Use of the GC/MS provides chemistry majors with
              experience in an  increasingly important technique.   These goals are achieved
              by  beginning with simple experiments in General Chemistry that are  designed
              to provide the students with training on the GC/MS while  demonstrating the
              power of its analytical capabilities.    Students analyze compounds extracted
              from candy or chewing gum  and identify the major flavorants.   The concepts of
              atomic  structure are reinforced by studying the natural distribution of 
              isotopes.   In Organic Chemistry, students use the GC/MS in a  more
              sophisticated manner when they obtain data to study the  linear free energy
              relationship in the fragmentation of  substituted benzophenones and
              acetophenones.   This experiment  reinforces the concepts of inductive and
              resonance effects that  are discussed in class.   They also use the GC/MS to
              obtain  kinetic data for the free radical chlorination reaction.   These 
              experiments underscore to the students and help them better  understand the
              importance of kinetics and thermodynamics in the  study of organic reaction
              mechanisms.   In Analytical Chemistry,  students learn the special consequences
              of using a hyphenated  technique to quantitatively analyze trace levels of
              organics.    Students continue to use the GC/MS in upper-level courses to 
              study the structure of compounds, to study the separation of  complex mixtures,
              and to obtain data for the study of reaction  mechanisms.   The instrument
              enhances special topics courses and  student research projects.
