Title       : Incorporation of an Inert Atmosphere Glove Box into the Air-Sensitive Synthesis
               Teaching Laboratory: Completion of aUnique Teaching Facility for Undergraduate
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9551691

Award Number: 9551691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Matchett Matchets@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university's chemistry department serves a student population  that is
              attending graduate school in rapidly increasing numbers.    To help these
              students and to stimulate even more to pursue this  path, the department is
              developing an engaging new program of  upper-level electives.   This program
              must provide the advanced  electives required for the professional major,
              excite students  about continuing their education, and convey to them the true 
              interdisciplinary nature of chemistry.   The chemistry department  has chosen
              to design a program to teach air-sensitive synthesis  to undergraduates.   This
              program fills the departmental need for  advanced synthetic course work with
              electives designed to  illustrate the interdisciplinary nature of chemistry
              seen in  fields such as organometallics and material science.   As the  focal
              point, the university is currently building an  undergraduate teaching lab
              dedicated to the art of air-sensitive  synthesis/manipulation.   This project
              specifically funds a  single station inert atmosphere glove box as the one
              remaining  item required for the completion of this facility.   Since much  of
              air-sensitive chemistry involves producing and handling  air-sensitive
              products, it is unrealistic to omit these from a  student's training.   Glove
              box use is not only the best way to  handle these products, it is also the most
              efficient, student  friendly, way to teach a laboratory class of this type.  
              Its  acquisition allows electives in Organometallics and Advanced  Synthetic
              Techniques to include a complete and relevant lab  component.
