Title       : Video Technology in Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9551066

Award Number: 9551066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7943               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard P. Gilfoyle ggilfoyl@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip D. Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Vineyard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The teaching of mechanics and motion in introductory physics has  produced
              disappointing results that imply that most students  leave the course with only
              a primitive understanding of the  motion of objects.   In this project,
              recently developed video  technology is used in an inquiry-based,
              laboratory-lecture format  to improve students' learning of the fundamental
              ideas of  Newtonian mechanics.   The students record the trajectory of an 
              object with a low-cost video camera, digitize and record the data  on a
              computer, and then analyze the observed motion  frame-by-frame to discover the
              features of the observed  phenomenon.   This procedure directly confronts
              students'  preconceptions about motion; measure the same quantities that are 
              used to describe motion in the classroom, such as the  time-dependent position
              of a projectile; and make new and  challenging phenomena accessible in the
              introductory physics  laboratory.   Before now, the methods employed in this
              project  were too costly to allow students to collect and analyze their  own
              data in an introductory physics laboratory.   In addition,  the method is
              flexible and easy to use, an essential practical  ingredient in an
              inquiry-based laboratory.  The audience targeted  in this project is all
              students who take introductory physics.    These students are from all
              scientific disciplines (physics to  sport science) and from all classes (first
              year to seniors).     The project implements the use of these video
              technologies in an  environment where the students are involved in both
              recording the  video and analyzing it.   The students can investigate a variety
               of phenomena that because of technical or cost barriers cannot be  addressed
              in the traditional undergraduate laboratory.
