Title       : Collaborative Signal Processing Education on the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9551617

Award Number: 9551617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don H. Johnson dhj@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Companies frequently team their employees over widespread regions  when
              undertaking large and detailed projects.   At present, these  enterprises use
              leased analog and digital communication lines and  will no doubt switch to
              computer networks as the "Information  Superhighway" becomes a reality.   From
              a pedagogical point of  view, this modern approach to teaming requires that
              educators  develop in their graduates the skills required for this new 
              reality.   These skills include, among others, identifying  expertise and
              interest within a larger distributed group,  segmenting tasks in a meaningful
              fashion, integrating designs  across a high-speed network, verifying
              performance against  specifications, and compiling and writing a comprehensive
              final  report.   Without these skills, our students face a competitive 
              disadvantage when confronted with cheaper, more classically  trained
              engineering talent now prevalent in the global  marketplace.   To confront this
              challenge to engineering  education, this project has designed and implemented
              team  learning and team teaching using the Internet.   The principal 
              investigators are well-acquainted teaching and research faculty  who specialize
              in digital signal processing.   The project  features signal processing courses
              with a heavy emphasis on  distributed experimentation.   The equipment used to
              support  these new courses is located at each university involved in the 
              project and will form a large connected multimedia laboratory.    These
              individual laboratories support audio and video  transmission necessary for
              facilitating real-time student  interaction over the Internet.   Relevant
              experiments and  learning aides are being developed and will be disseminated 
              electronically through standard Internet services and through the  development
              of a multimedia textbook authored by the  investigators.
