Title       : Instrumentation for Particle Transport/Separation Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9551886

Award Number: 9551886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene S. Schuster   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Pommersheim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A particle transport/separation flow system is currently under  construction and
              allows the laboratory investigation of particle  technology and separation
              concepts to be introduced for the first  time into the existing undergraduate
              curriculum in the College of  Engineering and in the Department of Chemical
              Engineering.   New  instruments, a stack analyzer, pressure transducers, a
              particle  characteristics tester, and a data acquisition board are being 
              incorporated with the particle transport/separation system  through this
              project.   This enables labs on cyclone separation  of powders from air,
              particle characterization, flow regime  identification for gas/solid transport,
              and hopper operation to  be incorporated into classes.  The pneumatic
              transport/separation  system has been completely designed and constructed
              undergraduate  students and has served to begin to introduce particle
              technology  and environmental separations to a small number of self-selected 
              students.   This project integrates particle technology into a  number of the
              undergraduate classes, thus enabling all  engineering undergraduates to become
              aware of the importance of  the knowledge of particles.   Additionally, all
              chemical  engineering students can learn the various concepts pertinent to  the
              transport and separation of particles in their existing  undergraduate courses.
                The new instrumentation can result in a  number of experiments of varying
              learning objectives on particle  technology, which is a vital area of knowledge
              that has  previously been neglected in chemical engineering education.  
              Classes such as Process Control, Fluid Dynamics, Exploring  Engineering, and
              Transport Phenomena will integrate the  experiments to affect over 1,500
              students in the next 5 years of  use.
