Title       : Biological Psychology: A Laboratory-Centered Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551247

Award Number: 9551247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40892              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Bitran dbitran@holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project restructures two core courses in a Biological  Psychology
              Concentration offered to biology and psychology  undergraduate majors.   A
              large number of courses in the  concentration have a significant laboratory
              component.   However,  as a result of insufficient instrumentation,
              Introduction to  Neuroscience and Neurochemistry and Behavior courses had been 
              offered in a lecture format.   The Introduction to Neuroscience  is a gateway
              course into the concentration.   Students completing  this course can make a
              more informed decision concerning their  choice to continue study in this area
              and be better prepared for  future courses.   Similarly, concepts in
              neurochemistry and  psychopharmacology taught in the Neurochemistry and
              Behavior  course are most effectively conveyed by active student 
              participation.   It is for these reasons that systemic reform for  these
              courses is sought.   This project reforms the structure of  these courses by
              providing experiments that will serve as the  centerpiece of the student's
              learning experience.   Thus,  important concepts in neuroscience are first
              discovered in the  laboratory.   Discussion of experimental results that follow
               leads to unveiling of general principles.   Only then is the  student asked to
              integrate reading assignments from the textbook  and primary literature on the
              topic with the specific experience  gained in the laboratory.   Students can
              gain proficiency in a  number of important techniques currently used in
              neuroscience,  and more importantly, they are actively involved in the process 
              of learning, thereby reducing the difficulty in comprehension of  technical
              jargon that characterizes scientific information  transmitted either verbally
              or in writing.
