Title       : Active Learning: Visualizing: Astronomy, Calculus, Computer Science, Earth
               Science, and Organic Chemistry with Multimedia Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9551864

Award Number: 9551864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Jones idrew@admin.elcamino.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Akins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn J. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Shankweiler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : El Camino College
	      16007 Crenshaw Blvd
	      Torrance, CA  905060001    213/532-3670

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Geoffrey Jones                                     DUE 9551864  El Camino
              College                                  FY1995 $80,000  Torrance, CA 
              905060001                            ILI - Instrumentation                     
                                              Project:                                       
                            Interdisciplinary    Title: Active Learning: Visualizing:
              Astronomy, Calculus, Computer  Science, Earth Science, and Organic   Chemistry
              with Multimedia Technology           El Camino College, a community college of
              23,000 students, is  encountering less-prepared incoming students, while course
              work in  mathematics and science becomes even more complex.  The college  seeks
              new methods, curriculum, and teaching strategies to retain  and prepare
              students for transfer to four-year institutions.  The  approach the Departments
              of Astronomy, Chemistry, Mathematics,  Earth and Computer Sciences in this
              project is to provide a greater  amount of active learning through the use of
              "hands on" computer  simulations of projects that previously were lecture only
              topics.   The subject matter chosen for active learning are abstract topics 
              and three dimensional presentations that require some  "visualization". 
              Greater "visualization" is now possible through  the use of computers using
              complex graphical, animation, and  simulation programs that allow for the
              examination and presentation  of math and science topics in ways that never
              before existed.  By  introducing "visualization" in a variety of courses and 
              assignments, the faculty believe that greater understanding,  appreciation, and
              retention of course material will occur.  Each of  the five departments have
              described, and in some cases pilot  tested, projects and subject matter for
              "visualization".  The  departments will share a single multi-disciplinary,
              multimedia  computer laboratory with both Macintosh and IBM capability.  The 
              goal is to increase the number of students completing their  bachelor degrees
              within the next five years.   Since two thirds of  all El Camino students are
              minority students, a greater transfer  and graduation rate of El Camino
              students will add to the pool of  minority mathematicians and scientists. 
              Evaluation of retention  and comparison of test score data will be examined. 
              Significant  results will be published in professional journals as well as 
              presentations to regional professional organizations.
