Title       : Advanced Microscopy for an Undergraduate Cell Biology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9551341

Award Number: 9551341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Kline dkline@biology.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brent C. Bruot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Stalvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university is developing an undergraduate cell biology course  that promises
              to be a relevant and exciting course to encourage  students to continue their
              studies and pursue careers in the  biological sciences and to provide them with
              the skills to do so.    Through this project, the university is developing
              advanced  microscopy laboratories that utilize many of the best and most 
              exciting techniques in cell biology, research.   Recent advances  in microscopy
              have provided researchers with new views of cell  biology, and a wide variety
              of fluorescent probes are now  available to study cellular structure and
              function in living or  fixed cells.   These techniques and instrumentation are
              brought  into the undergraduate teaching labs in a sophomore core course  in
              cell biology.   Laboratory exercises using fluorescence  microscopes equipped
              with contrast enhancing optics and an  imaging processing system are being
              developed; the students use  this equipment in experiments to examine the
              current models and  theories in cell biology.   For unlimited viewing, the 
              microscopes have a color video projection system to allow  students to project
              their cell preparations to the rest of the  class for examination and
              discussion.   With the video projection  and recording system, interactive and
              collaborative learning is  encouraged.   Individual and small group work, peer
              teaching, and  experimental projects, all of which are very effective teaching 
              techniques, are all provided.   Students perform experiments of  their own
              design and present their results orally and in written  reports.
