Title       : An Electronic Lab Book for an Introductory Programming Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9551208

Award Number: 9551208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet D. Hartman hartman@katya.acs.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joaquin A. Vila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bill E. Swafford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luann K. Stemler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In Fall 1994 changes were made to ACS 168 Structured Problem  Solving Using the
              Computer.   These changes included a move from  a mainframe to a personal
              computer environment, a change in  language to C, and the addition of a 2-hour
              weekly lab.   These  changes have provided students with the opportunity to use
              more  sophisticated software development tools, fostered more  interaction with
              students, and enabled the provision of  innovative experiences that are
              interactive, use graphical user  interfaces, use multimedia presentations, and
              are closer to the  student's previous experiences.   Laboratory modules to
              support  the lab sessions, about half of which have multimedia components, 
              were also developed and implemented.   The prototype modules use  only the
              graphics capabilities of the authoring tool (Multimedia  Toolbook).   The
              principal investigators seek support to extend  the modules to include audio,
              scanned images, and video clips.   This grant is funding the development and
              use of an electronic  CD-ROM lab book for ACS 168.   There are two versions of
              the lab  book:  (1) the instructor's version, containing lab modules  complete
              with runtime versions of the multimedia components, the  source code for labs,
              the multimedia help facility, answers to  lab activities, the instructor's lab
              manual, and the automated  grading system, and (2) the student version,
              containing lab  modules complete with runtime versions of the multimedia 
              components, the source code for labs, the multimedia help  facility, and
              ancillary documents.
