Title       : Simulation and Experimentation with Electronic Devices (SEED)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9551812

Award Number: 9551812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Toufic M. Hakim   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bashir A. Sayar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kaushik H. Thakore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville University
	      2800 University Blvd N
	      Jacksonville, FL  322113321    904/744-3950

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Laboratory for the Simulation and Experimentation with  Electronic Devices
              (SEED) is designed for freshman students in  the dual-degree engineering
              program (DDP) and for science  students from chemistry, physics, biology, and
              environmental  science.   It is hands-on, multidisciplinary, project-driven,
              and  team-based.   It focuses on the design of functional module  assemblies
              that interface various data acquisition devices with  the computer for
              simulation and analysis.   SEED surveys  micro-electronics, functional modules,
              and prototype boards.    Multidisciplinary project development is a major
              component of  SEED: teams design the signal acquisition system starting with 
              the probe and ending with the computer.   The students gather the  data and use
              the computer to analyze it and simulate the system's  dynamics.   The students
              deal with the macro-aspect of the  designs rather than the in-depth electronic
              treatment of the  separate components.   Various issues, such as compatibility,
               resonance, feedback, impedance matching, and analog-to-digital  conversions,
              are explored.   The SEED lab also enhances the  existing electronics laboratory
              and transforms it into an  advanced instrumentation lab.   It will play an
              instrumental role  in alleviating the current DDP's retention problem by adding
              an  element of excitement to the lower-level curriculum and will set  the tone
              for the whole program.   SEED will also affect some of  the advanced science
              laboratories in which measurement, and not  only analysis, is computer-based.  
              SEED, a DDP requirement and a  science recommended elective fulfilling a lab
              degree requirement,  supports five different stations (3 students per station);
              it  directly involves 60 students during its first 2 years of  operation.
