Title       : Enhancement of the Community College Organic Chemistry Curriculum with FT-IR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9551254

Award Number: 9551254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9361               (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond H. Fong rhfong@ccsf.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City Col of San Francisco
	      50 Phelan St
	      San Francisco, CA  941121821    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to enhance the chemistry curriculum  by
              incorporating the theory and practice of FT-IR analysis in  organic chemistry
              courses.   Out-dated dispersive IR  spectrophotometers are lacking in the
              capabilities necessary to  perform the desired experiments and IR techniques.  
               Incorporating an FT-IR instrument will enhance the organic  chemistry
              curriculum by reinforcing lecture topics, upgrading  existing experiments, and
              introducing new experiments.   The  FT-IR is the MIDAC Prospect.   This
              state-of-the-art IR not only  allows rapid acquisition of spectra and
              improvements in spectra  quality, but also provides undergraduate students with
              the  opportunity to gain hands-on experience in the operations of this 
              instrument which is widely used in universities and industry.    Lectures
              include more discussion of FT-IR methods and their  applications.   Through
              this project, lecture topics are  reinforced by studying mechanistic details of
              reactions, such as  kinetics and intermediate formation.   Additionally,
              students  will gain experience in sample preparation, analyzing spectra, 
              fundamental operations of the instrument, and analysis techniques  such as
              spectral subtraction.   The use of Fourier transform  instruments makes this
              possible.   The FT-IR instrument makes  significant contributions to the
              chemistry education and helps  bring computer-controlled instrumentation to
              undergraduate  students.
