Title       : Applications of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy in a Novel Integrated
               Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9551108

Award Number: 9551108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11767              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne G. Glenn glennag@rascal.guilford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. MacInnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Whitnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Guilford College
	      5800 West Friendly Avenue
	      Greensboro, NC  274104108    919/292-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There have been numerous attempts to create laboratory exercises  that integrate
              the concepts of physical, analytical, organic, and  inorganic chemistry.   Most
              of this work concentrates on pre-  planned labs where the answer is known.  
              However, true chemical  research relies not only on the integration of the
              concepts, but  also on the ability to work on problems where the answer is not 
              known a priori and where working effectively within a team of  researchers is
              vital.   The objective of this project is the  continuing development of an
              integrated lab sequence which  incorporates concepts from organic, inorganic,
              physical, and  analytical chemistry into projects involving original research 
              ideas.   Students work in teams of four or five, each team  including both
              organic chemistry and physical chemistry lab  students.   Each student brings
              his or her particular skills and  background to the research group, and the
              resulting combination  of skills and personalities often results in novel and
              original  research.   Majors in chemistry take the integrated laboratory 
              sequence twice, as part of their organic chemistry and physical  chemistry lab
              courses.  Research that has already been performed  under the rubric of the
              integrated laboratory include  sonochemistry, synthesis of
              buckminsterfullerene, synthesis of  water-soluble polymeric dyes, and synthesis
              and testing of  conductive polymers.   Students are not only able to do better 
              research, they are also able to gain valuable experience in using 
              instrumentation they are likely to encounter in their  professional careers.  
              The integrated laboratory sequence  provides a means for students to obtain
              expertise in applying  their knowledge of chemistry to real-life problems.
