Title       : An Undergraduate Laboratory in Particulate Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9551914

Award Number: 9551914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Tompson TompsonR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sudarshan K. Loyalka  (Principal Investigator former)
              Tushar K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a modern, fully-equipped,  undergraduate lab in the
              critical cross-disciplinary area of  Particulate Systems Engineering.   This
              lab forms the basis for  an undergraduate lab course, serving approximately 40
              students  each year, taught in conjunction with the course, "Particulate 
              Systems Engineering" (ENGR 379), offered through the Particulate  Systems
              Research Center.   This lab course is expanding and  enhancing a successful
              undergraduate program in this area which  has included the nurturing of over 70
              talented undergraduates  through a previous NSF grant.   Accurate measurement
              and  prediction of particulate properties are important to the science  and
              technologies associated with global warming, ozone layer  depletion, indoor and
              outdoor air pollution, combustion,  micro-contamination control, nanophase and
              materials  manufacturing, sensor and fiber optic fabrication, reduced 
              production and cleanup of hazardous wastes, and nuclear reactor  safety.   This
              importance is emphasized by the fact that over 70  percent of DuPont products
              are in particulate form, and that the  nation's research agencies initiatives
              in global warming, air  quality, and nanophase manufacturing.   Equipment used
              in this  project falls into three categories: aerosol generation, aerosol 
              classification, and analytical lasers.   In combination with the  substantial
              equipment already in place, this new equipment allows  undergraduate students
              to participate in an intensive laboratory  course that includes experiments
              designed to measure particle  distributions, characterize aerosol particles,
              study aerosol  dynamics and reaction chemistry, study specific aerosol 
              applications, and study and compare different aerosol measurement  and
              generation techniques.
