Title       : Student Computational Applied Mathematics Laboratory for Teaching Industrial and
               Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9551823

Award Number: 9551823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16370              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Coker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmond Rusjan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Thistleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Utica-Rome
	      PO Box 3050
	      Utica, NY  135043050    315/792-3301

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, funds are provided to improve undergraduate  mathematics
              education by developing a high-quality computational  environment for students
              interested in Industrial & Applied  Mathematics (IAM).   The Student Applied
              Mathematics Computer  Laboratory (SAM-LAB) is being upgraded through the
              purchase of  networked PC workstations running both UNIX and Windows and 
              appropriate peripheral hardware.   These workstations will be  connected to the
              campus network through the purchase of a network  hub.  The SAM-LAB provides a
              high-quality, dedicated computer  environment for undergraduate majors in
              engineering technologies  and computer science which will help them acquire
              strong  analytical, computational, and numerical skills.   Students using  the
              SAM-LAB and its configuration of computers connected to the  Internet have the
              opportunity to:  (1) pursue advanced  computational issues such as
              parallelization, (2) dedicate  computational resources for large tasks, (3)
              perform carefully  controlled mathematical experiments, and (4) develop an
              evolving  portfolio consisting of a set of projects.  A lab manual  containing
              detailed objectives and procedures for each project  developed during the
              course of this program is being compiled and  will be published.   Experiences
              with the laboratory will be  publicized at regional American Mathematical
              Association and  American Physical Society Meetings.   Students are encouraged
              to  present representative work from their portfolios at these  regional
              meetings.   Several of the laboratories using  commercially available packages
              or in-house developed software  will be distributed electronically.   A select
              number will be  published in appropriate journals.
