Title       : Incorporation of Scanning Electron Microscopy in Undergraduate Biology
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9551202

Award Number: 9551202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60827              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Elmendorf   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Bidlack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Radke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Oklahoma
	      100 N University Drive
	      Edmond, OK  73034    405/341-2980

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Integration of innovative investigations into undergraduate  microbiology,
              zoology, and plant biology laboratories is occurring  through the acquisition
              of a computer-interfaced Lecia Stereocan 420  scanning electron microscope
              (SEM).   Innovative investigations enable  undergraduate students to (1)
              utilize the scientific method in  designing experiments, (2) master new
              technologies, (3) obtain  qualitative and quantitative data, (4) develop
              conclusions based on  data, (5) understand the principles of specimen
              collection and  preparation, (6) understand the principles of SEM operation,
              and (7)  develop expertise in SEM operation.   Undergraduate students can use 
              the instrument in Introductory Microbiology, Ornithology, Comparative 
              Vertebrate Anatomy, Plant Physiology, Plant Anatomy, Scanning Electron 
              Microscopy, and Independent Study as part of required laboratory  exercises.  
              SEM exercises are being integrated into existing  laboratory schedules designed
              to (1) teach concepts, sample  preparation, and analyses and (2) to interest
              students with information  and research opportunities that are revealed by
              utilization of the  instrument.   Students are given hands-on experience
              utilizing the SEM  to study micromorphological characteristics of bacterial
              isolates,  mallophagous mites of birds, effects of heavy metal containing 
              wastewater on root hair development and nodule formation in legumes, 
              quantitative assessment of sunken glandular trichomes in sweet basil  treated
              with or without natural pesticides, evaluation of organelle  purity obtained by
              density gradient centrifugation of soybean extracts,  and surface modification
              in avian epidermal pore structure.   Students  can acquire knowledge in data
              analysis, instrumental "know-how," and  state-of-the-art training needed to
              enter the job market as confident  and productive scientists.
