Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy Laboratory Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9551558

Award Number: 9551558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Glaunsinger Wglaunsinger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daphna R. Yaniv  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B L. Ramakrishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio A. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart M. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The first multidisciplinary Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM)  laboratory for
              undergraduate students using research-grade  instrumentation is being created
              in this project using  state-of-the-art instrumentation for Scanning Tunneling 
              Microscopy (STM) and Atom Force Microscopy (AFM).   The  laboratory is designed
              to bring together students from different  disciplines of science and
              engineering and different ethnic  backgrounds and to help prepare them for the
              imminent revolution  in nano-science, engineering, and technology.   The
              laboratory is  equipped with research-grade instruments capable of operating in
               the STM and AFM modes at nanoscale resolution under ambient, in  vitro, and in
              situ electrochemical conditions.   The  multidisciplinary laboratory includes
              (1) sample and probe  preparation equipment, (2) six SPM workstations, (3) 
              post-acquisition data-processing centers, and (4) testing  equipment.   The
              project involves expert faculty and researchers  from the departments of
              chemistry/biochemistry,  physics/astronomy, geology, botany, zoology,
              microbiology,  chemical/bio/materials engineering, and electrical engineering. 
                The laboratory complements many undergraduate courses and  laboratories in
              the above disciplines, and provides highly  qualified students for
              undergraduate research projects.
