Title       : Incorporating Computer Algebra Systems and Writing-to-Learn in Linear Algebra
               and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9551794

Award Number: 9551794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40602              (Estimated)
Investigator: O. William McClung mcclung@nebrwesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. LaRose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Vogt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nebraska Wesleyan Univ
	      50th and Saint Paul Sts
	      Lincoln, NE  68504    402/466-2371

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9504905  Rogers  This award supports Eric Flint, a graduate student of 
              Professor Craig A. Rogers in the Center for Intelligent  Material Systems and
              Structures, Virginia Polytechnic  Institute and State University, to spend five
              months  carrying out research at the German Aerospace Research  Establishment
              (DLR) in Braunschweig, Germany.  His host for  this period of
              dissertation-related research is Jorg  Melcher, Deputy Head of the Division of
              Adaptive Structural  Systems of the Institute of Structural Mechanics of DLR. 
              This Institute is possibly the strongest in Europe in the  area of adaptive
              structural vibration control.  Research at  CIMMS is focused on characterizing
              the electrical and  mechanical behavior of "smart" actuators as part of complex
               structures.  Mr. Flint is working on intelligent design of  such smart system
              technology.  Research in the German  institute has concentrated on building
              structurally-  integrated actuators and designing control algorithms to 
              isolate vibration and control aeroelastic effects..  Mr.  Flint's dissertation
              research visit will provide an active  link between the U.S. and German
              research groups, giving  CIMMS access to the large test structures and other
              types of  stack actuators available at DLR.    The control of undesirable
              vibration and other behavior in  truss-like structures by passive design
              improvement is  reaching its technical limit.   Active control offers a way  to
              further improve the performance range of structures.  Adding a method of
              putting force into the structure creates  force paths which can be used to
              control and eliminate  excess vibration.  A promising approach is multi-layered
               stack actuators, which consist of thin layers of active  materials that are
              mechanically in serial and electrically  in parallel.  This area of
              control-structure interaction is  of widespread interest in the U.S. because of
               its potential  to significantly improve the efficiency and performance of a 
              wide variety of structural systems, from airplanes to   communication antennae,
              as well as suppressing vibration in  heavy machinery, bridges and certain types
              of buildings.  ***
