Title       : From Descriptive to Adaptive Understanding: Using Interactive Computer
               Simulation in Quantitative Biology and Statistics Labs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9551460

Award Number: 9551460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62320              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Huffman dh09@Academia.swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin S. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Arsuffi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project improves the effectiveness of laboratory exercises  in quantitative
              biology so that undergraduates can develop  essential analytical skills and an
              adaptive understanding of  dynamic statistical and biological principles.   The
              premise is  that the requisite laboratory instrumentation for teaching 
              adaptive knowledge of quantitative biology is high-speed  computers running
              responsive Monte Carlo simulations tailored to  exercise objectives.   The
              differecne with this project is that  it provides a set of focused and
              appealing lab exercises based on  realistic computer simulations running at
              spectacular speeds and  set in a playful learning environment.   The intent is
              not to  push, but rather to lure, students toward an adaptive working 
              knowledge of important principles in statistics and quantitative  biology. 
              Most of the simulations are Monte Carlo simulations of  random processes in
              biology.   Students are required to execute  and interpret appropriate
              hypothesis tests and to file reports  (on the server) describing the behavior
              of the simulated models  in a digital portfolio complete with tables and
              charts.    Appropriate software can be acquired externally (when available)  or
              developed by the PI.   The instrumentation includes computers  based on the new
              PowerPC processor family: 20 networked student  workstations on carts, 3
              courseware development stations  dedicated to the foup PIs, 1 file/print
              server, 1 printer and 1  scanner, and software required to provide the
              necessary  functionality and maintain the network.    SWT's Aquatic Biology 
              program is the focus of the project, and the targeted courses  include two
              ecology courses (either required for all Biology and  Aquatic majors), Aquatic
              Biology, Biometry (all required for  Aquatic majors), and a practical
              statistics course in the Math  Department.
