Title       : Integrated Design, Manufacturing and Materials Laboratory Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9551741

Award Number: 9551741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40634              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafiqul I. Noorani rnoorani@.lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Omar S. Es-Said  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf Fleck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mel I. Mendelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      7900 Loyola Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the Mechanical Engineering (ME) Department  is developing
              an advanced Integrated Design, Manufacturing, and  Materials Laboratory for the
              improvement of its undergraduate  curriculum.   The improvement plan includes
              the introduction of  four experiments that will enhance eight required and two 
              elective ME courses in computer graphics, computer-aided  manufacturing,
              materials engineering, and concurrent-  engineering-related courses.   The ME
              and Art Departments  together with private industry are implementing the
              experiments  collaboratively.   The experiments integrate design, 
              manufacturing, materials, and concurrent engineering.  The four  selected
              experiments test:  (1) the application of rapid  prototyping and CAD to produce
              wax models for investment casting;  (2) the use of investment casting to form
              Al-base alloy  components (e.g., turbo impellers); (3) the use of tensile 
              testing to evaluate material properties and optimize casting  variables; and
              (4) the use of teamworking to satisfy user  requirements for producing robust
              designs.  The major new  equipment includes a rapid prototyping machine and
              computers,  investment casting equipment, and video-related equipment.   This 
              project is important because it will provide approximately 140  engineering
              students with practical skills in product design.    This can improve their
              performance, increase their retention  rate, and enhance their attitude toward
              the profession of  engineering.   The project is also significant because
              improved  laboratory facilities can enhance the University's engineering 
              curriculum and prepare a future generation of U.S.  engineers to  compete
              effectively in the global marketplace.
