Title       : Computers as Biological Tools: The Incorporation of Computers into Introductory
               and Upper Level Biology Courses for Collecting, Analyzing and Presenting Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9551998

Award Number: 9551998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Chabot chrisc@psc.plymouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry T. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Plymouth State College
	      Plymouth State Col
	      Plymouth, NH  03264    603/536-1550

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The major thrust of this project is integrating computers into  the laboratory
              components of six courses in biology: invertebrate  zoology, ecology, animal
              physiology, animal behavior, independent  study, and senior research.   While
              the authors have previously  incorporated computer-based laboratory exercises
              into these  courses, the students have been severely limited in their ability 
              to participate actively in these laboratories because of a lack  of equipment. 
               This project rectifies this problem by providing  access to groups of two
              students to a computer with supporting  software and interfacing devices.  
              Through laboratory exercises  in these courses, students are introduced to
              computers as  biological tools that can be used to collect and analyze data.   
              This introduction demonstrates the usefulness of computers to  them, and more
              importantly, allows the students more time during  laboratory sessions to think
              about the results, to design new  experiments, and to perform these additional
              experiments.   The  students also use the computers and software programs to
              conduct  on-line literature searches, to learn to use the Internet and  Mosaic,
              and to prepare oral presentations of their results using  a computer display
              projector.   These computers, along with new  physiological equipment, can also
              be used by upper-level students  for their senior research projects.   A
              computer linked to an  overhead display unit is being made available for use in
              the  lecture component of these courses, in which the system can  function as
              an electronic blackboard.   This project shows  faculty members how computers
              can facilitate learning and  encourages them incorporate these types of
              learning experience  into two larger courses offered by the department, general
               biology and human anatomy and physiology.
