Title       : A Multidisciplinary Environmental Undergraduate Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9551564

Award Number: 9551564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44190              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Meyer gem@engecl.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed F. Dahab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Hubbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              George E. Meyer                         Due 9551564  University of
              Nebraska-Lincoln          FY1995 $44.190  Lincoln, NE  68583                   
                ILI - Instrumentation                                          Project:      
                                                 Interdisciplinary    Title: A
              Multidisciplinary Environmental Undergraduate Laboratory    The Departments of
              Biological Systems Engineering, Civil  Engineering, and Agricultural
              Meteorology at the University of  Nebraska-Lincoln will equip a
              multidisciplinary Environmental  Undergraduate Laboratory (EUL).  The EUL will
              facilitate curricular  change to address new teaching emphases for these
              departments.  Our  goal is to establish a learning environment that allows
              students to  explore uses of state-of-the-art equipment to solve environmental 
              problems.  The five computer workstations and data acquisition  systems, along
              with sensors to monitor environmental variables,  including water quality, will
              encourage cooperative learning,  problem-solving among small teams of students,
              and provide  realistic experiences to prepare students for careers in research 
              and industry.    Laboratory sessions for four courses (two in BioSysE, one in
              AgMet,  and one offered jointly in CivilE and BioSysE) will undergo 
              significant revision.  These revisions will emphasize use of  laboratory
              exercises to build on mathematical descriptions of  physical and chemical
              relationships introduced in lecture sessions  and facilitate the understanding
              of thermodynamic and energy state  relationships for environmental systems. 
              The new exercises will  permit "hands-on" experimentation using modern
              equipment including  automated monitoring using data acquisition systems;
              sensor types,  applications, design, testing and calibration; computer methods
              for  data analysis; and error analyses for these systems.  The EUL will  also
              be used for exercises or demonstrations to enhance at least  thirteen other
              undergraduate courses from three other disciplines.    Laboratory manual s for
              the revised courses will be developed.   Interactive televised sessions, using
              equipment from the EUL, will  be presented via AG*SAT, a national agricultural
              television  network.
