Title       : Integrated Physical, Mathematical and Computer Modeling of Simple Dynamical
               Systems: Constructing an Understanding of the Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9551442

Award Number: 9551442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13404              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra F. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hartwick College
	      
	      Oneonta, NY  13820    607/432-4200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the laboratory experiences in two classes,  an
              introductory earth systems science course and an upper-level  geochemistry
              course, are redesigned.   Both courses emphasize the  behavior and
              interrelationships of natural systems and  demonstrate to students the power of
              a quantitative approach to  problem-solving in science.   By combining simple
              physical models  with mathematical modeling (for upper-level students) and
              simple  computer modeling (both levels), students not only gain a deeper 
              understanding of the particular system they've studied, but gain  insight into
              an entire class of problems with many practical  applications.   In the
              intro-level course, students build  identical physical and computer models of a
              one-box dynamical  system.   This approach has several advantages:  (1)
              Students  gain confidence in computer modeling by working with a system  that
              they already understand well.   (2) Computer modeling is  creative, students
              both analyze a situation and design its  solution.   (3) The one-box model is a
              flexible system, easily  adapted for study of a wide variety of natural
              phenomena.   (4)  With appropriate software, model building can be carried out
              by  introductory-level students.   (5) The mathematical description  of a
              one-box model is well within the grasp of students with  basic calculus skills,
              and geology majors can gain experience in  applying mathematical techniques to
              problems of practical  interest.   This exercise is open-ended.   Students
              begin on a  firm platform of observation and are armed with theory and 
              computer skills, thus allowing them to explore a range of  problems whose
              solutions require creative and critical thinking.    This project provides
              seven new PowerMacintosh computers, two  printers, modeling software, and
              network hardware.
