Title       : Molecular Modeling Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9551199

Award Number: 9551199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl T. Wigal wigal@lvc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Cornelius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lebanon Valley College
	      College Avenue
	      Annville, PA  17003    717/867-4411

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Molecular modeling has evolved from a narrow research interest to  a broad-based
              tool useful to the bench chemist.   Its use has  become routine in industrial
              settings, such as the pharmaceutical  industry, where modeling a system prior
              to conventional  laboratory studies can save thousands of dollars in research
              and  development costs.   Computer modeling is a tool that many  students will
              use throughout their professional careers, and  colleges must prepare them for
              what lies ahead.  This project  integrates computer modeling into its
              curriculum through the  establishment of a Molecular Modeling Laboratory.   The
               university collects, develops, introduces, and disseminates  experiments
              demonstrating the capabilities of computational  chemistry at various levels of
              sophistication.   Freshmen use  this technique to demonstrate structural and
              spectral features of  molecules.   In organic chemistry, students predict
              reactivity by  calculating charge densities.   Biochemistry students determine 
              interaction energies for inhibitors of HIV protease, a target  enzyme in AIDS
              therapy.   In physical chemistry, students  demonstrate the principle of mutual
              exclusion in vibrational  spectroscopy by combining molecular modeling with IR
              and Raman  spectroscopy.   Finally, students apply their experiences to 
              research problems in their senior years.
