Title       : Computer Enhanced Learning in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9551957

Award Number: 9551957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25131              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Zarzana zarzanl@arc.losrios.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rina Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Ruis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American River College
	      Los Rios Community Colleg
	      Sacramento, CA  95825    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to introduce all lower-division  chemistry students to
              the use of computers early in the curricula  and continue using them for data
              acquisition and analysis as well  as for computer assisted instruction (CAI).  
              Twelve Macintosh SE  computers are being removed from the existing department
              network  and used in the laboratory with Vernier Serial Box Interface kits  for
              data acquisition.   Twelve new Macintosh Quadra 630s are  replacing the SEs on
              the network.   Upgrading the network  provides students access to computers
              powerful enough to run new  statistical software to be used for data analysis
              and simulation  and to additional Internet services.   CAI software is also 
              available on the network.   The success of the project is being  measured by
              student and instructor evaluations comparing  interfaced versus non-interfaced
              laboratory exercises and by  student and instructor evaluations of the CAI and
              statistical  software.   In addition to publications and conference 
              presentations, the investigators are holding a series of  workshops on computer
              interfaced laboratory exercises for local  high school and middle school
              science teachers and also for  at-risk high school students.
