Title       : Electric Vehicle Laboratory (EV Lab)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9551669

Award Number: 9551669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14686              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Voltz voltz@rama.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haldun Hadimioglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project relates to the development of an undergraduate  electric vehicle
              (EV) laboratory program.   One of the key  features of this particular program
              is the organization of  students and industry and faculty advisors in an
              industrial type  matrix organizational structure, called the Technology Team.  
               This structure simulates the realities of a functioning company  environment
              within the university.   Engineering students and  their advisors hold
              positions on the Technology Team.   The Team  decides on projects to pursue,
              specific to the development of  electric vehicle technology, and then budgets,
              plans, schedules,  designs, and manufactures the finished EV product, analogous
              to  real-world corporate operations.  The project manager positions  are filled
              by seniors who apply their work towards senior project  credits and cooperate
              with their associated undergraduate team  members within the organization to
              complete their projects.    Junior and sophomore students learn as they work
              with the  seniors, industry advisors, and faculty members, so that by the  time
              they reach their senior year they will be ready to take a  leading role and
              earn their own senior project credits.   This EV  program consists of an
              ongoing and evolving set of student  projects.   As the program develops, new
              students utilize  knowledge gained from previous projects as they move up
              within  the structure, to continually build a mature and evolving  knowledge
              base in EV technology.
