Title       : A Communication System Prototyping Laboratory for Electricaland Computer
               Engineering Curriculum Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9551934

Award Number: 9551934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48733              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Hornak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Biswajit Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart K. Tewksbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The diversity of communication applications and the spectrum of  system-level
              technologies upon which they rely provide a rich set  of opportunities to
              develop projects allowing students to apply  and integrate knowledge obtained
              from courses across the  curriculum while simultaneously developing the
              spectrum of CAD,  prototyping, and testing experiences critical to the
              engineering  workplace.   Through this project, a Communication System 
              Prototyping Laboratory (CSPL) provides a curriculum-wide  laboratory resource
              for integration of junior- and senior-level  required and elective topics
              through multidisciplinary  communication-based design experiences.   The CSPL
              organization  emulates the application-driven interdisciplinary environment of 
              a corporate research and development laboratory through use of  multiple
              "microlabs" within a single instructional lab linked by  a prototype fiber
              optic backbone.   As the foundation of the CSPL  organization, the Lightwave
              Microlab supports student design  activities based on lightwave communication
              applications with a  Prototype Fiber Network; a Photonic Prototyping Center for
               student optoelectronic interfacing and optical prototyping; a  Lightwave Test
              Measurement Center for component, transmission  medium, and system-level
              evaluation; and a Photonic Reference  Library.   With basic infrastructure for
              other microlabs in  place, this project specifically addresses the
              instrumentation  needs of the Lightwave Microlab.
