Title       : Mathematics Multimedia Computer Classroom/Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551064

Award Number: 9551064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ladnor D. Geissinger geissinger@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McCombs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hunter Ballew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl E. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Rowlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project attacks two problems that involve teaching high  school
              mathematics.   (1) College Algebra is the first math  course for students with
              a wide range of mathematical skills.    They have all seen the material before,
              and many did poorly, so  some are bored, others flounder, and many become
              discouraged and  reinforced in their dislike of math.   This project converts
              this  course into a multimedia computer lab course, where students work 
              individually or in small groups on interactive workbooks that may  contain
              focused exploratory environments, video clips,  simulations, explanations, and
              exercises.   These books are being  written using ToolBook and the computer
              algebra system MathKit  and put on CD-ROMs.   Instead of lecturing, instructors
              are  available in the lab for individual help and guidance.   Students  are
              able to work on modules at their own pace, taking proficiency  exams when they
              are ready.   (2) The University also trains  future teachers of school
              mathematics, and among the courses they  take are Geometry and Teaching Math in
              the Secondary Schools.    Before this project, such preservice teachers had
              very little  experience with using computers, except as word processors.   But 
              proficiency with using a computer as a tool for learning math is  strongly
              endorsed by the NCTM Standards and is now expected by  state education
              agencies.    Both of these courses are being  renovated and offered in a
              multimedia computer classroom, making  extensive use of tools such as
              Geometer's Sketchpad, LOGO, TIM,  ToolBook and MathKit.  To support these
              reforms, the university  is purchasing 29 networked multimedia computers with a
              server and  several machines for instructors who are developing materials for 
              these innovative courses.
