Title       : Integrating Critical Thinking, Problem Solving and Quantitative Skills in the
               Lecture/Lab for Non-Traditional Black Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9551876

Award Number: 9551876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Stewart   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Highland Park Cmty College
	      Glendale at Third
	      Highland Park, MI  48203    313/252-0475

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this grant, a comprehensive curriculum development  project integrates
              critical thinking and problem-solving skills  into existing curriculum.   The
              need for such a project springs  from a lack of experiences with abstract
              concepts that many black  students bring to the classroom.   The new teaching
              methodology  utilizes a variety of multimedia computer-enhanced learning tools 
              that will unify and focus all science courses into a cohesive  unit.   Concept
              bridges are being built as the student's ability  to interpret, analyze, and
              visualize concepts in science is  developed as a result of a variety of guided
              experiences.    Developed strategies integrate effective communication,
              critical  thinking, and problem-solving skills.   The integration of these 
              skills focuses attention on the development of higher level  thinking skills
              and provides students with a more valuable  science education.   Moreover, this
              experience can lead to  increased retention, student enrollment, student
              confidence, and  mastery of course content.   The new equipment alone cannot
              make  a significant impact on student entry into science careers nor  guarantee
              a rewarding science experience.   However, by careful  integration of these
              tools into the existing curriculum, a  delicate balance is achieved among the
              teacher, student, and  computer multimedia support system.   This balance can
              produce a  student with a far deeper understanding and appreciation of 
              science.
