Title       : Cooperative Multimedia Computing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9551180

Award Number: 9551180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip K. McKinley mckinley@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty H. Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juyang Weng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The university is establishing a Cooperative Multimedia Computing  Laboratory to
              support undergraduate education in the Department  of Computer Science.   The
              laboratory is using state-of-the-art  equipment to create a new multimedia
              curriculum based on three  courses:  Software Engineering, Computer Graphics,
              and Computer  Networks.   Laboratory assignments are being designed to allow 
              students to gain experience with large-scale, real-world  applications
              involving multimedia software, multimedia  interfaces, and multimedia
              communication.   Initial laboratory  sets are being drawn from environmental
              science,  computer-assisted medicine, and automated manufacturing.  The 
              faculty involved in the establishment of the proposed laboratory  have
              extensive experience in these application areas and in  developing laboratory
              exercises that expose students to new  technologies and computing methods.  The
              Department of Computer  Science, the College of Engineering, and the university
              are very  committed to this project.   Funds have already been allocated  for a
              preliminary, small-scale version of the laboratory, summer  salaries and course
              reductions for the three principal  investigators, laboratory space, supporting
              personnel, and  long-term maintenance of the equipment.
