Title       : Integrated Laboratory for Manufacturing Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551466

Award Number: 9551466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura E. Ray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh A. Korde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Beaini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yeu-Sheng Shiue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Michael Santi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Christian Brothers Univ
	      650 East Parkway South
	      Memphis, TN  381045568    901/278-0100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 This project develops an integrated laboratory to facilitate  undergraduate
              instruction in the complete design through  manufacturing process.   The new
              laboratory consists of three  interconnected subsystems.   The manufacturing
              subsystem includes  computer numerical control (CNC) machines and robotic
              assembly  stations.   This equipment strengthens instruction in modern 
              manufacturing processes and reinforces the importance of  manufacturability in
              design.   The design subsystem consists of  new graphic workstations that
              support computer-aided design and  manufacturing (CADM) instruction at the
              advanced undergraduate  level.   The integration subsystem consists of a new
              computer  workstation server with local area network connections to the new 
              manufacturing and design subsystems as well as to existing  Computer-Aided
              Engineering (CAE) and Controls laboratory  resources.   The server provides a
              shared platform for  computationally intensive elements of CADM.      
              Undergraduate  student instruction is expanded and enhanced in a number of
              ways.    Experience with the demands of agile manufacturing systems with 
              autonomous control is provided.   The concept of concurrent  engineering design
              is reinforced by providing interdisciplinary  interaction in an integrated
              laboratory environment.   The  advantages of distributed processing for rapid
              prototyping,  modification, and design porting is supported by hands-on 
              experience.
