Title       : An Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Laboratory for the Designand Manufacture of
               Surface Mount Printed Circuit Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9551283

Award Number: 9551283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maher E. Rizkalla   (Principal Investigator current)
              Aydin Ungan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Burkart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Y. Chien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. O'Loughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Yokomoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a state-of-the-art, interdisciplinary  undergraduate
              laboratory component for an existing three-credit  course, "Design and
              Manufacture of Printed Circuit Assemblies."   Previously, student hands-on
              experiences had been limited to  simulations with APTOS software, without a
              more meaningful  laboratory experience needed for students to be better
              prepared  for careers in this area.   The course, with its new lab  component,
              is intended for seniors in electrical engineering and  mechanical engineering,
              and design projects are formulated so  that students are able to focus on
              aspects that are commensurate  with their major.   Students fabricate their
              designs immediately  at the Electronic Manufacturing Productivity Facility and
              test  and evaluate their products in the new laboratory.  Major  equipment
              purchased for this laboratory includes six Sun  SPARCstations, a networkable
              PADS-PERFORM CAD system for  UNIX-based workstations, and a color plotter.  
              This equipment is  used for the layout design and analysis of surface mount
              printed  circuit assemblies.   Additional equipment includes two function 
              generators, two digital storage oscilloscopes, and two logic  analyzers used
              for testing the final products.  This project is  significant because it brings
              the theoretical study, laboratory  design, and real product manufacturing of
              surface-mount printed  circuit assemblies as a whole to undergraduate
              education.   In  addition, it provides a model for the cooperation of
              educational  institutions and manufacturing companies to provide 
              state-of-the-art technical training for senior students, and  emphasizes
              interdisciplinary group work for students from  different disciplines.
