Title       : Computing in Science Majors General Chemistry Laboratories Linked with a
               Laboratory Interfacing Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9551387

Award Number: 9551387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36102              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Hyde hyde@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen T. Conklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project incorporates experiments that illustrate chemical  principles with
              a new strategy and a new format for conducting  the experiments.   The strategy
              involves switching from  "traditional" experiments, in which students follow
              detailed  directions, to an inquiry philosophy, in which students are given 
              more freedom in conducting experiments and analyzing data.   The  new format
              requires computers at each laboratory station for data  collection,
              manipulation, analysis, and display and incorporates  computerized experiments.
                This merger of current computer  technology and the inquiry approach frees
              the student from  tedious data collection and engages students in the
              observations,  analysis, and interpretation of data.  The changes in the
              general  chemistry laboratory are linked to changes in an advanced  laboratory
              interfacing course that emphasizes the construction  and testing of simple
              circuits and sensors used for data  acquisition in the general chemistry
              laboratory.   Additionally,  the advanced students develop new general
              chemistry experiments  using these circuits and sensors.  The new experiments
              are  further tested when they are incorporated into the general  chemistry
              laboratory.   This symbiotic relationship provides a  source for continual
              feedback and evaluation of the entire  project.
