Title       : Introduction of Surface Chemistry Using Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
               and Incorporation of FT-IR into Upper Level Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1995       
File        : a9551033

Award Number: 9551033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17788              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Columbia   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Pacer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Experiments are being developed to introduce students to surface  chemistry and
              the usefulness of FT-IR as a surface analytical  tool.   These experiments
              probe the interaction between thin  films and reflective metal substrates using
              infrared  reflection-absorption spectroscopy.   The thrust of the  experimental
              work focuses on investigating parameters such as  film thickness, nature of the
              substrate material and its  relationship to the magnitude of frequency shifts,
              and the effect  of thermal processing of the films on FT-IR spectra.   Industry
               applications, such as thin film coatings on computer hard disks  and on food
              or beverage cans, are also being studied.  In  addition, introductory
              experiments focus on the basics of FT-IR,  to facilitate its use in analytical,
              organic, and inorganic  laboratories.   Experiments published in the Journal of
              Chemical  Education, and elsewhere, are evaluated, developed to fit local 
              needs, and incorporated into labs.   These experiments, serve as  takeoff
              points for designing undergraduate research projects  dealing with topics such
              as environmental analysis (automobile  exhaust and air pollution studies), IR
              spectra of solids and  nonvolatile liquids, kinetic methods of analysis based
              on FT-IR  spectra, and FT-IR reflectance studies combined with 
              thermogravimetric analysis (a combination useful for studying  polymers).
