Title       : Teaching Concurrent Engineering Principles Using a Rapid Prototype Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9551467

Award Number: 9551467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Winek gw04@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronn F. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project, the Helisys Rapid Prototyping (RP) machine is  used to teach
              the principles of concurrent engineering in an  Engineering Technology program.
                Rapid prototyping is the  process of creating a three-dimensional object
              directly from a  computer- aided design (CAD) file.   This process is 
              revolutionizing the prototyping step in the design/engineering  process in much
              the same manner CAD revolutionized drafting and  computer-aided manufacturing
              (CAM) revolutionized manufacturing.   The RP equipment is being immediately
              incorporated into the  curriculum to teach the contemporary concept of
              concurrent  engineering.   This concept allows manufactured products to be 
              developed and produced much faster than previously possible  because several
              design and manufacturing activities can occur at  once.   One of the key pieces
              of equipment to teaching concurrent  engineering is the RP machine.   This
              machine gives students  hands-on experience with an emerging technology and
              prepares them  to enter a global market place.   They can actually convert
              their  CAD design to three-dimensional objects that will be analyzed for  form,
              fit, function, and assembly.   This new ability holds  students accountable for
              their designs.   The RP machine also  gives the PI and CoPI the opportunity to
              develop national  curriculum models for use by other institutions of higher 
              learning when the RP equipment becomes common place in both  industry and
              education.
