Title       : Electronic Classroom for Mathematics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9551256

Award Number: 9551256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyati Debnath wnjoyati@vax2.winona.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felino G. Pascual  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winona State University
	      8th and Johnson Streets
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/457-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project incorporates PowerMac computers as instruments of  active teaching
              and learning into Calculus I, II, and III;  Multivariable Calculus; and
              Numerical Analysis I and II, using  the software Mathematica.   These courses
              take advantage of the  graphics and programming capabilities of Mathematica,
              allowing  students to gain insight into the core of the subject matter.   
              Mathematica supports the development of "notebooks;"  a writer  can present
              paragraphs of text, embedded equations, tables, and  graphs.   The student can
              read the text, manipulate the  equations, generate new graphs, and experiment
              with parameter  values.   Students can use the material in more active and 
              creative ways.   In Calculus courses, fundamental concepts, such  as function
              and limit, continuity and differentiability, and  instantaneous rates of
              change, are greatly illuminated by  graphical and numerical treatments.   When
              Mathematica is used as  a tool, students of Multivariable Calculus can easily
              visualize  three-dimensional problems using 3D plot and rotation.   In the 
              Numerical Analysis course, it is now possible to take on more  relevant
              problems that otherwise would not be covered because of  their extreme
              complexity.   Mathematica can easily deal with  complex, repetitive
              computations that are inherent to the course,  allowing students to concentrate
              on more difficult concepts;  thus, students, engineers, and mathematicians are
              better equipped  for research.
