Title       : Modern and Rapid Biochemical Analysis of Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551326

Award Number: 9551326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13150              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Irvin ji02@academia.swt  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project modifies the existing biochemistry laboratory with  the improvement
              and addition of experiments in enzymology that  provide students with a
              laboratory experience similar to one they  might experience in a research
              environment.   The addition of two  instruments, a kinetic plate reader and a
              UV-visible  spectrophotometer, to the biochemistry laboratory is allowing the 
              students to perform three complete enzyme isolations in which  they can collect
              kinetic and protein concentration data rapidly  at every step to determine the
              extent of purification.   They can  also determine the kinetic properties of
              three different enzymes  using rapid analytical techniques so they can collect
              a  significant amount of useful data and also have time to adjust  experimental
              conditions and to correct mistakes.   In particular,  the addition of the
              kinetic plate reader provides the means to  use a unique two-dimensional method
              of enzyme and protein  analysis in the teaching laboratory.   This new
              two-dimensional  method not only greatly decreases time required for data 
              collection but also provides rapid and clear visualization of  experimental
              results.    The time savings provides the additional  advantage of having the
              instructor available to help the students  with data interpretation prior to
              leaving laboratory.   This  equipment enables the students to perform a number
              of meaningful  experiments so that they can become acquainted with the 
              techniques and use of modern, computer controlled  instrumentation.
