Title       : A Digital Technology Network for Improving Laboratories in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9551874

Award Number: 9551874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54600              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Shepherd shepherd jd@mercer.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Kot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mercer University
	      1400 Coleman Avenue
	      Macon, GA  312070001    912/744-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the university is creating a Digital  Technology Network
              (DTN), which is a hands-on laboratory facility  for undergraduate biology
              majors and nonscientists, in lower- and  upper-level courses.   The backbone of
              the DTN is a local area  computer network adapted to the needs of cmurses in
              each  curricular area.   Instead of a traditional experience in which  students
              are passive recipients of faculty knowledge and  expertise, the DTN promotes
              the development of experienced  practitioners of science.   In introductory
              courses, the DTN is  used in group problem-solving activities that enhance
              computer  literacy and analytical skills while promoting critical thinking, 
              collaborative interaction, and understanding of biological  concepts.   The DTN
              is becoming part of the normal student  laboratory routine.   Lecture and
              laboratory are coordinated in  an iterative framework designed to make
              progressively greater  demands on incipient skills.   From simple beginning
              exercises  with simulation and physiology, students progress to complex, 
              open-ended exercises.   In upper-division courses, students  construct and
              manipulate analytical spreadsheets and population  projection matrices.   They
              collect and analyze gene sequences in  Internet databases.   They plan and
              execute physiology  experiments that draw on their accumulated skills in
              computerized  data collection and analysis, generation of hypotheses and 
              experimental designs, collaboration with colleagues in the lab  and on the
              Internet.
