Title       : Field Instrumentation and Infra Structure Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9551622

Award Number: 9551622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simeon J. Komisar komiss@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George F. List  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Zimmie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed-W. M. Elgamal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating an upper-level undergraduate laboratory  emphasizing
              real-time, non-destructive, field data-acquisition  and interpretation for
              civil and environmental engineering  (C&EE).   The campus serves as the
              laboratory bench.  Student  teams place sensors (e.g.  strain, pressure,
              conductivity, flow)  on chosen features such as a bridges, wells, storm drains
              and  retaining walls.   Teams then interface that equipment with  computer
              data-acquisition systems, calibrate and maintain the  data, and monitor
              responses to changing environmental conditions.   Thus, structural behavior
              under load, traffic flow and  intensity, air pollution loading, stormwater and
              groundwater  flow, and quality is recorded, analyzed and displayed using GIS 
              and visualization tools.  This educational thrust builds  practical experience
              in the infrastructure while addressing  traditional weaknesses in many C&EE
              curricula.   Students  encounter large, practical data sets in a radical
              departure from  conventional pedagogy.   By fostering interdisciplinary work 
              using tools and techniques from traditional electrical, systems,  and chemical
              engineering fields, C&EE students are trained to  manage information flows in
              "noisy" environments and to use those  flows in flexible operational
              strategies.  Restructuring of the  curriculum stressing interactive learning
              along with a blurring  of traditional disciplinary boundaries makes this
              innovative  course timely.   By serving as a practical "capstone," with an 
              emphasis on problem definition as well as resolution, this lab  prepares C&EE
              students for the expanded demands of the workplace  and its focus on the
              collection and management of information.
