Title       : Integration of Fourier Transforms Nuclear Magnetic ResonanceSpectroscopy into
               the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9551044

Award Number: 9551044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan D. Ledford dledford@jaguarl.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norris W. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Harrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is acquiring of a high field Fourier transform  multinuclear NMR
              spectrometer for use as part of the overall  improvement of the undergraduate
              curriculum.   The improvement  plan is integrating the theory and applications
              of multinuclear  FT-NMR into ten regularly scheduled laboratory courses and the
               undergraduate student research program.   The spectrometer  provides students
              and faculty with the capability to perform  pulse techniques which furnish
              structure information that are  routine by today's standards.   Courses which
              focus on the  technical aspects of FT methods and the applications of both C13 
              and H1 NMR methods for quantitative measurements are also being  enhanced by
              the spectrometer.   Experiments which target the  studies of reaction
              mechanisms, stereospecific reactions,  thermodynamic properties, equilibrium
              and substituent constants,  and enzyme kinetics are being introduced into
              physical, organic,  analytical, and biochemistry laboratories and into two 
              Instrumental Analysis courses.   The enhanced capability of high  resolution
              NMR pulse techniques also improves both the quality  and quantity of
              undergraduate student research which is a  requirement for all students seeking
              a major in chemistry.    Integration of high resolution FT-NMR into the
              chemistry  curriculum enhances the undergraduate experience with modern 
              instrumentation and reinforces student understanding of how  modern chemistry
              research is conducted.    The Bruker DPX-250 was  chosen for its cost
              effectiveness, versatility, and ease of use  in providing a number of
              applications.   The AVANCE DPX system  incorporates digital signal and
              filtering techniques which  provide ultra-high stability and sensitivity
              required for 3-D and  inverse experiments.   All advanced NMR experiments and 
              techniques, from ID and DEPT to inverse, 2D or gradient  experiments are
              performed automatically.   Experimental results  are automatically processed
              and plotted.   The Ethernet interface  allows for transfer of data  via a
              network to individual  workstations or PCs.   Most importantly, the AVANCE DPX
              is an  ideal teaching tool for illustrating the fundamental concepts of  NMR
              and illustrating how it is used to solve molecular structure  problems.
