Title       : Geophysical and GPS Equipment for Inquiry-Oriented, Integrated Laboratories in
               Introductory Geology, GroundwaterGeology and Environmental Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9551251

Award Number: 9551251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28350              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Robert Burger rburger@science.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Newton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The geology department is completely revamping laboratories in  introductory
              geology and coordinating laboratories in groundwater  geology and environmental
              geophysics to provide a series of  integrated, inquiry-oriented, field-based
              experiences addressing  interrelated, local geological problems and stressing
              the need  for multidisciplinary approaches.   These laboratories focus on  the
              geology and environmental problems of the local area, which  depends on a
              confined aquifer for its water supply.    Contamination of this water by
              agricultural pesticides and  industrial waste has occurred to varying degrees. 
               Purchase of  modern equipment with improved data acquisition and digital 
              data-transfer capabilities makes it possible to undertake  meaningful problems
              during course laboratories, even at the  introductory level.   Introductory
              geology laboratories include a  refraction seismic survey to define aquifer
              thickness, a  resistivity survey to continue monitoring a leachate plume, a 
              magnetic gradiometer survey of old industrial sites to search for  potential
              contamination sources, measurement of water levels in  observation wells to map
              the potentiometric surface, and  determination of aquifer transmissivity and
              storativity to assess  groundwater movement rates.   Combined laboratories in 
              groundwater geology and environmental geophysics complement this  effort,
              thereby building on the introductory experience.    Additional activities
              include seismic reflection profiling to map  sediment stratigraphy and advanced
              groundwater analysis to assess  possible plume migration paths.   GPS
              information together with  all field data from all courses can be added to an
              extensive GIS  database for production and evaluation of derivative maps that 
              students evaluate.
