Title       : Development of Biomedical Engineering Laboratory Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9551177

Award Number: 9551177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67355              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Forrester forreste@utkvx.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy L. Cezeaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack F. Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Jendrucko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to develop modules that provide  laboratory
              experience in undergraduate biomedical engineering  elective classes.   Within
              the biomedical engineering elective  courses, nine modules are being developed:
              (1) experimental  stress analysis of orthopedic materials, (2) stress-strain 
              analysis of soft tissue, (3) study of hand tool vibration, (4)  measurement of
              fluid mechanical properties of cardiac valve  prostheses, (5) study of
              transport properties in hemodialysis,  (6) use of indicator/dilution techniques
              for flow measurement,  (7) pressure measurement in a mock circulatory system,
              (8)  electrical safety of biomedical equipment, and (9) analysis of 
              respiratory flow.   Many of these modules compare the data  generated to
              industrial standards to introduce realistic  experiences into the curriculum.  
              Equipment requested includes  an oscillograph recorder and IBM PC for data
              acquisition and  signal conditioning; strain gage instrumentation for stress 
              analysis; accelerometers for determination of hand tool  vibration; pressure
              transducers and flowmeter probes for  instrumentation of two mock circulatory
              systems; a  spectrophotometer to measure concentration of solutes in 
              hemodialysis; thermal and dye dilution systems for measurement of  cardiac
              output; an electrical safety analyzer for determination  of safety of medical
              equipment; and a pneumotachograph and animal  ventilator for the study of
              respiratory flow.   These modules  should be of interest to biomedical and
              other engineering  educators since they allow students to learn methods of data
               collection and analysis while enhancing their understanding of  fundamental
              engineering science principles.
