Title       : Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry in Undergraduate Chemistry and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9551319

Award Number: 9551319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Milligan milligan@fredonia.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, funds are provided for the purchase of a  gas
              chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS).   The acquisition of  GC/MS
              capabilities greatly increases laboratory and research  experiences for
              undergraduates in the growing field of  environmental chemistry and science.  
              This instrument bolsters  the undergraduate course curriculum in environmental,
              analytical,  and organic chemistry and provides new research topics in 
              environmental chemistry for undergraduate students.  Students  benefitting from
              the strengthened environmental chemistry  curriculum gain new experiences in
              the following areas:  environmental sampling, sample preparation, fate and
              transport of  trace organic compounds in the environment, gas chromatography, 
              and mass spectrometry.   Students integrate laboratory skills  developed in
              prior courses into the analytical methodologies and  techniques required for
              environmental analysis.   Emphasis is on  development and testing of modern
              analytical techniques employing  GC/MS.  Class and research projects include
              sampling of on-site  monitoring wells for pesticide and herbicide contamination
              of  local groundwater resources, an evaluation of the persistence of 
              anthropogenic chlorinated organic compounds in the environment,  measurement of
              octanol-water partition coefficients of a variety  of compounds, and analysis
              of zebra mussels in Lake Erie for  bioaccumulation of trace organic compounds. 
               The hope is that  many nonmajors are attracted to these projects, particularly
               biology, environmental sciences, and geosciences students.
