Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation to Enhance Genetic and Molecular Biology
               Laboratories and Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9551166

Award Number: 9551166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry R. Eckroat   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past decade, biology has been revolutionized by new  molecular
              procedures.   This revolution in how biological systems  are studied also
              requires changes in how the biological sciences  are taught.   The development
              of molecular techniques has been so  widespread that the training of future
              scientists must include  the principles, methods, and applications of these
              procedures.    In order to provide biology students with the best and most 
              current experience possible, the faculty are in the process of  modifying the
              curriculum to increase student exposure to  molecular biology.   This project
              funds the purchase of equipment  packages to expand the molecular topics
              addressed in sophomore  and advanced-level biology practicums and undergraduate
              research.    The equipment provides a realistic exposure to the techniques of 
              modern molecular biology.   This technique minimizes the use of  prepackaged
              kits that serve to facilitate an understanding of  molecular biological
              concepts but are limited in experimental  scope and do little to increase
              student understanding of DNA  technology.   The university can now expand the
              current  repertoire of molecular techniques to include cloning,  sequencing,
              and use of molecular markers in population analysis.    In addition to its use
              in structured laboratory exercises, this  equipment can be used to provide
              students conducting independent  research with a strong background in DNA
              analysis.   The intent  is to enhance the university's already strong
              undergraduate  program by instituting a program including molecular and 
              population genetics.
