Title       : Enhancement of Mechanical Engineering Curriculum with Signal Processing
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9551035

Award Number: 9551035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman L. Fortenberry                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim N. Tansel tanseli@eng.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cesar Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Miami is a dynamic, multicultural city at the gateway of the  United
              States, Europe, and Latin America, a characteristic that  has created the
              largest manufacturing region in Florida.  The  school, one of the nation's
              three Carnegie II doctoral-granting  universities with more than 50 percent
              minority students, is  continuously updating its curriculum to teach the
              constantly  changing knowledge base of modern engineering.   In addition, the 
              school graduates more Hispanic engineers than any other  institution in the
              nation, and more than 60 percent of its  engineering graduates continue on to
              graduate programs.        This project enhances the current curriculum with
              signal  processing applications in mechanical engineering to introduce 
              conventional mechanical engineering students to system  identification, failure
              prediction, and nondestructive testing.    These areas enhance the
              instrumentation and electromechanical  system design skills of our students.  
              Eleven new experiments  have been added to the curriculum to open one new
              course and to  improve six existing courses.   Students use state-of-the-art 
              precise measurement equipment in laboratories to learn the basics  of
              monitoring and analysis techniques.       The experiments were  prepared with
              the assistance of a select group of students.    Equipment purchased for this
              project is used for various  contracts (with local industry and federal
              agencies) as part of  undergraduate research projects.   These undergraduate
              student  activities generate funding to support maintenance expenses and 
              future enhancement.   The student activities associated with this  project are
              targeted towards juniors and seniors.
