Title       : On Bridging the Theory-Research Gap for Sociology Students: NSF-ILI-IP Support
               for the Role of a Micro-Computer Laboratory in Cedar Crest College's Sociology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9551435

Award Number: 9551435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew S. Ziner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Huffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maynard L. Cressman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cedar Crest College
	      
	      Allentown, PA  18104    215/437-4471

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   For undergraduate students enrolled in Cedar Crest College's  Introduction
              to Culture and Society, Research Methods and Design,  and Evaluating Human
              Service Organizations courses, analyzing the  interrelationship between human
              social organization and behavioral  processes takes on both theoretical and
              applied (i.e., "real  world") dimensions.  Though traditional pedagogical
              techniques  (e.g., textbooks and class discussion) explore this important 
              connection, without "hands-on" experience, students are left to  wonder how
              generalizations offered by sociology (and all social  sciences) are developed. 
              Such suspicion affects the very  foundation of their learning experiences and
              may prevent the  integration of course lessons in their personal and,
              ultimately,  professional lives.          To address this critical need for
              linkage and hands-on  experience, three computer-assisted instructional (CAI)
              programs  with a history of reliability and classroom use, Data Happy! 
              (Carter, 1995), Survey Research: A Computer-Assisted Introduction  (Bainbridge,
              1989) and SPSS/PC+ Studentware (Norusis, 1991), will  be integrated within
              Introduction to Culture and Society, Research  Methods and Design, and
              Evaluating Human Service organizations  micro-computer classroom labs, based on
              funds made available  through NSF's ILI-IP Award and Cedar Crest College.  The
              role that  each CAI program plays in course labs is threefold.  First, to 
              enhance the students' understanding of key theoretical concepts and  their
              importance in sociology by examining how these concepts have  been used in
              sociological research.  Second, to provide exercises  on elementary or advanced
              data analysis and its connection to the  problem of establishing causality in
              order to facilitate a working  knowledge and critique of sociological
              frameworks.  Finally, to  challenge students to continue to use real data and
              explore, test,  and apply the insights of sociology to social conditions and 
              circumstances in their communities.
