Title       : Environmental Analysis and Bioremediation for Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9551945

Award Number: 9551945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38089              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. McGarey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly D. Gregg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Barry Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Safaa Al-Hamdani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    205/435-9820

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To strengthen its undergraduate curriculum, the Department of  Biology has
              recently instituted a series of undergraduate  research courses required for
              the Bachelor of Science degree in  Biology.   The course series (1) begins with
              a course in  scientific methods and research proposal development, (2) 
              continues with a semester of directed undergraduate research, and  (3)
              concludes with a symposium presentation and a written thesis  or journal
              publication.   Additionally, two new interdisciplinary  Bachelor of Science
              degree programs with concentrations in  hazardous waste management or natural
              and cultural resources  management have been developed.   This project provides
              new  equipment to support interdisciplinary undergraduate research  activities
              to detect heavy metals and chlorinated organic  compounds in environmental
              samples; examine the transport of  these substances through water, soils, and
              sediments; and  investigate the applied use of plants and microorganisms in 
              bioremediation.   Additionally, the equipment undoubtedly  enhances the
              educational experience in the courses physical  geology, physical geography,
              soils, environmental chemistry, and  toxicological chemistry within the
              management degree programs.    The major equipment items include an automated
              gas chromatograph,  an atomic absorption spectrophotometer with computer
              station for  equipment control and data analysis, lab-top centrifuge with 
              rotors, two bench-top incubator shakers, a portable hand-operated  sieve
              shaker, and a Spectronic 20, single-beam spectrophotometer.    The
              undergraduate research program, the envirolmental programs,  and this new
              equipment are essential components of the  university's mission to seek a high
              level of excellence in  undergraduate education including the natural and
              physical  sciences.
