Title       : Project CAUSE (Computer Assisted Undergraduate Science Education)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9551799

Award Number: 9551799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert M. Magro amagro@mail.fscwv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erica Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Galen Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Ruoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairmont State College
	      Locust Avenue
	      Fairmont, WV  26554    304/367-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the university is equipping a  20-workstation
              microcomputer-assisted data accumulation and  analysis laboratory.   The
              instrumentation is being used in  Principles of Chemistry, a course designed
              for chemistry majors  and other students who require a rigorous introductory
              class in  general chemistry.   Each workstation consists of a microcomputer 
              equipped with a variety of data accumulating probes and  supporting hardware.  
              The equipment is durable, easy to use and  highly suitable for undergraduate
              level courses.    The use of  computer-interfaced probes allows rapid, accurate
              data  accumulation, which in turn allows more time to be spent on data 
              interpretation.   The instrumentation also is capable of running  several
              different experiments simultaneously or consecutively.    The data storage
              system and versatile software analyze and  conveniently sort files, and a hard
              copy can be produced that is  relevant to a particular concept or cluster of
              concepts.   These  qualities make the instrumentation highly applicable to
              real-time  data interpretation.   The instrumentation is in keeping with the 
              goal of exposing students to instruments with computer-assisted  capabilities
              throughout the curriculum, thereby better preparing  the student for graduate
              school and a work place that is  increasingly dependent upon such technologies.
                Some 400  students (chemistry, biology, and other majors) could benefit  from
              the project over the 5-year period.
