Title       : An Interdisciplinary Course in Supercomputing and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9551877

Award Number: 9551877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay Zemoudeh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Javier Torner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arturo I. Concepcion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While supercomputers are ideal tools for solving computationally  intensive
              problems, they are usually underutilized because the  scientific community has
              not been formally trained and exposed to  such equipment.   Visualization
              techniques are an effective tool  in encouraging enthusiasm in future
              scientists and scientific  endeavors.    The Departments of Computer Science,
              Mathematics,  and Physics are collaborating on an interdisciplinary project for
               high-speed networking hardware that will integrate the  computation power of
              the university's two supercomputers with the  visualization capabilities of
              existing graphics workstations.    This equipment provides the necessary means
              for a project whose  main objective is to give undergraduate science majors a 
              foundation in the use of supercomputers as a tool for modeling  physical
              phenomena and solving computationally intensive  problems.   The unique feature
              of the project is the emphasis on  high-speed computation combined with
              visualization.   The  availability of both supercomputers and sophisticated
              graphics  equipment enables students not only to model physical phenomena,  but
              also to visualize the phenomena, which will lead to a greater  understanding of
              the science involved.    The target audience of  the project is the upper-class
              science major with minimal  programming background.   The project is intended
              to generate  interest in, and to introduce and teach, supercomputer 
              programming to undergraduates in scientific disciplines.   It may  encourage
              joint faculty-student efforts through independent  studies that involve
              supercomputer programming and use.
