Title       : Automated/Instrumentated Open Channel Hydraulics Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9551137

Award Number: 9551137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall R. Boggio x2716  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert Germann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Giuliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Scribellito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ocean County College
	      College Drive
	      Toms River, NJ  087532102    201/255-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of the project is on that area of hydraulics dealing  with phenomena
              of open channel flow.   Recent natural disaster,  such as the Mississippi basin
              flooding, demonstrate that a  greater awareness of the forces of nature and the
              principles of  open channel flow are needed in our society to plan and develop 
              better optimum infrastructures.  This project integrates physical  laboratory
              experimentation in hydraulics and data acquisition  techniques with engineering
              calculations to facilitate the  graphical/pictorial and animation power of the
              computer to create  an integrated multivisual presentation.   The laboratory
              setting,  part of the Civil Engineering Technology and Environmental  Studies
              program at the colleges, is analogous to a modern day  process "control room"
              with multiple displays providing student  groups with the capability for
              interactive learning.   Students  receive different perspectives of data,
              relevant equation,  experimental dynamics, visual enimation, and actual
              real-world  photos/videos of the phenomena under study.  System integration 
              requires the utilization of an open channel testing flume  structure; computer
              hardware and software; optical discs; and  software (media) production
              processes to develop a coherent  story-line and interactive presentation of the
              experiment for on-  line student understanding.   As part of this project,
              students  are being exposed to problems of environmentally related channel 
              flow as experienced in the area.   Project outcomes are suitable  for
              demonstrations to K-12 secondary public school students, to  motivate interest
              in science and technology.
