Title       : A Laboratory for Improved Signals and Systems Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9551815

Award Number: 9551815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31743              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nixon A. Pendergrass npendergrass@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rulph Chassaing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project, coalition of faculty from three universities has  developed a
              new laboratory for signals and systems courses for  Electrical and Computer
              Engineering majors.  This laboratory  significantly improves signals and
              systems education by having  students design and implement systems that solve
              real engineering  problems.  Required signals and systems courses are very 
              important to electrical and computer engineering majors because  they provide
              the foundation for important subjects such as  communications, systems,
              control, and signal processing.   Unfortunately, these courses do not have
              laboratories or hands-on  activity associated with them.   However, it is very
              important to  have today's engineering students "do" real engineering problems 
              because they are motivated best by work that they readily  appreciate as
              relevant and useful.  This project builds a  laboratory for introductory
              signals and systems courses, which  has students design and implement solutions
              to real engineering  problems.   They test their designs on their own speech
              and music  waveforms and listen to the results.   The laboratory is built 
              around computer simulation software and data conversion hardware  using
              high-performance personal computers.   Problems are  assigned as homework
              projects without formal laboratory meetings,  therefore avoiding difficult
              curriculum changes.   Students in  this new laboratory focus on solving real
              system design problems  with the concepts, mathematical descriptions and block
              diagrams  that are the tools of a signals and systems course.   Audio  output
              helps them connect the frequency domain to reality by  associating the spectrum
              analyzer of their ears with what they  see from output plots.
