Title       : Digital Imaging For Inquiry-Based Bioscience Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9551020

Award Number: 9551020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne E. Magee mageewe@duvm.ocs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Presley F. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students majoring in the life sciences are taking part in a new  curriculum that
              is organized around a series of investigative  laboratory modules.   The
              program now extends over the five  quarters of the freshman and sophomore
              years, has greatly  decreased emphasis on lectures, features extensive use of 
              computers and technology, and involves integration with other  disciplines.  
              Students work in small groups and model, plan,  carry out, and report on their
              experiments.   These same concepts  are being extended into upper-division and
              nonmajors courses.    The new approach has brought into sharp focus the need
              for new  analytical techniques that will extend the number of biological 
              principles that students may prove for themselves.   The  techniques should be
              quantitative, easily mastered, and linked to  the cmmputer for data analysis,
              ready comparison with national  data bases, report writing, and research
              presentations.   This  project funds a platform of four techniques for
              collecting images  in digital form for analysis and quantitation on a
              laboratory  network of Macintosh computers.   The four are a flatbed scanner 
              (to digitize graphic data), a Hi-8 camcorder (to capture macro  images, time
              lapse, and fast frame), monochrome video cameras (to  capture medium light
              intensity macro to micro scale images), and  a sensitive CCD color video camera
              (primarily for microscope  work).   Appropriate accessories and data storage
              devices also  are obtained under this project.
