Title       : Interactive Multimedia Classroom, Courseware Studio, and Study Hall for
               Undergraduates in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9551932

Award Number: 9551932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Abel jfa5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Today's engineering colleges must attract, retain, and  accommodate the various
              learning styles of a diverse student  body, including more women,
              underrepresented minorities, older  students, and part-time students than ever
              before.   Doing so  requires the development of improved teaching methods and 
              restructured curricula.   Modern information technology,  especially
              interactive multimedia, shows great promise for  supporting improvements in
              teaching and curricula directed at  meeting this goal.   For that promise to be
              fulfilled, faculty  must see how instructional technology can be used
              creatively and  effectively, and the resources for using it in lecture halls, 
              classrooms, and study halls must be readily accessible to faculty  and
              students.   At this school, over the past several years,  faculty interest and
              expertise in multimedia courseware have  developed to the extent that current
              teaching facilities will no  longer support the demand for either developing or
              delivering  such courseware.   The equipment acquired for this project is 
              creating the facilities to allow faculty to move to the next  level of
              instructional technology, undertaking substantially more  extensive and
              sophisticated courseware development projects than  they can now.   Funds are
              being used to equip, first, a  multimedia courseware studio and, second, an
              interactive  multimedia classroom which will be open long hours and also be 
              used as a multimedia study hall when not scheduled for group and  section
              meetings.   The immediate audience for this project  includes faculty and
              undergraduates in all departments at the  College of Engineering.   Through
              electronic publishing (via the  NEEDS Database and World Wide Web), the
              courseware being  developed will ultimately be available to engineering faculty
              and  students throughout the world.
