Title       : Use of Global Positioning System, Geographic Information System, and Computer
               Aided Design for Real-Time Site Inventory, Analysis, and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9551200

Award Number: 9551200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Po-Siu P. Hsu phsu@vms.ucc.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Needham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Like many other professions, landscape architecture and  horticulture require a
              great amount of attribute collection, data  inventory, analysis, and design.  
              In the past few years, major  emphasis has been placed on the integration of
              computer aided  design (CAD) and geographic information system (GIS) into the 
              university's undergraduate teaching curriculum.   Our students  are able to use
              these technological advances to build site  inventories and implement their
              design solutions.   Four  innovative experiments in the university's
              undergraduate basic  curriculum are investigating the real-time experience of 
              gathering information on-site and collaborating site data with  hands-on
              experience in computer software.   Global positioning  system (GPS) satellites
              provide digital coordinates and elevation  information for any location on the
              earth.   Along with a  data-logger, this system is an efficient tool for data
              collection  and data input in the field.    Students perform on-site design 
              scenario presentations to clients.   The university's landscape  architecture
              and horticulture program is utilizing GPS technology  in conjunction with GIS
              and CAD in undergraduate teaching.   This  project is also improving the
              current practice of teaching by  introducing an innovative mobile lab concept
              with on-site data  collection, terrain model construction, design emulation,
              and  client communication.
