Title       : Dissertation Research: Postclassic Craft Production in Morelos, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9520365

Award Number: 9520365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Drennan    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Ruth Fauman-  Fichman
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will  conduct laboratory
              work both in Mexico and in Albany NY to  analyze archaeological materials
              collected from sites in Morelos,  Mexico. These sites, occupied between
              1150-1519 AD document the  span of time during which local groups were
              incorporated into the  Aztec empire. Ms. Fauman-Fichman will focus on materials
              related  to the spinning industry and the production of cotton thread. She 
              will analyze architectural information from excavated houses in  both urban and
              rural contexts; associated ceramics; artifacts  associated with women's
              activities such as mazie grinding  equipment, cooking pots, griddles and
              objects related to  spinning, weaving and embroidering. The will incorporate
              this  information with the architectural data to reconstruct activity  patterns
              and how these changed over time. The project also has an  experimental
              component and the function of spindles and related  artifacts will be
              determined.    Although this project focusses on one specific industry, the
              goal  of the work is to understand how production changes in varying  political
              conditions. With incorporation of Morelos into the  Aztec empire, the political
              situation in the region underwent  major alteration and local groups were
              forced to work to provide  tribute. Cotton constituted an important prehistoric
              good and  demands were met in this form. In technologically simple  societies,
              much production takes place on the household level and  Ms. Fauman-Fichman
              wishes to understand how these basic societal  units were impacted by and
              responded to these changes.    This research is important for several reasons.
              It will provide  new insight into a period of great interest to archaeologists.
              It  will shed new light on how, over time, basic units of society  adapt and
              will assist in training a promising young scientist.
