Title       : The Legal Mediation of Scientific and Cultural Values in the North Dakota Indian
               Reburial Dispute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9520873

Award Number: 9520873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Doris Marie Provine                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn Milun milun@ricevm1.rice.edu                  milun@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9520873  Milun  This project investigates how the American legal system has
              shaped the conflict between scientific and historical interests and the
              interests of Native Americans with regard to Indian burial sites and the
              examination of skeletal remains held in scientific and historical collections. 
              It uses the North Dakota dispute as a case study, but will seek to connect the
              North Dakota situation to national and international legal concerns.  The
              dispute involves civil rights, property law, and concepts of Indian
              sovereignty, and has been pursued in both the legislative and judicial policy
              arenas.  The investigation will use ethnographic and language analysis methods
              to analyze data gathered from interviews with key participants in the reburial
              conflict, legal documents, and media reports on the dispute.  The project
              should advance theoretical work on civil rights, the legal treatment of
              scientific values, and the debate in anthropology on the embedding of local
              conflicts in larger conflicts of interests and institutions.  %%%%  This
              project investigates how the American legal system has shaped the conflict
              between scientific and historical interests and the interests of Native
              Americans with regard to Indian burial sites and the examination of skeletal
              remains held in scientific and historical collections.  It uses the North
              Dakota dispute as a case study, but will seek to connect the North Dakota
              situation to national and international legal concerns.  The dispute involves
              civil rights, property law, and concepts of Indian sovereignty, and has been
              pursued in both the legislative and judicial policy arenas.  The investigation
              will use ethnographic and language analysis methods to analyze data gathered
              from interviews with key participants in the reburial conflict, legal
              documents, and media reports on the dispute.  The project should advance
              theoretical work on civil rights, the legal treatment of scientific values, and
              the debate in anthropology on the embedding of local conflicts in large r
              conflicts of interests and institutions.  ****
