Title       : Modelling Phase Ordering Kinetics in Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9520923

Award Number: 9520923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bulbul Chakraborty bulbul@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520923  Chakraborty  Kinetics of ordering in alloys will be investigated using 
              models based on descriptions of the electronic structure of  metallic alloys. 
              By predicting microstructures and growth  laws, these studies will provide the
              opportunity of making  quantitative comparisons between theory and experiment. 
              The  type of modeling will also bridge the gap between  experiments and
              theoretical results obtained using kinetic  Ising models and their continuum
              version, the time-dependent  Ginzburg-Landau model.    The microscopic models
              of alloys have two features which  make the study of growth kinetics relevant
              and interesting.  The models include a description of the coupling between 
              elastic strains and chemical order and they include typical  metallic
              interactions such as Osize-effectO terms and long-  range interactions arising
              from Fermi surface effects.  Two  types of models will be considered in the
              current work.  One  is a particular version of the embedded atom approach which
               provides a very good description of non-transition metal  alloys, and the
              other is a model based on the direct pair-  correlation function of alloys
              which can be calculated from  the coherent potential approximation to
              disordered alloys.  The latter approach is known to provide an excellent 
              description of transition metal alloys and particularly of  any fermi-surface
              realted effects.    The study of kinetics can be divided into three separate 
              parts: (1) direct Monte Carlo simulations of embedded atom  Hamiltonians
              including chemical and displacement effects,  (2) simulations of Langevin
              equations based on Ginzburg-  Landau functionals constructed from microscopic
              models,and  (3) studies of a generalized Ising model which provides the 
              simplest model of ordering accompanied by a structural  transition.  The
              generalized Ising model has a wider range  of applicability than alloys and
              will provide a description  of kinetics in any system where there is a coupling
              between  a structural distortion and some orderi ng field.  %%%  Theoretical
              research will be conducted on the properties of  metallic alloys.  In
              particular, studies will be made on how  the components of a binary alloy mix
              together to form  various phases and structures.  Understanding how these 
              phases evolve will contribute to predicting the properties  of these alloys and
              how various processing paths affect  these properties.  ***
