Title       : Relaxor Ferroelectric and Proton Glass Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1995   
File        : a9520251

Award Number: 9520251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Hugo Schmidt schmidt@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Tuthill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520251  H. Schmidt    The  PI  will investigate properties of partially
              disordered materials  in  particular of proton glass crystals and relaxor
              ferroelectrics.  A  broad  range of measurements, such as dielectric
              spectroscopy  from  1  mHz  to  1 GHz, third-order dielectric permittivity,
              hysterisis loops,  field heating and zero-field heating, and Brillouin
              scattering will be  conducted at Montana State. Neutron scattering and
              diffraction will be  carried  out  at  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory. 
              Phenomena  to  be  investigated  include smearing of the phase transition and 
              clustering  in  relaxor ferroelectrics, nonergodic behavior, phase coexistence
              and  proton  tunneling  in  proton glasses. Proton glass  results  will  be 
              interpreted  in terms of the bound charge semiconductor  model  and  a 
              phonon-assisted    tunneling    model.   A   diffusion-barrier-limited 
              conductivity  model  and  other appropriate models  will  be  used  to 
              interpret  the relaxor ferroelectric behavior. Monte Carlo simulations  of
              proton glass behavior will also be performed.  %%%  Partially disordered
              crystalline materials, in which atoms of one type  are  replaced by those of
              another type, at random sites in the crystal  will  be  investigated. The focus
              is on materials which  show  unusual  response to electric fields. These
              include proton glasses, mixtures of  ferroelectric    crystals    which   
              polarize    spontaneously    and  antiferroelectrics which consist of
              oppositely polarized  interlocking  parts.   Relaxor  ferroelectrics  which 
              have  pronounced   mechanical  response  to  an electric field, and are
              beginning to find application  as  sensors  and actuators will also be studied.
              The objective  is  to  understand  the  fundamental properties,  including  the
               response  to  electromagnetic  fields  of  very low to very  high 
              frequencies,  the  effects  of heating and cooling, and the structure of these
              materials.  Attempts  will  be  made  to  improve  upon  existing  conceptual 
              and  mathemat ical models of these materials.  ***
