Title       : Development of a Theory of Values and Their Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9520288

Award Number: 9520288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Baron baron@cattell.psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A theory of values and their measurement will be developed on the basis of two
              distinctions among  types of values: protected values vs. well-behaved values,
              and fundamental vs. proxy values.  Protected values, in contrast to well
              behaved values, resist tradeoffs with other values and concern  means rather
              than ends.  For example, some people think that destruction of species by
              logging should  be stopped at any cost.  Proxy values are stand-ins for
              fundamental values, to which they are related  through beliefs (often
              uncertain).  For example, percent of children vaccinated is a proxy for disease
               prevention, to which it is related by beliefs about vaccine effectiveness. 
              These distinctions can  help us understand inconsistency in measurement of
              values for environmental amenities and government  policies.  Two types of
              inconsistency involve insensitivity to quantity (e.g., insensitivity to range 
              in assigning relative weights to attributes, quantity insensitivity in
              contingent valuation), and  nonconsequential principles that lead to different
              valuations of identical outcomes achieved by  different means (e.g., use of
              cost rather than benefit in contingent valuation, omission bias).  Hypotheses
              regarding the sources of these inconsistencies will be tested by examining the
              effects of:  fundamental vs. proxy values; information relating proxy to
              fundamental values; manipulations of the  measurement task to bring subjects'
              approach in line with its purpose; and combinations of these  manipulations. 
              It will also be determined whether increased consistency within each of two
              measures  will increase agreement between them. This project is supported by
              the EPA/NSF Valuation for  Environmental Policy funding opportunity.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
