Title       : Design Requirements for Shear Connectors in Encased Steel (SRC) and Concrete
               Filled Tube (CFT) Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1997     
File        : a9520233

Award Number: 9520233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Roeder croeder@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9520233  Roeder  Composite steel and concrete  infrastructures and buildings are
               desirable for seismic design,  because they economically provide  both the
              strength and stiffness  needed to assure good performance  under adverse
              loading conditions.  However, composite action requires  a shear transfer
              between the steel  and the concrete.  The transfer  requirements are highly
              variable  depending upon the location of the  component in the structure.  Los
              of  this transfer through slip may  result in a dramatic loss of  strength and
              stiffness with very  little energy dissipation.  Shear  connectors may be used
              to transfer  shear force between elements but  they are costly, and engineers
              are  motivated to minimize their use.  At present, there are no guidelines  or
              specification provisions to help  them determine the best shear  connector
              placement in US practice.  This research will provide design  guidelines for
              establishing the  most economical shear connector  requirements in both encased
              steel  (SRC) and concrete filled tube  (CFT) construction, while assuring  good
              seismic performance.    This project will consist of a  thorough review of
              existing test  data to determine the shear  capacity that can be developed with
               various CFT and SRC applications.  A series of experiments will be  performed
              to fill gaps in existing  knowledge and data.  Studies on  creep, shrinkage and
              the Poisson  effect represent potential problems  in using bond or adhesion for
              the  shear transfer mechanism, and  experiments will be performed.  The 
              experiments will establish a more  complete picture of  bond stress  and shear
              transfer capacity for  both CFT and SRC applications.  A  range of SRC and CFT
              prototype  structures based on the Theme  Structures established for this 
              research project will be analyzed  to determine the shear transfer  demand
              necessary to assure  satisfactory seismic performance.  The shear transfer
              capabilities  will be correlated to the demand to  develop design guidelines
              and  recommendati ons.    This is a project supported under  the year 1 program
              of the Civil  Infrastructure Systems (CIS),  solicitation NSF 94-154.  ***
