Title       : Algorithms in Parametric Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9520946

Award Number: 9520946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163965             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Fernandez-Baca fernande@cs.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9135,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Two topics in the design of combinatorial algorithms are addressed:  (1)
              Parametric problems on graphs with vertex and/or edge weights, with  particular
              emphasis on Megiddo's method of parametric search; (2) The  construction of
              evolutionary trees for sets of species, focusing on methods  where species are
              described by the characteristics they exhibit.  First,   parametric computing
              deals with problems where the input is a continuous   function of one or more
              parameters; it has applications in:   (1a) Sensitivity analysis (that is,
              studying  how changes in costs affect the choice of optimum solution to a
              problem);  (1b) Lagrangian relaxation (a powerful heuristic for coping with
              difficult  constraints in optimization problems); (1c) computational geometry;
              and  (1d) computational biology.  The primary goal of this project is to study
              the  circumstances under which parametric problems can be solved within the
              same time  bound as their underlying non-parametric problems.  This leads to an
              examination  of the roles of parallelism, dynamic algorithms, and graph and
              space  decomposition techniques in parametric search.  A secondary goal is to
              obtain  bounds on the number of times the optimum solution to certain
              parametric  problems changes as the parameter is varied across its range.
              Second,  an evolutionary tree or phylogeny describes how a set of species
              evolved   from a common ancestor. The research on phylogeny construction deals
              primarily   (2a) with finding faster algorithms for important special cases,
              and   (2b) with developing dynamic algorithms for updating existing trees.   
              Dynamic algorithms are particularly useful in practice, as they permit  
              scientists to analyze  different scenarios for evolution and to modify existing
                trees to reflect increased knowledge about sets of species.  It appears that 
               the development of efficient dynamic algorithms requires clean
              characterizations   of sets of species admitting certain kinds of phylogenies. 
              Such characterizations    may be of interest in their own right.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
