Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Synaptic Plasticity Associated with Song Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1995    
File        : a9520730

Award Number: 9520730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Vleck                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6777               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. DeVoogd tjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9520730    Information is encoded in the brain by modifications in  cellular
              structure and changes in numbers of synaptic  connections between neurons.  The
              brain is organized into  discrete neural circuits which process specific types
              of  learned information and control specific behaviors.  When  the connections
              (synapses) within these neural circuits are  altered, the output of the circuit
              changes and the behavior  that it controls is modified.  The objective of this 
              research is to increase understanding of the development of  a learned behavior
              and the neural circuitry which controls  that behavior.  The development of one
              naturally occurring  learned behavior, bird song, will be related to the 
              development of synapses within specific song-related brain  areas.  Song in
              birds is a complex learned behavior that is  controlled by a highly localized
              system of interconnected  neurons.  Synapse numbers in song-related brain areas
              of  normally raised individuals and of individuals that have had  no
              opportunity for song learning will be quantified using  high magnification
              electron microscopy.  The singing  behavior and social behavior of both groups
              will be analyzed  to correlate neuroanatomical and behavioral changes. 
              Preliminary data indicate that song-deprived individuals  possess approximately
              40% more synapses than normally raised  individuals.  This may indicate that
              song learning is  accompanied by a large scale reduction in synapse numbers. 
              This research will increase our understanding, not just of  the neural basis
              for song learning, but of principles and  mechanisms important for many
              different forms of learning in  different species of animals.
