Title       : Affect and Persuasion II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1997      
File        : a9520854

Award Number: 9520854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Petty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This program of research includes nine experiments in three interrelated project
              areas that build on prior findings about the role of emotions in human judgment
              and persuasion.  The first project area examines the manner by which affect
              influences attitudes when people are highly motivated and able to think about a
              message.  In particular, research will examine how temporary mood states
              influence people's judgments of the risks and benefits of various courses of
              action, and what the implications of this are for accepting or rejecting the
              conclusions of a persuasive advocacy.  The second project area examines
              emotional (affective) versus rational (cognitive) persuasive messages and
              explores a controversy in the literature as to when each type of message is
              more likely to be effective.  That is, if one's initial attitude is based
              mostly on emotional factors, is it better to challenge this attitude with an
              emotional or a rational appeal?  The third project area examines the phenomenon
              of bias correction.  People are sometimes aware of the fact that their moods
              and emotions can bias their judgments.  To what extent do people attempt to
              correct for these presumed biases when they are made salient and what is the
              mechanism by which these corrections are made?  Situations in which people
              "overcorrect" their judgments will also be explored.  The latter phenomenon is
              interesting in that it suggests that people can sometimes become more biased
              the more they attempt to be unbiased (i.e., accurate) in their judgments.  
              Although many of the most important health issues of our time involve such
              things as convincing fearful people to change their behaviors because of AIDS,
              or influencing depressed teenagers to seek help, relatively little is known
              about the role that emotions play in human judgment processes and in
              persuasion.   The major goal of the proposed research is to continue a line of
              investigation on the role of emotion in human judgment.  In general, this
              research examines how emotion influences peo ple's judgments in different
              situations such as when the issue is highly important or not, or when people
              are able to think carefully or not.  For example, when an issue is not very
              important, people are expected to agree more with virtually any message when
              they are in a good rather than a bad mood regardless of the quality of the
              arguments given.  As the importance of the issue increases, however, emotions
              are expected to influence judgments by different mechanisms such as by biasing
              the processing of the substantive arguments in the message.  In such high
              processing situations, positive emotions can be associated with less rather
              than more influence such as when a person in a happy state rejects a message
              about smoking and cancer because the likelihood of getting cancer seems reduced
              when people are happy.  This research has implications for understanding how
              emotions influence both mundane decision making such as product choices, and
              more important decisions such as changing one's job or seeking medical
              attention.
