Title       : Studies of Thermal Motions in Liquids and Polymer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9520845

Award Number: 9520845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Pecora pecora@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robert Pecora is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research involving   motions in liquid and
              polymer systems.  A variety of light scattering   techniques are used such as
              Fabry-Perot interferometry and   photocorrelation spectroscopy as well as total
              intensity light scattering   and transient electric birefringence decay.    The
              dynamics of both   dilute and nondilute solutions of rigid and semirigid
              rodlike molecules   including polypeptides, collagen, small rodlike protein,  
              oligonucleotides, and DNA fragments will be studied.  The effect of  
              interaction and entanglement will be investigated, and the nature of slow  
              modes will be elucidated.  A model composite liquid has been developed   which
              consists of small coated silica spheres and a rigid polymer   immersed in a
              solvent.  This system will also be studied by dynamic light   scattering and
              transient electric birefringence decay.  Composite liquids are a ubiquitous
              class of materials which contain   polymer, particles and solvent.  They are
              used as ceramic precursors,   lubricants, paints and coatings, adhesives,  and
              in chromatographic   columns.  Due to their complexity and the lack of adequate
              model systems,   the interactions between the species in such systems are not
              well   understood.  Pecora  has constructed a model rod/sphere composite liquid
                whose dynamics can be studied over a wide range of composition of both   the
              rods and the spheres using an experimental technique known as dynamic   light
              scattering.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
