Title       : Real Space Method for First Principles Calculation of Electronic, Magnetic, and
               Spectroscopic Properties of Halogen-Bridged Transition Metal Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9520319

Award Number: 9520319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Wilkins wilkins@pacific.mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mebarek Alouani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ponnuswamy Sadayappan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9164,9166,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9520319  Wilkins  This award is one made through the FY95 Computational 
              Approaches to Real Materials competition.  Funding is  provided through the
              Divisions of Materials Research,  Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific
              Computing, as  well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the 
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.  The  research combines
              algorithm and code development with  materials theory to address important
              materials problems for  which computational breakthroughs can produce large
              payoffs.  As such, the research spans the strategic initiatives in  High
              Performance Computing and Communications and Advanced  Materials and
              Processing.    The halogen-bridged transition-metal linear-chain compounds  are
              unique in their wide chemical tunability with respect to  their ground state
              and their energy gap.  Momentum-space  computation has indicated that these
              materials may have  technological importance.  Real space computation will
              allow  much larger systems to be studied due to transitioning from 
              calculations scaling as the cube of the number of particles  being considered
              to those scaling linearly with the number  of particles.  The larger systems
              will enable more accurate  optical properties to be calculated and enable
              accurate  treatment of defects, including polarons and solitons, which  will
              allow realistic calculations of optical and magnetic  properties. 
              Computational aspects of the work include  development of specialized parallel
              sparse matrix  algorithms; use and development of load-balancing  heuristics;
              development of parallel disk-based algorithms  for fast Fourier transforms and
              other matrix operations;  and, use of shared data-space model such as provided
              by High  Performance Fortran.  Codes will be run on a variety of  platforms. 
              %%%  This award is one made through the FY95 Computational  Approaches to Real
              Materials competition.  Funding is  provided through the Divisions of Materials
              Research,  Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific C omputing, as  well
              as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the  Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate.  The  research combines algorithm and code
              development with  materials theory to address important materials problems for 
              which computational breakthroughs can produce large payoffs.  As such, the
              research spans the strategic initiatives in  High Performance Computing and
              Communications and Advanced  Materials and Processing.    The research will
              focus on a class of materials called  halogen-bridged compounds.  These
              compounds can be readily  modified by varying their structure and components in
              order  to achieve desired electronic, optical and magnetic  properties.  Thus,
              they are Odesigner materials.O  Present  computational techniques only hint at
              these possibilities.  The present research will develop computational
              techniques  in order to deal with much more realistic systems of these 
              compounds.  Consequently, successful completion of this  research will advance
              computation on state-of-the-art  computers, will assist in fundamental
              understanding of the  properties of these compounds and will enable the
              accurate  design of a class of materials for a variety of  applications.  ***
