Title       : Reactivity of B-X Bonds with Transition Metal Complexes: Chemistry of Metal
               Boryl Complexes and Their Relevance to Functionalization of Organic Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9520176

Award Number: 9520176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton R. Smith smithmil@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program will   provide
              a grant to Dr. Milton R. Smith of Michigan State University to   explore the
              reactivity of boron containing reagents with transition metal   complexes.  He
              will study the reactivity of metal-olefin complexes with   borane reagents
              emphasizing selective transformations relevant to   hydroboration chemistry. He
              will develop synthetic routes to, and   fundamental reaction chemistry of,
              single and double bonds between boron   and early transition metals.  He will
              also explore the oxidative and   metathetical reactivity of boron-boron bonds
              with transition metal   complexes.  He proposes experiments to induce catalytic
              conversion of   olefins to vinyl boranes, to define the mechanisms of these
              reactions, to   prepare compounds with metal-boron double bonds, and to
              investigate the   involvement of B-B bonds in redox and metathetical reactions.
               The principal relevance of this work is tied to metal-catalyzed  
              hydroboration of alkenes in organic chemistry.  The addition of borane  
              reagents to unsaturated organic molecules is an extremely versatile   reaction,
              particularly because the conversion of borane groups to various   functional
              groups generally proceeds with retention of the   stereochemistry at the
              carbon. This project pushes the frontier of   hydroboration chemistry.  It is
              expected to uncover relevant mechanism   information which will aid in the
              discovery of new catalysts with new and   different properties.  The discovery
              of a boron metal double bond would   be a major achievement in this area and
              could have far reaching   implications.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
