Title       : Theoretical and Simulational Modeling of the Deposition and Growth of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9520842

Award Number: 9520842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereydoon Family phyff@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520842  Family    This research program develops and applies new theoretical 
              and simulational modeling techniques to problems in the  growth, deposition,
              and sputtering of materials.  The  studies involve both the early stages of
              growth, including  nucleation of islands and defects in the submonolayer 
              regime, as well as a study of the evolution and morphology  of the surface at
              long times and long length scales in  various materials growth processes, such
              as molecular-beam-  epitaxy and ion-beam sputtering and ion-beam sputter 
              deposition.  Considerable effort is being made to continue  to identify and
              better understand far-from-equilibrium  processes in the presence of different
              types of growth  instabilities.  The concepts and the modeling techniques 
              developed in this project provide us with a deeper  fundamental understanding
              of a wide variety of materials  growth processes that are of great
              technological importance.  %%%  This research program develops and applies new
              theoretical  and simulational modeling techniques to problems in the  growth,
              deposition, and sputtering of materials.  The  studies involve both the early
              stages of growth, including  nucleation of islands and defects in the regime
              where the  atoms are a single layer thick, as well as a study of the  evolution
              and morphology of the surface at long times and  long length scales in various
              materials growth processes.  Considerable effort is being made to continue to
              identify  and better understand far-from-equilibrium processes in the  presence
              of different types of growth instabilities.  The  concepts and the modeling
              techniques developed in this  project provide us with a deeper fundamental
              understanding  of a wide variety of materials growth processes that are of 
              great technological importance.  ***
