Title       : Studies of Catalysis Models and Percolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9520700

Award Number: 9520700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Ziff rziff@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520700  Ziff    This project concerns basic research on two fundamental 
              problems of material systems:  the percolation transition in  random media and
              cooperativity in surface reactions, such as  in heterogeneous catalysis.  The
              work on percolation  revolves around gaining a fundamental understanding of the
               quantity that gives the probability of crossing a system of  linear dimension
              L from one conducting side to the other,  with given boundary conditions on the
              other sides.  The  investigator will carry out studies in both two and three 
              dimensions.  The work on catalysis begins with the Ziff,  Gulari, and Barshad
              model of CO oxidation.  He will study  this model  near the first-order
              transition and spinodal  points to determine the importance of surface effects
              and  metastability for that transition.  He will also consider  models for the
              NO-CO reactions, involving for the first time  multiple pathways for N
              reaction.  This work will lead to a  substantial advance in the understanding
              of the phenomena  available to these out-of-equilibrium, driven, surface 
              reaction systems, and help in developing models that have  practical
              application to real catalytic systems.  %%%  This project concerns research on
              two fundamental problems  of materials systems.  The first involves percolation
              in  random media.  The project involves understanding the  probability of
              crossing a system of a given size from one  conducting side to the other.  This
              work has applications to  flow through porous media (such as oil extraction
              through  the ground) and electrical conduction in random systems  (relating to
              the electrical breakdown of materials).  The  second involves a model of CO
              oxidation, which the authored  developed several years ago and which many other
              researchers  have also studied.  This model is practically important as  the
              foundation of practical models for surface reactions,  such as those that take
              place in an automotive catalytic  converter.  ***
