Title       : Photoemission Spectra, d-Wave Superconductivity and Other Properties of High-Tc
               Electronic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1997   
File        : a9520776

Award Number: 9520776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elbio R. Dagotto dagotto@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adriana Moreo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520776  Dagotto  The broad goal of this project is to carry out a comparison 
              between calculations using models of strongly correlated  electrons and
              experimental results in high-temperature  superconductors, both in the normal
              and superconducting  states.  Computational techniques (exact diagonalization
              and  quantum Monte Carlo) address the many-body correlations of  the electronic
              systems.  In part,  the investigators are  testing the assumptions of an
              explanation of angle-resolved  photoemission and transport data that they
              recently  proposed.  They are using their model to calculate  photoemission
              spectra, which they will then compare with  experiments.  If successful, these
              projects will clarify  several aspects of the anomalous properties of high 
              temperature superconductors.  These investigators are  collaborating with
              others at the National High Field Magnet  Laboratory in Tallahassee, Florida,
              who are investigating  these materials in strong fields both theoretically and 
              experimentally.  %%%  The broad goal of this project is to carry out a
              comparison  between calculations using models of strongly interacting 
              electrons and experimental results in high-temperature  superconductors, both
              in the normal and superconducting  states.  The community recognizes the
              investigators as  experts in the computational techniques that address the 
              many-body correlations of the electronic systems.  In part,  the investigators
              are testing the assumptions of an  explanation that they recently proposed for
              experiments that  involve (a) the emission of photons (such as light) from 
              these materials and (b) the transport of electrons.  Using  their model, with
              its assumptions, they calculate what the  experiments would give if their
              models were correct and then  compare with experiments to test how close their
              model is to  real materials.  If successful, these projects will clarify 
              several aspects of the anomalous properties of high  temperature
              superconductors.  These investigators are  collaborating wit h others at the
              National High Field Magnet  Laboratory in Tallahassee, Florida, who are
              investigating  these materials in strong fields both theoretically and 
              experimentally.  ***
