Title       : Relevance in Learning Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9520134

Award Number: 9520134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aditi Dhagat aditi@cs.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               For doing medical diagnosis, one may wish to design a learning algorithm  
              which attempts to determine from test data which combinations of symptoms
              indicate  that a person will develop a  certain disease.  The test data may
              consist of a  collection of patient profiles, with the outcomes of  a large
              number of tests on  each patient, and a bit indicating whether the patient
              subsequently  developed  the disease.  One may further assume that whether a
              patient develops the disease  depends  only on the presence or absence of a few
              symptoms, and all other  symptoms are irrelevant.  In that  case, a good
              learning algorithms should  output a hypothesis that is also a function of a
              small number  of symptoms.    A hypothesis can be used to predict whether
              future patients will develop the  disease.   If the hypothesis depends on only
              a small number of clinical tests,  it saves time and money.  In recent work,
              the investigator has shown a  polynomial time PAC (Probably Approximately
              Correct) algorithm which learns  k-term disjunctive normal form formulae which
              depend on at most r variables  (where r is unknown and may be a function of the
              total number of variables)  by creating a disjunctive normal form (DNF)
              hypothesis which contains at most  poly(r) variables.  An initial goal of this
              project is (a) to demonstrate   a similar result for the class of decision
              lists.  Additional goals    include:  (b) the exploration of different
              paradigms   where extracting relevant information is important; (c) the
              discovery of  efficient algorithms for the current problems; (d) the
              development of a   theoretical framework for measuring relevance under which
              universally   applicable techniques for reducing irrelevant information can be
              found.  In addition to the research described above, the PI will teach a
              graduate  seminar on computational learning theory with the expectation of
              attracting  graduate students to the area.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
