Title       : Energies and Dynamics of Defects in Copper and Aluminum ULSI Interconnects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9520371

Award Number: 9520371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Atlas susie@sapphire.phys.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9166,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9520371  Atlas    This project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real 
              Materials (CARM95) program.  The Division of Materials  Research, Division of
              Advanced Scientific Computing, and  Division of Mathematical Sciences are all
              supporting this  research.  The investigator is collaborating with  researchers
              at Sandia National Laboratory and Los Alamos  National Laboratory, and the
              computing will take place on  the University of New Mexico parallel
              supercomputer located  in Kihei, Hawaii.  The project focuses on the
              microscopic  properties of copper and aluminum grain boundaries and  defects,
              and the impact of substitutional impurities and  vacancies on the chemistry of
              these intergranular  interfaces.  The work is motivated by the failure of Cu
              and  Al interconnects used in semiconductor chips.  These  problems arise from
              a phenomenon called electromigration in  which the electron wind caused by high
              current densities  results in the formation of voids that diffuse and aggregate
               along grain boundaries, ultimately forming cracks in the  metal and leading to
              catastrophic failure.  These  calculations represent some of the largest ab
              initio  materials calculations ever attempted.  The investigator is  writing
              the parallel molecular dynamics code using the  portable, parallel C++ class
              library that she has developed  in collaboration with the Object-Oriented
              Particle  Simulation Project at the Los Alamos Advanced Computing  Laboratory. 
              The defect physics is coupled across quantum  and mesoscopic length scales
              through successive ab initio  refinements of the interatomic forces used in
              dynamic  simulations.  %%%  This project is part of the Computational
              Approaches to Real  Materials (CARM95) program.  The Division of Materials 
              Research, Division of Advanced Scientific Computing, and  Division of
              Mathematical Sciences are all supporting this  research.  The investigator is
              collaborating with  researchers at Sandia National Laboratory and Los Alamos 
              National Laboratory, and the computing wil l take place on  the University of
              New Mexico parallel supercomputer located  in Kihei, Hawaii.  The project is
              motivated by the failure  of copper and aluminum interconnects used in
              semiconductor  chips.  The project simulates defects in these materials and 
              how they evolve in the presence of high electric currents,  eventually leading
              to failure resulting from small cracks.  These calculations represent some of
              the largest first-  principle materials calculations ever attempted.  A better 
              understanding of the atomic-level principles that apply in  the simulations
              will help to design interconnects that have  improved properties.  ***
