Title       : Growth of Epitaxial Fluorides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9520829

Award Number: 9520829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo J. Schowalter schowl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9520829 Schowalter   This research aims, using epitaxial insulators from the
              Group II fluorides, for applications of fundamental materials science research
              in future generations of electronic and opto-electronic devices.  Recognizing
              the many advantages of Si substrates and the fact that Si-based devices will
              continue to dominate the market, this project explores heteroepitaxial growth
              by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on Si substrates for use in monolithic
              integrated devices which require single-crystal layers of different materials.
              Prior work on epitaxial CaF2 on Si will be extended to MgF2 and CdF2 which both
              (unlike CaF2) have smaller lattice parameters than Si. Appropriate combinations
              of these two fluorides with CaF2 will allow close lattice matching with Si. The
              growth of epitaxial GaN on Si is targeted as a particular goal of the
              development of substrate engineering techniques using fluoride buffer layers. 
              In addition, the possibility of developing opto-electronic devices directly in
              the epitaxial fluorides by doping the fluoride with rare earth metals and then
              measuring their optical properties will be explored. Electron transport through
              the single crystal materials will be studied for possibilities of
              charge-injection photonic devices. Charge transport will also be examined in
              very thin epitaxial fluoride layers for application in barrier devices such as
              Schottky barrier detectors and ballistic electron detectors. These charge
              transport measurements will be significantly aided by development of ballistic
              electron emission microscopy (BEEM) techniques both inside and outside the MBE
              system. %%%  This program will be a comprehensive investigation of an important
              class of materials whose electronic properties may result in the integration of
              new functional heterojunction electronic and optoelectronic materials and
              devices on silicon substrates.  Because of the pervasiveness of silicon
              integrated circuit technology and its enormous economic importance, the
              technological impact of the p roposed program is potentially very large.  An
              important feature of the program is the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area of materials research. ***
