Title       : Dissertation Research: Evaluating the National Estuary Program: A Case Study of
               the Albemarle-Pamlico Estuarine Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1995      
File        : a9520394

Award Number: 9520394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3340               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Orbach mko@mail.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9179,9186,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Early federal efforts at environmental management were straightforward
              regulatory programs under which an agency would set standards that industries
              had to meet.  However, over time it has become apparent that such narrow
              approaches to protecting the environment are insufficient.  Stakeholders in
              environmental management, including scientists, environmental managers, and the
              public, recognize that environmental management involves diverse and often
              conflicting values, scientific complexity, and whole ecosystems.  People have
              different concepts of what is important and how to manage the systems.  In
              response to this challenge, new institutions have been developed for improving
              environmental policy, by integrating these diverse values.  One example is the
              National Estuary Program (NEP), a federally-funded planning effort in which
              regions convene Management Conferences to study and plan for critical estuaries
              over a five-year period.  One of the first completed National Estuary Programs
              is the Ablemarle Pamlico Estuarine Study (APES) in North Carolina.  This
              research is an in-depth historical case study of APES to determine how
              effective it was at incorporating diverse values for the estuarine system.  The
              research uses document analysis of program minutes, correspondence, budgets and
              reports; interviews with key staff and APES Management Conference participants;
              and a standardized survey of all participants.  Results will include an
              explanation of the decision-making process within APES, including how values
              were elicited, debated, and incorporated in the APES planning recommendations. 
              The research will assess how well this innovative institution accomplished NEP
              goals of improving the use of science, involving the public and integrating
              management agencies.  The findings will have application to other environmental
              management efforts.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
