Title       : Induced Inverse-Microemulsion Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9520909

Award Number: 9520909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142372             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hunkeler djh@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1773,9162,9197,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Acrylic water soluble polymers are utilized in industries such as paper making
              (fines retention), oil recovery (pushing fluids), personal hygiene (absorbent
              hydrogels) as well as in environmentally friendly applications such as water
              treatment (flocculation).  Water based polymers also have emerging applications
              in controlled drug delivery, immunoisolation, bioartificial organs
              (encapsulation) as well as components of light weight solar cells.  In these
              applications, the polymer gains its utility from its hydrophilicity, charge
              density, and molecular weight.  The PI is interested in developing a new
              process which enables the synthesis of high molecular weight acrylic water
              soluble polymers: Induced Inverse-Microemulsion Polymerization.  This enables
              the formation of a thermodynamically stable inverse-microemulsion at lower
              emulsifier levels than have ever been used before (as low as 2 wt% of the total
              recipe).  These inverse-microemulsions are transformed from monomeric
              inverse-macroemulsions by taking advantage of the inherent features of the
              reaction, such as its ex othermicity.  The process combines some of the
              advantages of an inverse-microemulsion product, such as its stability and ease
              of chemical modification of the polymeric backbone, while avoiding the
              principal disadvantage: economics.  The lower emulsifier level permits the
              process to compete with inverse-macroemulsions.  The PIs plan a series of
              synthesis and characterization studies to investigate and understand induced
              inverse-microemulsion polymerization and to evaluate its potential.  They plan
              to develop mechanistic models which will help maximize the linear molecular
              weight of the polymer produced.  The project also involves strategic basic
              research in light and neutron scattering and birefringence.  It is cost shared
              by more than 50% from US  industry and also fits in well with the PI's existing
              projects on environmentally conscious design and  life cycle analysis which are
              focused on evaluating solvent-free alternatives to existing processes  for the
              production of water soluble polymers.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
