Title       : High Spin Organic Molecules and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9520959

Award Number: 9520959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Dougherty dad@igor.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This award is made in the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division
              in support of  the research of Dr. Dennis Dougherty at the California Institute
              of Technology.  The research  will continue Dougherty's efforts on the design,
              synthesis, and characterization of model spin-  coupled and di- and
              tri-radicals based on complex heterocycles and/or radical ions where the 
              spin-containing moieties are connected by a ferromagnetic coupling unit which
              ensures that any  two or more spins linked through it will experience high spin
              ferromagnetic coupling rather than  low spin antiferromagnetic coupling. 
              Meta-phenylene will be the primary coupling unit.   Radical systems which have
              high spin ground states and a large energy gap to low spin excited  states will
              be candidates for assembly into highly cross linked organic networks with
              controlled  topologies to ensure favorable magnetic coupling.  Strategies for
              building extended networks will  involve synthesizing closed shell polymers or
              networks, fully characterizing them, and then  introducing spins by a chemical
              or electrochemical doping procedure.  Magnetic properties will  be
              characterized by variable temperature SQUID magnetometry and electron
              paramagnetic  resonance measurements.    This highly interdisciplinary research
              addresses fundamental issues of spin-spin interactions in  simple model
              polyradical systems and how they can be applied to extended bulk organic 
              magnets.  Critical to the success of the project will be band gap engineering
              which will assure  high spin ground states at ambient conditions.  Magnetic
              materials are ubiquitous in modern  technology.  Organic magnets will find
              potential applications in light weight motors and  information storage systems.
