Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Structure in Ponderosa Pine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9520381

Award Number: 9520381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry B. Mitton mitton@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520381  Mitton   Effective management of plant populations (either for economic
              or conservation purposes) requires an understanding of the genetic differences
              among populations, since these differences may reflect adaptation to the local
              environments in which each population lives.  Much of our understanding of
              population differentiation has been derived from the study of protein genes. 
              This proposed research will make use of recent DNA technologies to compare the
              findilgs from protein genes to other types of gene, in natural populations of
              ponderosa pine.  The data collection is straightforward, and consists of
              measuring the amount of genetic differentiation between populations in a
              north-south transect through the range of ponderosa pine from the Southwest. 
              Genetic differences are measured by determining the frequency of DNA types
              ("alleles") in each population under study, from samples of needle tissue
              brought back to the laboratory.    This study will advance our understanding in
              two ways.  First, by comparing patterns of genetic differences between
              different types of genes, older findings can be tested.  Theory predicts that
              the size of genetic differences among populations will be determined by the
              amount of migration and interbreeding between them.  Since the amount of
              migration is the same for all genes, all loci should show the same magnitude of
              difference between populations. If not, then genes which "don't fit" are likely
              to be affected by some other factor, such as selection to adapt to local
              conditions.  Second, the study will compare those genes inherited from both
              parents (most genes) with those inherited solely from one parent.  Pines
              provide a unique opportunity to do this in that chloroplast DNA is inherited
              paternally (through the pollen), while mitochondrial DNA is maternally
              inherited (through the seed).  By comparing the relative differences between
              populations for genes with these contrasting inheritance patterns, the
              investigators can measure the relative amount of mig ration by both seeds and
              pollen.  It is important to understand this, because only seed migrants can
              found new populations, while migrant pollen is restricted to movement between
              existing populations.
