Title       : Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale Ferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1996      
File        : a9520325

Award Number: 9520325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Novotny   (Principal Investigator current)
              Per Arne Rikvold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9166,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9520325  Novotny    This project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real
               Materials (CARM95) program.  The Division of Materials  Research, Division of
              Advanced Scientific Computing, and  Division of Mathematical Sciences are all
              supporting this  research.  Fundamental and technological issues motivate  this
              work.  Magnetic mass storage technology is rapidly  progressing to the state
              where single bits are stored on the  nanoscale.  At the same time,
              understanding of model and  realistic fundamental behavior of ferromagnetism in
              the  restrictive geometries of thin films, whiskers, and single-  domain grains
              is rudimentary at best.  The investigators  propose to further develop and
              utilize an acceleration  developed by Novotny (the Monte Carlo Markov Absorbing
              Chain  algorithm) to study dynamical phenomena in real ferromagnets  in the
              nanoscale domain.  The investigators are developing  codes on the SP-2 at the
              Supercomputer Computations Research  Institute at Florida State University. 
              They will then make  production runs on the SP-2 at Cornell University.  These 
              calculations couple with recent advances in engineering  magnetic materials on
              this scale and on experimental studies  of dynamical phenomena using magnetic
              force microscopies.   %%%  This project is part of the Computational Approaches
              to Real  Materials (CARM95) program.  The Division of Materials  Research,
              Division of Advanced Scientific Computing, and  Division of Mathematical
              Sciences are all supporting this  research. Fundamental and technological
              issues motivate this  work.  Magnetic mass storage technology is rapidly 
              progressing to the state where single bits are stored on the  scale of 
              thousands of atoms.  At the same time,  understanding of model and realistic
              fundamental behavior of  ferromagnetism in the restrictive geometries of thin
              films,  whiskers, and single-domain grains is rudimentary at best.  The
              investigators propose to further develop and utilize a  computer algorithm
              developed by Novotny that is much f aster  than others.  The project simulates
              phenomena that evolve in  time in real ferromagnets on the scale of thousands
              of  atoms.  The investigators are developing codes on a parallel  computer at
              the Supercomputer Computations Research  Institute at Florida State University.
               They will then make  production runs on a similar machine at Cornell
              University.  These calculations will couple with recent advances in 
              engineering magnetic materials on this scale and on  experimental studies of
              dynamical phenomena using magnetic  force microscopies.  ***
