Title       : Measuring the Kinetics of Surfactant Adsorptive - Desorptive Exchange: The Role
               of Surfactant Structure and Charge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9520972

Award Number: 9520972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144687             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Stebe kjs@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9520972  Kathleen J. Stebe  Johns Hopkins University     The aim
              of this study is to probe the dependence of the absorption kinetics of
              surfactants on their structure and charge.  Two methods will be used; the
              pendant bubble and the oscillating bubble techniques, which have precise
              theoretical descriptions in terms of surfactant mass transfer and
              thermodynamics.    The shape of a pendant bubble in surfactant solution becomes
              increasingly elongated as surfactant diffuses and absorbs, reducing the surface
              profiles.  These profiles are matched to theoretical diffusion controlled
              relaxation's to obtain diffusion coefficients.  Equilibrium data establish the
              surface equation of state and the adsorption isotherm.    In the oscillating
              bubble method a small spherical bubble is formed, equilibrated, and
              subsequently forced to oscillate by the action of a piezo-piston.  Phase angles
              and amplitude ratios between the radial and gas phase pressure oscillations are
              analyzed to confirm the diffusivities and to obtain the adsorption-desorption
              coefficients.    For non-ionic surfactants, the theoretical framework to use
              these techniques has been established.  In the first part of this study, the
              equilibrium and dynamics of surfactant absorption of a homologous series of
              nonionic surfactants, the polyethoxylates, will be studied.      The absorption
              of ionic surfactants used to describe the equilibrium and dynamics of
              surfactant absorption.  Because Debye lengths are typically small, of order
              1000A, an approach based on a thin Debye length will be adopted.  Diffusive
              flux alone determines the sublayer concentration.  Surfactant partitions
              between the interface and the bulk according to an absorption kinetic barrier
              which is caused, in part, by the surface potential.  The potential gradient at
              the surface concentration.  Instantaneous electrical equilibrium is assumed, so
              the potential obeys a Gouy-Chapman distribution within the double layer.  A
              surface equation of state and adsorption isotherm tha t properly incorporate
              the surface potential will be adopted.  This approach will be used to develop
              models for ionic surfactant adsorption in the pendant bubble and in the
              oscillating bubble methods.  Theory will be compare to experiment for the a
              series of the long chain acids.
