Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9520495

Award Number: 9520495
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucretia M. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Ward the
              opportunity to obtain training in the School of Education at UCLA.  Her
              graduate work has been in social psychology and her research interests have
              centered on children's understanding of male-female relations in general and
              sexuality in particular.  For her postdoctoral work she will be examining
              associations between sexual content on television, adolescents' gender-role
              concepts, and their sexual conceptions and behaviors.  The postdoctoral
              research will include collecting data about television use among adolescents,
              developing new empirical measures assessing use and interpretation of
              television content, and working with complex statistical models.  She will also
              obtain an understanding of communication theories which will greatly enhance
              her theoretical foundation.  The School of Education's emphasis on research
              applications will give her the foundation she needs to link her research more
              directly to the real world.      Although it has frequently been assumed that
              adolescents' consumption of sexual content on television relates to their
              conceptions of sexuality and to their sexual conduct, empirical support for
              this link has been sparse and inconsistent.  This postdoctoral research is an
              attempt to provide a comprehensive study of these issues.
