Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Research and Discovery in the Southern Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9520789

Award Number: 9520789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Geison gerry@Princeton.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geison/Kellman:  Doctoral Dissertation Research    With the Hubble Space
              Telescope, the Super-conducting Super Collider, the Human Genome Project and
              LIGO, we frequently think that "Big" science is a product of the 20th century
              and principally in the area of physics or astronomy.   A science with the
              longest history of "big" science, however, is oceanography.  Even today, NSF
              and NOAA must spend millions of dollars to construct oceanographic vessels and
              equipment.  Expeditions remain extremely expensive.  Yet nations have invested
              in major ocean-going scientific expeditions for at least three centuries.  The
              ostensible reason for these expeditions is the advance of knowledge and the
              concomitant economic development that comes from scientific knowledge.   Yet
              even today, these voyages serve political and commercial as well as scientific
              purposes.  Ocean margin drilling, for example, not only advances our
              understanding of the ocean floors but tells us what minerals may be on the
              ocean floor that our companies might "mine" and supports our positions in the
              negotiations over Law of the Sea treaties.    Mr. Kellman, under the direction
              of Dr. Geison, is examining the wave of French scientific voyages that charted
              the Pacific and southern oceans.  His focus is an analysis of the scientific
              projects planned in Paris and carried out on board, using the wealth of
              unpublished logbooks and other manuscript sources.  He is exploring the meaning
              of science for these voyages, looking for the way individual disciplines, as
              well as general methodology interacted with the various forces behind the
              expedition. He sees these voyages in the greater context of the political,
              commercial and philosophical aims of French overseas exploration and
              development.    The scientific results of these voyages often reflect the
              diversity of forces behind them.  In natural history, a new focus on the
              varieties of humans led to the emergence of anthropology. In hydrography and
              geography, new methods and standards of mathematical r igor were adopted.  A
              new ethos of quantification and precision served as both a motivation and a
              result of these expeditions.  This project will give a new sense to the term
              "scientific voyages" and show how "science" came to stand for a particular
              approach and set of methods, equally useful to the academies, to the state, and
              to commerce.
