Title       : Catalytic Activation and Oxidation of C-H and C-C Bonds by Soluble Metal
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9520791

Award Number: 9520791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ayusman Sen asen@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supported by the Inorganic Bioinorganic and Organometallic 
              Chemistry Program will support the continuation of studies of transition 
              metal, homogeneous catalysis by Professor A. Sen of the Pennsylvania   State 
              University.  Professor Sen will perform in-depth investigations of two   new 
              catalytic systems that offer promise for selective, metal catalyzed,  oxidative
              functionalization of organic molecules.  The first of these  systems is the
              platinum(II) mediated hydroxylation of remote C-H bonds in  certain
              functionalized organic compounds.  The second is the rhodium  catalyzed
              hydroxylation and hydroxycarbonylation of C-H and C-C bonds of  alkanes,
              including methane and ethane, using molecular oxygen as the  oxidant.  The
              catalyst precursors contain no oxidizable ligands so that  there is the
              possibility that catalyst degradation will not occur.  To be  addressed in both
              cases are the structure and reactivity of the  organometallic intermediates,
              the nature of the C-H (C-C) activation   step,  and the mechanistic origins of
              the observed selectivities.  This research is concerned with the development of
              homogeneous catalysts  based upon transition metals that may allow for the
              selective  functionalization of saturated hydrocarbons.   Homogeneously
              catalyzed  reactions typically offer much greater selectivity than
              heterogeneous  reactions, when they can be used.  However, only the latter
              types of  catalysts are used industrially to promote reactions of saturated 
              hydrocarbons because known homogeneous catalysts normally are not  sufficiently
              reactive, if they even react.  The initial discoveries upon  which this
              research is based suggest that homogeneous catalysts may  ultimately be used
              for the selective functionalization of such molecules.   If the catalytic
              activities are great enough, there is a high   probability  that commercially
              viable processes will result.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
