Title       : Purchase of a AC-80 NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9520633

Award Number: 9520633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Turro turro@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will help the
              Department of  Chemistry at Columbia University acquire an AC-80 NMR
              spectrometer that will operate as a  multiuser steady state (SS) and time
              resolved (TR) instrument for the detection of chemically  induced dynamic
              nuclear polarization (CIDNP).  The Principal Investigators will employ the 
              instrument to investigate, by multinuclear  (1H, 13C, 31P) SS-CIDNP and
              TR-CIDNP, the  mechanisms of diverse photochemical systems including (1) the
              reactions of organic radical  ions produced by photosensitized electron
              transfer; (2) the photochemistry of phosphites  and phosphine oxides; (3) the
              measurement of exit rates of radicals, produced by photolysis  of ketone from
              micelles as a function of micelle size and radical structure; (4) the 
              photosensitized cleavage of thymine dimers in systems that model photoinduced
              repair of  damaged DNA; (5) a search for CIDNP in oriented biological
              macromolecular solids; and  (6) time resolved CIDNP of biradicals produced by
              photolysis of cyclic ketones.    In addition to the research described above,
              the instrumentation will be used by undergraduates  in advanced organic
              chemistry laboratories, in physical-analytical laboratories, in research 
              project laboratories, in senior research and in summer undergraduate research. 
              The instrument  will be coupled into an "electronic smart classroom" containing
              state-of-the-art multimedia  facilities to allow students and faculty to
              introduce data directly from experiments into lecture,  recitation and
              discussion groups on demand.  Finally, the computer interface will be employed 
              to produce modules that will simulate important NMR experiments and will be
              accessible to  students on their own personal computers through ColumbiaNet.   
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool
              available to  the  chemist for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. 
              It is used to identify  unknown  substances, characterize specific arra
              ngements of atoms within molecules, and to  study the  dynamics of interactions
              between molecules in solution.  Access to state-of-the-art  NMR  spectrometry
              is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.  The  results
              from  these NMR studies are useful in areas such as polymers and catalysis, and
              in  biology.
