Title       : Collaborative: Assessing Effects of Food Web Structure on Patterns of
               Productivity and Trophic Transfer in Lake Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9520214

Award Number: 9520214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Goldman crgoldman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Brett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9520214  Goldman   This research will examine the effect of upper food web
              configuration on pelagic ecosystem structure, carbon flow, and productivity in
              Castle Lake, California. This research builds on a whole lake food web
              manipulation, and augments the value and importance of a well-developed long
              term data set emphasizing biological and climatic determinants of primary
              productivity. In this project, food web configuration in Castle Lake will be
              manipulated by varying the stocking rates of rainbow trout. The manipulation
              will reduce rainbow trout, thus increasing the abundance of golden shiners,
              copepods, and micrograzers of bacteria. By measuring rates of microbial and
              primary production and assessing population and growth dynamics of metazoans
              and fish, this research will estimate patterns of production and carbon flow
              through the food web under different food web configurations. The response of
              the Castle Lake food web to trophic structure manipulation will be compared to
              concurrent dynamics in an unperturbed reference site, Cliff Lake. In addition
              to the whole lake manipulation, a series of meso- and microcosm experiments to
              address mechanisms determining food web structure will be conducted. This
              research will be summarized and synthesized within a quantitative simulation
              model. This quantitative framework will allow integration from investigations
              spanning a variety of spatial and temporal scales, and will allow
              interpretation of microbial and classic-based food web dynamics within the
              context of the long-term data record for the Castle Lake ecosystem.
