Title       : Dissertation Research: Gene Expression in Response to Mechanical Stress or Wind
               in Poplar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1995      
File        : a9520707

Award Number: 9520707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank W. Telewski telewski@cpp.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520707    Woody  plants vary in their ability to tolerate wind stress.  Many 
              trees respond to wind stress by adding woody secondary  growth  which 
              increases wind tolerances,  but  the  genetic  basis  of  traits  that  improve
              wind  tolerance  is  nearly  unknown.  This research will compare the genes
              expressed  in  poplar  trees  subjected to wind stress to  those  in  trees 
              which  have  not been stressed.  Poplars are selected  as  a  model woody plant
              system because of their economic value  in  biomass production, ease of
              propagation, small genome  size,  ease of isolation of DNA and RNA, and
              transformability.  The  comparison  of genes will be accomplished using
              differential  display  of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products.   This 
              technique  enables  a  side  by  side  comparison  of  those  messenger  RNAs
              (mRNAs) which become active in wind-stressed  versus  the  unstressed plants. 
              These mRNAs will  represent  genes  which are activated by wind stress and may
              contribute  to   the   structural   tolerance  of   the   plants.    The 
              differentially expressed genes will be cloned, sequenced and  used  to probe
              (screen) poplar varieties which vary in their  response  to  wind stress. That
              procedure will identify  the  role  of  the genes in the signal cascade pathway
               for  wind  stress  response in plants having secondary growth.   Plants  that
              are successful in wind exposed sites should possess and  express  these  genes.
               Identification and  cloning  of  the  genes  will  allow  early 
              identification  of  wind-tolerant  individuals  and  strains, and may allow 
              transformation  of  poplars  and other woody plant subjects to improve
              tolerance  to wind and decrease the risk of wind damage.
