Title       : Variability of the Climate System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9520579

Award Number: 9520579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin K. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Kinter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Global Environ Soc
	      401 Powder Mill Road, Suite 302
	      Beltsville, MD  20705    301/595-7000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9520579  Schneider, Edwin K.  Kinter, James L.  Institute of
              Global Environment and Society Inc.  Title: Variability of the Climate System  
               The project consists of a series of numerical experiments designed  to
              increase understanding of the natural variability of the climate  system.  It
              is necessary to have accurate estimates of the natural  variability to identify
              climate signals produced by external  forcing and to evaluate climate
              predictions.  This research is  relevant to the goals of TOGA and CLIVAR/GOALS
              and is expected to  contribute to IPCC/USGCRP.  The proposed research will
              define and  carry out an experimental procedure to isolate and estimate the 
              contributions to natural climatic variability from atmospheric,  land and
              oceanic processes.  Specific processes that will be  examined are atmospheric
              chaos, stochastic forcing of the land  surface, stochastic forcing of the ocean
              mixed layer, coupled  ocean/atmosphere chaos, the annual cycle of solar
              forcing.  Results  will be obtained by analysis of several multi-decade to
              century  long numerical integrations made with variants of a numerical  climate
              model.  The basic version of the model will include global  atmosphere and
              ocean general circulation submodels, land surface  processes including effects
              due to vegetation, and sea ice.    First, the errors of the fully interactive
              coupled model in  simulating the observed annual mean and annual cycle of sea
              surface  temperature will be ascertained.  Modifications to the model will  be
              made to reduce the magnitude of these errors.  A control  integration without
              flux corrections will be carried out to  determine the equilibrium climate.  In
              subsequent integrations the  interactions between the component submodels will
              be restricted in  order to either eliminate or reduce atmosphere/land and 
              atmosphere/ocean coupling.  The changes, which will be introduced  in various
              combinations, include replacement of the dynamical ocean  with a specified
              climatological sea surface temp erature or by mixed  layer ocean, specification
              of climatological soil mixture and snow  cover, and elimination of the annual
              cycle.  The climatology for  the restricted model simulations will be that of
              the control  integration.  Intercomparsion of the results and Nature will 
              provide estimates of the contributions of the atmosphere/land and 
              atmosphere/ocean interactions to the modeled and actual climate  variability.  
               Related experiments will also be done to study the influence of  flux
              correction and oceanic initial conditions in climate  simulation and
              prediction.  Changes in natural variability  introduced by the flux correction
              procedure will be evaluated using  an equilibrium simulation in which the full
              climate model before  improvement is flux corrected to produce the same
              climatology as  the control integration.  An experiment will be done to
              estimate  the departure of the current climate from equilibrium due to the 
              changing greenhouse forcing.
