Title       : A Study of Proto-Planetary System Candidates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9520989

Award Number: 9520989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang-Ping Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520989  Cheng    The origin of our own solar system is one of the most
              fundamental  problems in astrophysics.  One way to investigate this problem is
              to  study systems that are still in the phase of planet formation.    Intensive
              studies of Beta Pictoris (A5 IV-V) have revealed a dust disk  and a dynamic gas
              envelope (showing both mass infall and outflow)  around the star.  The age of
              Beta Pic (<200 million years) roughly  corresponds to the era of planet
              formation and subsequent "heavy  bombardment" in our solar system.  Therefore,
              it is likely that Beta  Pic's dust + gas disk is similar to the accretion disk
              in the  primordial solar nebula.  However, it is still not resolved why Beta 
              Pic seems to have such a dynamic dust + gas disk, with about 100-200  mass
              infall events each year.  The understanding of the accretion  mechanism in Beta
              Pic, and of the relationship between the debris disk  and its circumstellar
              gas, is far from complete.  Is this a young  planetary system still undergoing
              formation, or is it the remnant of a  dusty proto-stellar accretion disk in its
              clearing phase?  Other  systems similar to Beta Pic with debris disks and
              circumstellar gas  need to be identified and studied to answer the questions.  
               The detection of circumstellar debris around nearby A type stars, such  as
              ,Beta Pic, provides an unparalleled opportunity to explore possible 
              proto-planetary systems that could resemble our own Solar System at an  early
              stage of evolution.  Therefore, a search for proto-planetary  system candidates
              will be completed.  The ultimate goal of this study  of these systems is to
              ascertain if they, as a group, represent some  phase of planet formation. 
              Three major objectives will be pursued:    (1) Identify nearby main-sequence A
              type stars that have circumstellar  dust, using the Infrared Astronomical
              Satellite (IRAS) Faint Source  Survey (FSS) data.  Although it is very
              difficult to detect dust disks  by direct imaging, one can infer the presence
              of circumstellar dust by  the det ection of excess infrared wavelength emission
              that is consistent  with thermal radiation from the orbiting grains.    (2)
              Obtain high-resolution visible and ultraviolet wavelength spectra  of the
              volume-limited A-star sample to study the presence, ionization,  and kinematics
              of the circumstellar gas.  These high-resolution spectra  can be used to detect
              narrow circumstellar gas absorption spectra  features and the amount of
              circumstellar gas in the line of sight will  be inferred.  The visible and
              ultraviolet wavelength circumstellar  absorption lines will be compared to each
              other to test whether the  evaporation of cometary-like bodies is responsible
              for the variable  redshifted lines seen in spectra of Beta Pic and several
              other Beta  Pic-like stars in the volume-limited A-star survey.    (3) Test the
              hypothesis that gaseous accretion is occurring in the  inner regions of the
              debris disks of these planetary system candidates.  These systems might have
              physical properties similar to those of the  primordial solar nebula.  The
              study of the dynamic nature of these  proto-planetary system's circumstellar
              environments will provide  valuable insight into the formation of planetary
              systems.
