Title       : Dissertation Research: Effective Population Size in Aquilegia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9520774

Award Number: 9520774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brook G. Milligan brook@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520774  Milligan   Effective population size determines the rate of change in
              populations due to a wide range of evolutionary forces.  These forces include
              random genetic drift, natural selection and migration.  Accurate estimation of
              effective size is central to a wide range of questions in evolutionary biology.
               The best way to make accurate estimates of effective size is to include as
              much relevant biological information in the estimation process.  Many studies
              have included such information; nevertheless, important aspects still have been
              neglected.   A large number of plants possess the ability to produce some or
              all of their offspring by self-fertilization.  Little is known about the effect
              of self-fertilization in determining effective population size.  This research
              will use a combination of theoretical population genetics, molecular population
              genetics, and demography to test the importance of selfing rate in determining
              the effective population size.  Information on selfing rate and demography will
              be used to develop an estimator of effective size.  This estimator will be
              compared to a long-term historical estimate of effective size based on DNA
              sequences.  These two independent estimates will then be compared.  A complex
              of herbaceous perennial plants in the genus Aquilegia, found in the
              southwestern United States and adjoining Mexico, will provide the experimental
              system.  This system is well suited to answering this particular question
              because Aquilegia populations in this region are located in well isolated and
              well delineated mesic areas.  These features make determining population sizes
              and other demographic parameters feasible.  In addition, many of the molecular
              techniques required for this study have been optimized to work in the Aquilegia
              system.   This research is significant in at least five ways.  First, it will
              lead to the development of theory pertaining to the evolution of a very large
              group of perennial plant populations.  Second, it will test this theory using
              an ind ependent, long-term, estimate of effective size.  Third, the two major
              datasets developed, a two-year demographic dataset and a molecular population
              genetic dataset, will be useful for a wide range of evolutionary studies not
              directly addressed by this research.  Fourth, because effective population size
              is important in the evolution of small populations, this research will provide
              information that may be required by conservation biologists in making
              successful management choices.  Finally, because this research will provide
              both current and long-term estimates of effective size, it may be used to
              examine how populations have changed over time.
