Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: RAND Goes Domestic: The RAND Corporation's
               Diversification into Social Welfare Research, 1958-1972
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9520187

Award Number: 9520187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hounshell hounshel@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hounshell/Jardini    Mr.  Jardini, under the direction of Dr. Hounshell, is
              undertaking dissertation research on the RAND Corporation as a case study of
              the production of knowledge during the Cold War and the interaction between
              national security and social welfare research and policy during that period. 
              The RAND Corporation was formed at the conclusion of World War II as a means by
              which America's finest intellectual talent could be harnessed to national
              security research and policy making in peacetime.  Under a cloak of secrecy,
              RAND hosted remarkable advances in such diverse fields as computer and software
              design, materials science, space systems, and especially, in social science
              methodologies such as game theory, linear and dynamic programming, and systems
              analysis.  Yet on July 14 1966, RAND's board of trustees decided to terminate
              the corporations exclusive military focus and diversify into social welfare
              research.  Moving aggressively, RAND quickly secured funding support from a
              wide range of public and private institutions, and by 1972 its research and
              methods had become central to the social welfare movement.  This means that,
              ironically, the sophisticated methodologies developed at RAND to contemplate
              nuclear war became some of the nation's fundamental weapons in the war against
              poverty and other social ills.    Drawing from a wide range of  documentary
              sources, including RAND's previously inaccessible archives, Mr. Jardini is
              employing RAND's diversification as a window on the complex interaction among
              national security and social welfare research and policy making in Cold War
              America.  In general, he is exploring the evolution of RAND's research program,
              RAND's development and use of innovative methodologies as an "independent"
              research organization in federal policy making, the gradual deterioration of
              the 1950's model of secret science, and the consequences of RAND's central role
              in both national security and social welfare research and policy analysis. 
              RAND's central role in bo th national security and social welfare policy-making
              allows this dissertation to address several other critical issues and
              contribute substantially to rapidly developing fields of scholarship.  What led
              to the emergence of nonprofit research and advisory organizations, and what was
              their role in government policy formulation during the post-World War II ear? 
              How have American's perceptions of the roles of science and technology in
              national policy-making changed over time?  Of what consequence is it that many
              of the central analytical methodologies employed in social research and
              problem-solving were created to address national security concerns?  What were
              the implications of massive defense sponsorship for the definition and content
              of Cold War research and research methods?  As the US moves to meet the
              challenges of the post-Cold War era, it is of increasing importance that
              scholars analyze and understand the issues taken by in this dissertation.
