Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Morphology & Cladistic Biogeography of Verres
               (Coleoptera: Passalidae; Proculini)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9520759

Award Number: 9520759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Liebherr jkl5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9520759  LIEBHERR   This award will contribute support to the doctoral
              dissertation research of a student at Cornell University.  That project
              involves the phylogenetic analysis of relationships among species in the beetle
              genus Verres  (Insecta: Coleoptera: Passalidae: Proculini) and its affinities
              to other closely related genera.  Characters from both adult and larval
              morphology will be employed and the resulting "tree" of relationships will be
              utilized to test historical biogeographic hypotheses about geological
              relationships of land areas in Mexico and Central America.  Funds awarded will
              support travel for the student to visit and study type specimens at major
              European museums, travel to conduct collecting and field studies in Mexico and
              Guatemala (the student is independently applying for travel support from
              Cornell University to enable field work in Panama and Costa Rica), and scanning
              electron microscopic examination of  ultrastructural features of these beetles.
                Members of the beetle family Passalidae are extremely important components of
              tropical forest ecosystems.  These beetles excavate galleries in dead wood
              where they brood their young socially.  Their biology parallels that of
              termites in many respects; both are major decomposers living in colonies that
              have many associations with fungi, nematodes and other decomposing
              "invertebrates."  A clear understanding of relationships among these beetles
              will allow testing of interesting hypotheses about origins of social, behavior,
              mutualistic associations with other organisms, biogeography, etc..  %%%  This
              award will contribute to the training of a young insect systematist at a time
              when training of a future generation of systematic expertise, especially for
              insects and other invertebrate groups, is reaching crisis proportions.  The
              studies of this student will contribute to our knowledge of the biodiversity of
               an important group of decomposer organisms in tropical forest ecosystems.  ***
