Title       : Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Materials Processing Using Linear-Scaling Tight
               Binding Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1996     
File        : a9520315

Award Number: 9520315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Teter teter@lassp.cornel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paulette Clancy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9166,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9520315  Teter  This award is one made through the FY95 Computational 
              Approaches to Real Materials competition.  Funding is  provided through the
              Divisions of Materials Research,  Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific
              Computing, as  well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the 
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.  The  research combines
              algorithm and code development with  materials theory to address important
              materials problems for  which computational breakthroughs can produce large
              payoffs.  As such, the research spans the strategic initiatives in  High
              Performance Computing and Communications and Advanced  Materials and Processing
                 Phase transformation and electronic structure properties of  realistically
              modeled crystalline and amorphous materials  will be studied using a new tight
              binding molecular dynamics  code.  This new technique represents a compromise
              between  computationally infeasible ab initio  techniques and faster  - but
              less accurate - methods that employ classical  potentials.  The tight binding
              molecular dynamics method has  non-orthogonal basis functions and handles
              electrostatic  interactions.  This will allow the study of inhomogeneous 
              systems such as amorphous materials and interfaces, as well  as ceramic
              materials which have significant ionic character  in their bonding.  The method
              will build on previous linear  scaling techniques which are explicitly
              parallelizable.  The  codes will be implemented on the Cornell SP-2.  This new 
              technique will allow the study of a variety of physical  systems and processes,
              inaccessible by previous methods,  such as solid/liquid and solid/solid phase
              transformations,  defect diffusion in materials and amorphous materials.   
              Besides Cornell, the team includes participants from  Corning, Los Alamos
              National Laboratory, Oxford University,  AT&T Bell Laboratories, IBM and DEC. 
              %%%   This award is one made through the FY95 Computational  Approaches to Real
              Materials competition.  Funding is  provide d through the Divisions of
              Materials Research,  Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing,
              as  well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the  Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences Directorate.  The  research combines algorithm and code
              development with  materials theory to address important materials problems for 
              which computational breakthroughs can produce large payoffs.  As such, the
              research spans the strategic initiatives in  High Performance Computing and
              Communications and Advanced  Materials and Processing    The research will
              involve a complementary team who will  apply fundamental aspects of materials
              physics to understand  and simulate the large scale processing of materials. 
              Such  processing phenomena as solid/solid phase  transformations  and
              solid/liquid phase transformations will be modeled.  In  addition, the
              simulations will be large enough so that the  effects of defects and their
              kinetics will be studied.  The  use of new algorithms and their implementation
              on massively  parallel computers enable these ambitious calculations to be 
              done.  The results will be a major contribution to the  design and processing
              control of new materials.  ***
