Title       : SGER: Production Planning Models for Companies with Remanufacturing Capability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9520438

Award Number: 9520438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4079               (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9520438  Uzsoy   This research is aimed at addressing the problem of
              remanufacturing of a product at the end of  its life cycle. It is a research
              that is aimed at integrating issues on preserving environmental quality and at
              same time maintain economic manufacturing. In particular, the research will
              pursue the development of a model of a production system with remanufacturing
              capability which can be used to explore the effects of different demand
              patterns, production and disposal costs, and government actions on the economic
              viability of remanufacturing policies.  Remanufacturing involves the
              refurbishing and/or partially rebuilding a product returned from the market at
              the end of its life to give it the functionality of a new product. This
              research is exploratory in nature. The basic components of the model to be
              developed will include product staging, disassembly, sorting, cleaning, repair,
              and assembly. With respect to assembly operations, manual assembly is assumed.
              The model also assumes that both remanufacturing  and new assemblies are
              carried out simultaneously in the same facility.  When fully developed, the
              model will be used to determine a minimum cost procurement and production plan.
              Output from the model will include (1) the quantity of a product to
              disassemble, (2) the quantity of each component to reuse or dispose of, (3) the
              quantity of each product to remanufacture, and (4) the quantity of  new
              components and products of each type  to make in order to satisfy market
              demand.    The problem of environmental degradation resulting from improper
              disposal of products that have reached the end of their life cycles is
              increasingly being recognized in many parts of the world. Whereas the proposed
              research will not eliminate the problem, it does, however, lessen the impact by
              developing a methodology to integrate the reuse of old components into
              manufacturing. The impact on environment, resource usage and conservation, and
              manufacturing cost savings to be derived from the research can be q uite
              significant. The models to be developed will pave the way for the realization
              of complete models that can be used by companies to evaluate the costs and
              benefits associated with integrating environmental concerns into manufacturing
              decisions and processes.
