Title       : Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Metals, Superconductors, and Spin-Polarized
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9520191

Award Number: 9520191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Stanton stanton@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9162,AMPP,OSIE,
Abstract    :
              9520191  Stanton  This theoretical project will investigate the optical and 
              dynamical properties of carriers photoexcited by ultrafast,  femtosecond lasers
              in metals and superconductors and in spin-  polarized semiconductors.  This
              work will provide new  theoretical information on ultrafast dynamics in
              degenerate  Fermi systems; hot electron effects in metals; quasi-  particle
              dynamics in semiconductors; and, spin dependent  scattering in polarized and
              magnetic semiconductors.    The goal is to bring the theoretical understanding
              of the  carrier dynamics in these systems up to the same level as  the
              understanding in bulk and quantum confined  semiconductors.  This involves
              realistic band stucture and  scattering rates together with detailed transport 
              calculations.    In addition, for bulk semiconductors, the dynamical band gap 
              renormalization associated with the many-body Coulomb  interaction in
              nonequilibrium systems will be studied.  Results obtained by other
              investigators for quasi-  equilibrium conditions will be extended to include
              effects  associated with a wave-vector-dependent Coulomb hole term; a 
              photoexcited two-component plasma with one species  (electrons) substantially
              lighter than the other (holes);  and, the effect of time-dependent,
              nonequilibrium  distribution functions on the band gap renormalization.  This
              gives us an opportunity to explore observable, time-  dependent, nonequilibrium
              many-body effects.  %%%  Tunable femtosecond lasers now make possible the
              detailed  study of electronic processes in solid state systems.  While  much
              initial work has focused on bulk semiconductors nad  quantum confined
              semiconductors, a variety of new systems  will be studied in this research.  In
              particular, systems to  be studied include metals, superconductors and
              polarized  semiconductors.    While the technology of ultrafast laser studies
              of solid  state systems has advanced rapidly over the past few years,  the
              associated theoretical studies have lagged.  This grant  will provide valu able
              theoretical insight on the complex  behavior of these systems when perturbed by
              laser  irradiation.  ***
