Title       : Performance and Reliability/Availability Models for the Analysis of Distributed
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9520226

Award Number: 9520226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noe Lopez-Benitez noe.lopez@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to investigate high level  models for the
              performance and  performability analysis of  distributed computing systems
              hosting replicated programs  and data  files. The high level models studied
              rely on  Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN) used hierarchically to  model the behavior
              of the system in the presence of several types of  hardware faults as well as 
              software failures. Systems targeted include real-time systems where critical 
              jobs are deadline  constrained. These jobs are partitioned  into tasks with
              precedence relations depicted via a task  graph. Although task graphs can be
              evaluated directly, the  evaluation assumes the existence of an  unlimited
              number of processing units. Using Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN) the  evaluation
              of task  graphs can include other constraints such  as a limited number of
              processors and existing  allocation schemes static or dynamic. At the SPN
              level, state  reduction can be achieved by  generating only those states  that
              satisfy functional as well as performance requirements  specified in the form
              of symbolic boolean expressions. A synergistic approach will be investigated 
              to predict the  effect of hardware failures on the performance of a system 
              running a single or  multiple tasks, that may require access  to distributed
              data files.  The combination of SPN models  and previously proposed reliability
              models such as those  used to evaluate multiterminal  reliability, has the
              objective of reducing the state space of the underlying  Markov model 
              (failure/repair models) even though hardware  failures include nodes and links.
              Once the  failure/repair  model is generated, performance reward levels can be
              associated with each  structural state of the system. This work will contribute
              to the systematic design of  distributed  systems. Design requirements such as
              delay, network throughput, load, task completion time, cost,  etc.,  will be
              analyzed in terms of their susceptibility to  failures in the hardware support
              for  a particular  applica tion. It will also contribute to the evaluation of 
              existing systems in order  to detect bottlenecks or weak  points and suggest
              appropriate remedial  course of action (to  either update or replace existing
              equipment). The  systematic prediction of  performance and  reliability in 
              terms of selective critical tasks, will aid in the process  of  updating
              currently  saturated computer systems. In  particular, the performance models
              of partitioned  jobs will  be  useful in predicting the average completion
              times under  userselected allocation schemes  via a  single SPN-based model  of
              a given task graph.  Thus, giving users a rapid  assessment on the  suitability
              of particular schemes in a  real-time distributed computing environment.  ***
