Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Reconstruction of the Simuliidae (Diptera:
               Culicomorpha) using Mitochondrial DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1995       
File        : a9520613

Award Number: 9520613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Maddison beetle@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520613  Maddison   The Simuliidae black flies are a large group of dipterans
              occurring worldwide, but most notorious in the African and American tropics
              where various species carry filarial parasites causing river blindness and
              other diseases.  The taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships of the numerous
              species and genera are poorly understood, and the conflicting classifications
              proposed over the years hinder effective control strategies.  Graduate student
              John Moulton, under the supervision of faculty adviser Prof. David Maddison at
              the University of Arizona, is analyzing mutational differences in mitochondrial
              DNA of numerous taxa of simuliid black flies collected from various parts of
              the world.  The molecular differences will be used to construct a scheme of
              evolutionary connections among the genera and tribes of Simuliidae, and then
              these relationships can be compared with and tested against the known
              morphological features of the groups.   Black flies present interesting
              scientific questions about biogeography and character evolution, questions that
              have resisted successful attack because of the conflicting taxonomies so far
              employed for their classification and identification.  Recent morphological
              work by the Canadian entomologist Currie now provides a reliable framework for
              comparing and contrasting new molecular data from DNA sequence analyses.  The
              integration of these two approaches should lead to a robust phylogenetic
              understanding of the evolution and dispersal of black flies, including those
              harboring disease vectors.
