Title       : Seismic Behavior and Design of Connections for CFT Column Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9520279

Award Number: 9520279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Ricles jmr5@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le-Wu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                9520279    Ricles    One efficient means of composite    construction is the
              concrete    filled steel tube (CFT) column-    wide flange steel beam system.  
               The filling of the tube    increases the stiffness and    strength of the
              system.  This    form of construction also    produces a very cost effective   
              structural system by combining    the attributes of structural    steel (speed
              of construction,    strength, long-span capability,    lightweight) and
              concrete    (stiffness, damping, economy),    where the tube provides a   
              convenient formwork for placing    the concrete.  One of the key    elements in
              this type of    construction is the structural    connection between the beam
              and    column.  As part of a lateral    seismic load resistant system    the
              connection would be expected    to be capable of transferring    beam forces
              and moments to the    columns.  The behavior of    connections is typically
              complex    due to the inelastic, non-    uniform, combined stress states   
              that develop under loading.    There presently is still a lack    of knowledge
              related to the    seismic performance and    guidelines for seismic   
              resistance design of CFT    composite construction,    particularly for
              connections.    This study will focus on the    seismic behavior of moment   
              connections for CFT square    column composite structural    systems.  The
              objectives are to:    (1) study the force and moment    transfer mechanism
              between the    beams and a adjacent column, and    the influence connection
              details    have on this mechanism; (2)    develop connection details that   
              perform well under seismic    conditions, and are cost    effective; and (3)
              develop    design guidelines for    implementing the details in    practice.   
              The analytical investigation    will consists of two parts.  The    first part
              will involve    conducting nonlinear time    history seismic analysis of open  
               CFT column composite systems.    The second part will entail    conducting
              nonlinear finite    element ana lysis of the    connection in order to assess  
               the affects various structural    details have on the force and    moment
              transfer mechanism and    capacity of the connection.    Affects of concrete
              crushing,    steel tube local buckling, and    panel zone deformation on   
              connection performance will be    assessed.  The experimental    program will
              involve the    construction and testing of full    scale beam column sub-   
              assemblages for seismic loading    conditions.  These sub-    assemblages will
              resemble the    beam and column members and    their connection in the interior
                 joint region of the prototype    theme structure.  Each    connection in a
              test specimen    will consist of an innovative    design, where the ductility  
               demand and information on    connection details obtained from    the
              analytical study will be    used to formulate these designs.    The results
              from the    experimental and analytical    programs will then be used to   
              formulate the design guidelines.    This is a project supported    under the
              year 1 program of the    Civil Infrastructure Systems    (CIS) solicitation NSF
              94-154.        ***
