Title       : Dissertation Research: An In Situ Hybridization Study of a Rhizobacterial
               Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1995 
File        : a9520272

Award Number: 9520272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5354               (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Bartlett EOS@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Hines  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520272  Hines  Molecular techniques that use 16S rRNA as phylogenetic
              descriptors offer potential for delineating the microscale structure and
              activity of rhizosphere bacterial communities in a manner that was not
              previously possible. Studies are currently underway which are investigating the
              population composition of sulfate-reducing bacteria in a salt marsh rhizosphere
              by: 1) probing bulk RNA; 2) amplifying and sequencing of rRNA genes for
              determining diversity, and 3) enumerating, isolating and characterizing
              sulfate-reducing bacteria. The research in this dissertation proposal will
              complement this work by investigating bacteria on plant roots at the cellular
              level using in situ hybridization technology which has only recently become
              advanced enough to visualize bacteria on roots using fluorescent probes and
              confocal laser microscopy.    This goal will be achieved by conducting
              preliminary investigations, and then visiting the laboratory of Dr. R. Amman in
              Germany who has agreed to instruct the student investigator in the state of the
              art of using laser microscopy and in site hybridization techniques with
              fluorescence detection. The work will be completed using the laser microscope
              at the Gulf Breeze EPA Laboratory in collaboration with Dr. R. Devereux.  
              Development and application of in situ techniques will enable the
              identification and visualization of individual bacteria in their native
              microhabitat, will elucidate the micro-ecology of these bacteria in relation to
              their spatial arrangements with other bacteria, and will demonstrate the
              interaction of bacteria with various parts of the root. The results will not
              only portray complex biogeochemical interactions between microbiota and plants,
              but will provide a manner in which to monitor exogenous bacteria artificially
              introduced into the rhizosphere.
