Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Instrumentation for a Vertically Integrated
               Controls Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9520447

Award Number: 9520447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54616              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Bernstein dsbaero@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis P. Bernal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Driscoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent T. Coppola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Washabaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9520447  Bernstein              The Department of Aerospace Engineering at the
              University of  Michigan will purchase a real-time control processor and related
               diagnostic equipment that will be dedicated to support research  in
              engineering.  The equipment will be used for several research  projects,
              including, in particular:  control of a rotating  actuator, control of noise,
              control of rotating imbalance,  control of combustion, and control os slosh.   
                   Control-system technology is an enabling technology for many  complex,
              high performance systems.  In many of these applications  the control system is
              so essential that the system simply cannot  operate without it.  On the other
              hand, failure of the control  system can have dire consequences.  Graphic
              examples include the  Chernobyl disaster and Airbus crashes.  In view of the
              importance  and risks of control-system technology, this proposal seeks 
              laboratory equipment in the form of a real-time control processor  and related
              equipment to allow researchers to carry out a broad  range of experiments in
              feedback control technology.         The equipment to be purchased under this
              grant will allow us  to upgrade and expand our current control laboratory
              facilities.   Multichannel identification and control capabilities will be used
               to implement and assess the performance of multivariable  controllers.  Our
              goal is to develop a vertically integrated  control laboratory in which data is
              passed seamlessly from  identification experiments to control law synthesis
              and,,  finally, to real-time code generation for implementation and  testing. 
              This high degree of integration will be critical for  exploiting and
              demonstrating the capabilities of new developments  in control technology for a
              variety of applications.  ***
