Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9520487

Award Number: 9520487
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio J. Botelho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, PA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Botelho, whose
              doctoral training is in political science, the opportunity to obtain training
              in the conceptual and methodological foundations of historical research in the
              area of science, technology, and society at Johns Hopkins University.  The
              creation in the mid-forties of the Aeronautics Technological Institute, with
              the assistance of MIT and the American government, was a watershed in Brazil's
              postwar modernization.  Dr. Botelho will explore the international and domestic
              factors in the transfer of a technological model, the MIT model, from the
              United States to Brazil, and will assess the consequences for Brazil's
              technology development.  Johns Hopkins is an ideal institution for the
              postdoctoral study given that similar historical studies are being carried out
              for other developing countries there.  This research will contribute to the
              ongoing comparative and theoretical re-assessment of the role of engineering
              communities and their values in national development in the history of
              technology and, critically, to the historical knowledge of technological change
              in developing countries.  In addition, it contributes to our understanding of
              the evolution of hybrid technical professions and institutions--in aeronautics,
              electronics, and computer science--critical to postwar development in developed
              and developing countries.  Finally, the research will shed new light on the
              complex interplay of political, technological, and cultural elements
              contributing to a conceptual framework for analyzing technology transfer
              between nations and for assessing the role of the translation of foreign ideas,
              values, and institutions in the international diffusion of engineering
              disciplines and practices.  Given the current scientific and technological
              dilemmas facing the majority of developing countries, such a framework could
              assist in the design of more effective and sound policies.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
