Title       : Dissertation Research: Energetic Consequences of Hatching Asynchrony and Clutch
               Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9520846

Award Number: 9520846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley W. Weathers wwweathers@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520846    Many bird species that feed their young in the nest lay eggs  that
              hatch asynchronously, with the first laid eggs hatching  from  two days to two
              weeks before the last laid eggs.  This  study  tests  two  long-standing 
              hypotheses  that  seek  to  explain this phenomenon.  The first suggests that
              asynchrony  increases  males'  contribution  to  reproduction  and  thus 
              reproductive success of a pair, by prolonging the time  that  males  feed 
              females  and young.  The second  suggests  that  asynchrony  reduces peak
              energy demands,  by  spreading  the  cost  of  raising  offspring over a longer
               time.   Although  these  hypotheses differ in their details, both assume  that
               hatching  asynchrony evolved in response to food  limitation  during  the
              breeding season and that it functions to  reduce  parental  effort.  
              Falsifying these hypotheses  would  mean  that   breeding  is  not  invariably 
              constrained  by   food  availability,  which  would alter our understanding  of
               the  factors   that  limit  avian  reproductive  success.    This  research 
              will  test  these  hypotheses  by  measuring   the  metabolic  rate of
              free-living green-rumped parrotlets  that  are  rearing  either  synchronous 
              and  asynchronous  broods  containing  either  4 or 8 chicks.  Green-rumped 
              parrotlets  exhibit the most extreme degree of hatching asynchrony found  in 
              birds,  yet  are  capable  of  rearing  synchronous  and  asynchronous  broods
              with equal success, making  them  ideal  subjects for this project.   Field
              metabolic rate of parents  feeding  young  will be determined using the doubly 
              labeled  water  technique, a method that employs isotopically labeled  water  
              to  determine  directly  metabolism  of  free-living  animals.  The results
              will increase our understanding of the  way  that costs of reproduction affect
              breeding systems, and  the extent to which energy demands have played a role in
              the  evolution of avian life histories.  It will also expand  our  knowledge 
              of  tropical parrots, on e of the most  threatened  groups  of  birds, and
              provide baseline data  that  may  aid  future conservation efforts.
