Title       : Dissertation Research: Pedal Function in Anthropoid Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9520363

Award Number: 9520363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10944              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Jungers wjungers@epo.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9183,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The foot is among the most frequently analyzed elements of the primate anatomy,
              as foot morphology is closely linked to locomotor mechanics and habitat use,
              and foot remains are common in the fossil record.  However, despite the
              abundant amount of research on the shape (morphology) of the primate foot,
              little is known about the function of the primate foot in living animals and
              humans.  Yet this is absolutely necessary for the interpretation of fossil foot
              function and understanding of the evolutionary processes by which animal
              postcranial design evolved in response to changing environmental conditions. 
              This project, from the outstanding laboratory in this area of research, will
              apply comparative and experimental methods to the study of foot design and
              evolution in living apes and humans, which is the necessary first step before
              infering function and behavior in extinct species, including the earliest
              fossil human ancestors.  In order to understand the development of the highly
              specialized foot anatomy of humans, comparisons will be made across humans,
              apes, and a few selected monkey species.  The primary focus is on the
              `functional axis` of the foot, a feature usually defined morphologically by
              metatarsal or digital formulae or by the distribution of the intrinsic digital
              abductor muscles.  Competing hypotheses that link morphological axes (and other
              features) to substrate use and specific behaviors will be tested empirically by
              application of simultaneous video, kinetic, and muscle monitoring electrode
              methodologies.   This study will provide the first comprehensive data on
              function of the living anthropoid foot.  The methods developed here will also
              open a new avenue for experimental research in primate locomotion that can
              analyze movement and force distribution within foot elements and at the
              interface of the foot and its substrate (ground or branches).  It will also
              involve the training of a young professional in an outstanding laboratory.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
