Title       : GOALI: Stochastic Optimization for the Scheduling of Tests in the Development of
               New Chemical Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9520153

Award Number: 9520153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignacio E. Grossmann ig0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Grossman - 9520153    To introduce a new chemical in the market there
              are tests that have to be performed by and R&D organization.  These are mostly
              regulatory requirements such as environmental and safety tests.  If a potential
              product fails any test it cannot reach the market.  Scheduling the tests for
              the development of new products has important economic implications.  The
              fundamental trade-off is between greater sales and income that result from
              longer schedules.   One of the complications in the scheduling is its
              combinatorial nature, especially when the number of potential products is
              large.  In addition, there are uncertainties in the costs of the tasks,
              probabilities of success of the tasks, in the income of the products. 
              Furthermore,  there are precedence constraints for the tests, constrains on
              resources for performing the tests, and on the capacity and investment capital
              for the manufacturing facilities.       This project is concerned with the
              study of stochastic optimization models and methods fmr the optimal scheduling
              of testing tasks for the development of new products.  An effective
              optimization model will be developed for the optimal scheduling of testing
              tasks that maximizes New Present Value and that can capture the major trade-off
              and decisions involved  in this problem, as well as the relevant constraints. 
              Preliminary work has indicated that one can model the problem as a large-scale
              mixed -integer linear program that uses continuous time representation and
              discrete distributions for the stochastic parameters.  However, this model can
              become computationally expensive for modest number of products and tests. 
              Therefore, computational strategies will be investigated that rely on the use
              of cutting planes, decomposition and logic.  The integration of the
              optimization model for testing with the model of the process network of the
              manufacturing company in order to assess the effect of plant capacity
              constraints as well as to identify investment opportunities for mo difying
              designs or building the new facilities will also be explored.  Another problem
              of interest will be to determine the required modifications in existing
              facilities to accommodate the production of new produats.  While most of the
              theoretical and computational work will be performed at Carnegie Mellon, there
              will be extensive interaction with DowElanco.  Initially it will consist of
              information gathering to fully understand the issues involved in this problem. 
              At a later stage, realistic case studies aimed at agricultural chemicals will
              be developed to test the proposed methods.
