Title       : Planning Meeting for Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
               Computer-Aided Devices for Diagnosis and Surgical Intervention Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9520887

Award Number: 9520887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bartholomew O. Nnaji   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9520887  Nnaji  This award is providing funding for a planning grant proposal to
               study the feasibility of establishing an Industry/University  Cooperative
              Research Center for Computer-Aided Devices for  Diagnosis and Surgical
              Intervention Systems at the University of  Massachusetts at Amherst.    Medical
              imaging diagnosis and surgical intervention systems are  common technologies
              for doctors.  Today, there is no integrated  imaging technologies that can
              present both the bone and soft tissue  structure in three dimensions.  Medical
              industries have shown a  great interests in the development of intelligent
              imaging systems  that can provide more realistic, three-dimensional
              presentations of  organs, segments of organs or groups of organs.  In a typical
               plastic surgery, doctors normally perform the operations manually.   When a
              skin graft or flap is necessary for reconstruction of a  damaged area, the
              surgeon must estimate the contour, area, and  volume of the tissue required to
              ensure success of the  reconstruction.   CAD/CAM and Robotics technologies
              developed by  engineers and scientists are very useful tools to develop the
              next  generation surgical intervention system.  CAD/CAM technology based  on
              geometric reasoning that can be employed to estimate precise  dimensions of
              damaged areas and match skin and tissue portions to  be extracted from another
              part of the body.  Robotics technology  can be integrated in controlling and
              sensing the surgical  operations adaptively.    Research projects proposed for
              industrial members consideration for  the envisioned Center are;  1) a Surgical
              Virtual Reality Machine,  2) A Sensor Equipment Scalpel, 3) Computer Aided
              Medical Imager  (CAM Imager), 4) Spine Curvature Analyzer Using Laser, 5)
              Automated  Burn Debridement, 6) Automated Congential Birthmark Treatment, 7) 
              Recreation of Exact Duplicate Tissue Defects, 8) Automation Tissue  Expansion,
              9) Planner for Burn Reconstruction, 10) Tissue  Engineering, 11) Charge-Coupled
              Device (CCD) application in Small -  Field Digital Mammography, 12)
              Radiologist's Diagnostic Aid in  Detection of Microcalcification Precursors of
              Breast Cancer, 13)  Digital Mammographic Cassette, 14) Digital Breast Specimen 
              Radiography for Improved Biopsy, and 15) Prototype of a  Stereoscopic
              Mammography System.    The Principal Investigator/Center Director is a
              recognized  authority in his field and has assembled an interdisciplinary 
              research team of researchers from the University of Massachusetts  at Amherst
              and the Brigham and Woman's Hospital (a teaching  affiliate of Harvard Medical
              School).    A planning meeting with interested companies was held on   January
              20, 1995.    The Program Manager recommends the University of Massachusetts at 
              Amherst be awarded $10,000 for one year to conduct a planning  activity.
