Title       : Dissertation Research: Gene Flow and the Scale of Fragmentation in Tropical Tree
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9520702

Award Number: 9520702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Hamrick hamrick@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DEB 95-20702   Hamrick    Deforestation is occurring at an alarming rate in many
              parts of the world, especially in tropical regions.  Much attention has been
              focused on the resultant loss of species diversity, particularly of animals. 
              Relatively little effort has gone into examining the effects of fragmentation
              on the dynamics of tropical tree populations.  In contrast to the temperate
              zone, most tropical tree species disperse pollen and seeds by means of animal
              vectors.  Thus, it is likely that habitat fragmentation could seriously impact
              the integrity of tropical tree populations if pollinator and seed disperser
              associations are disrupted.  A lack of dispersal among remnant forest fragments
              would lead to genetic differentiation among fragments over several generations
              and an increased probability of extinction due to demographic factors
              associated with small population size.  This combination of factors should lead
              to a loss of genetic diversity in the species over time which could compromise
              its ability to respond to future evolutionary pressures.    This study examines
              the effects of habitat fragmentation on gene movement via pollen and seed
              within and among remnant forest patches in premontane tropical rain forest in
              southern Costa Rica.  The study site consists of a 20 hectare fragmented area
              including three one-hectare remnant patches plus two one-hectare plots in
              continuous forest for control.  Molecular genetic markers will be utilized to
              identify adults and young seedlings of the study species occurring within the
              study sites.  Genetic fingerprints will be used to establish patterns of
              parental relationship between seedlings and parent-pairs occurring within the
              study region.    Seedlings that cannot be produced by parents resident on the
              plot represent instances of long-distance gene flow.  The detailed examination
              of parent-seedling associations within the study regions will provide important
              evidence regarding:  the amount of genetic connectedness among patches; the
              importance of f ree-standing individuals in pastures to the local dynamics of
              patch populations;  and the importance of corridors to the movement of pollen
              and seeds.  These data will provide an empirical perspective on patterns of
              gene flow in a heterogeneous environment and will prmvide necessary information
              for the conservation of tropical areas and the design of tropical reserves.
