Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of an Atmospheric Nitrogen Deposition Gradient on
               White Spruce (Picea glauca) Ectomycorrhizae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1995  
File        : a9520760

Award Number: 9520760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Fahey tjf5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Lovett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9520760  Fahey  Nitrogen availability may be an important factor influencing the
              abundance, diversity, and function of ectomycorrhizal fungi (ECMF).
              Understanding ECMF responses to nitrogen is critical not only because natural
              spatiotemporal variation in nitrogen availability, but also because
              anthropogenic nitrogen deposition has altered nitrogen availability in forest
              soils. Recent evidence suggests that declining production and diversity of ECMF
              fruitbodies in Europe is correlated with multiple air pollutants, including
              atmospheric nitrogen deposition.    The objective of this dissertation research
              is to determine the effect of nitrogen deposition on ECMF of white spruce over
              a short, steep nitrogen deposition gradient in Alaska. Hypotheses are that 1)
              there is lower ECMF diversity near the nitrogen source, 2) ECMF species
              dominant at high and low nitrogen sites differ both in their ability to
              colonize roots, and in their effect on tree nutrition and growth, under high
              and low soil nitrogen availability.    Initial sampling focused on fungal
              species distribution, tree nutrition and growth, and soil chemistry.
              Preliminary results indicate that high nitrogen deposition sites have lower
              diversity and abundance of ECMF than low nitrogen deposition sites. Seedling
              experiments will examine differences among ECMF species in root colonization
              and nitrogen transfer under high and low nitrogen availability   This research
              is important because fungi, in general, and mycorrhizal fungi, in particular,
              are primary agents of decomposition and nutrient cycling in ecosystems. Given
              that chronic anthropogenic nitrogen deposition is occurring throughout the
              world, knowledge od the effects of this pollution is essential for
              understanding the future consequences of humankind's impact on natural systems.
