Title       : Cooperative & Quantum Effects in Condensed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9520175

Award Number: 9520175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Brooks Harris harris@harris.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9520175  Harris    This project seeks to understand the roles of symmetries and 
              pseudosymmetries in novel materials.  One project concerns  the study of the
              magnetic symmetry of the lamellar copper  oxide antiferromagnets, with a goal
              of accounting for the  observed magnetic anisotropy.  Since these materials
              (when  suitable doped) give rise to high temperature  superconductivity, this
              research can have technological as  well as intellectual payoffs.  Another
              project concerns the  symmetry in Kagome antiferromagnets.  Such systems are 
              realized in structures in which magnetic ions occupy lattice  planes that are
              widely separated by nonmagnetic ions.  The  principal investigator will attempt
              to answer the open  question as to whether there is long range order of any
              type  in the quantum ground state.  If there is, it would probably  involve a
              totally new and interesting type of symmetry.  %%%  Symmetries play a crucial
              role as an aid in interpreting and  understanding materials.  This research
              involves work in two  projects in which the symmetries involved are not well 
              understood.  Both projects concern antiferromagnets, in  which magnetic spins
              do not all align but rather alternate  in a regular pattern.  The first
              addresses the magnetic  symmetry in lamellar copper oxides, which are materials
              that  give rise to high temperature superconductivity when they  are doped. 
              The second concerns the symmetry in a quantum  model on a special two
              dimensional lattice.  If long range  order is present in this system in the
              absence of thermal  disorder, this would probably involve a totally new and 
              interesting type of symmetry.  ***
