Title       : Development of in Vitro Genetic System to Study RNA Editing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9520253

Award Number: 9520253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura F. Landweber lfl@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9520253  Landweber  The objective of this research is to develop the use of in
              vitro selection as a model system to explore he possible link between RNA
              catalysis and kinetoplastid RNA editing. RNA editing is the bizarre and complex
              addition or deletion of uridine residues which occurs in the mitochondria of
              some of the earliest eukaryotes, the kinetoplastid protozoa. The approach will
              be to develop a successful in vitro selection system to analyze the mechanism
              and evolution of RNA editing.  These experiments will address the antiquity of
              RNA editing and the role of RNA catalysts in evolution. One hypothesis is that
              RNA editing is an ancient process, and the interaction of several short loci to
              produce one final transcript may reflect some of the steps involved in the
              first assembly of genes. Specifically, these experiments will test the
              hypothesis that RNA editing may have been one of the key players in the RNA
              world by analyzing whether each of its steps can be catalyzed by RNA, a
              characteristic of some of the earliest hypothesized biological mechanisms. This
              research will determine whether the first step of RNA editing, a
              transesterification similar to other RNA catalyzed ligation reactions, can be
              catalyzed by an RNA molecule.  Through a series of in vitro selection
              experiments, which simulate evolution in a test tube, the experiments will
              explore the world of possible primitive RNA editing enzymes, by selecting the
              desired catalytic molecules from a pool of random sequences.  Armed with these
              preliminary experiments, we will then be prepared to analyze the later steps of
              RNA editing, with the final goal of evolving a complete RNA catalyzed RNA
              editing system in vitro. These experiments will test whether a molecule capable
              of editing RNA could have arisen under fairly simple conditions: a model for
              the evolution of complex molecular processes. Ultimately, this will allow one
              to design new RNA enzymes that can edit RNA of any specific sequence.  %%%  The
              objective od this research is to deve lop the use of in vitro selection to
              explore the possible link between RNA catalysis and kinetoplastid RNA editing.
              RNA editing is the bizarre and complex addition or deletion of uridine residues
              which occurs in the mitochondria of some of the earliest eukaryotes, the
              kinetoplastid protozoa. The approach will be to develop a successful in vitro
              selection system to analyze the mechanism and evolution of RNA editing.  These
              experiments will test whether a molecule capable of editing RNA could have
              arisen under fairly simple conditions: a model for the evolution of complex
              molecular processes. Through a series of in vitro selection experiments, which
              simulate evolution in a test tube, the experiments will explore the world of
              possible primitive RNA editing enzymes, by seleating new catalytic molecules
              from a pool of random sequences. Ultimately, this will allow one to design new
              RNA enzymes that can edit RNA of any specific sequence.  ***
