Title       : Synthesis and NMR Studies of Linear Polycarbosilanes-CeramicPrecursors and Novel
               Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9520930

Award Number: 9520930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard V. Interrante interl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Apple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1374,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded in the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry Division
              Interrante and Apple will investigate the synthesis, structures, and pyrolysis
              of a unique series of polycarbosilanes derived from poly(silaethylene) (PSE),
              which is a precursor to the production of stoichiometric silicon carbide. 
              Ring-opening polymerization (ROP) processes will be investigated and developed
              into an effective general route to polycarbosilanes.  Both solution and
              solid-state NMR spectroscopy will provide information about the molecular and
              crystal structures of PSE and other silyl polymers as well as some of their
              preceramic and ceramic pyrolysis products.  This study will enable the
              systematic study of an emerging class of inorganic/organic polymers which
              effectively bridge the gap between the all-carbon chain polymers, such as
              polyethylene, and the inorganic polymers based on silicon, such as polysilanes
              ald polysiloxanes.  %%%  Silicon carbide is a material with high strength and
              modulus capable of performing at high working temperatures in practical
              applications such as a gas turbine engine.  Silicon oxycarbide is also a target
              ceramic material which is potentially a fiber and matrix material in ceramic
              composites.  However, in both cases excess carbon, which results from
              decomposition of the organosilicon precursors, affects both the mechanical
              properties and oxidative stability of the end products.  This research
              investigates routes to producing these end products without the troublesome
              excess carbon, resulting in ceramics with superior material properties.
