Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Optical Astrometric Observations as Measures of
               Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9520484

Award Number: 9520484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice C. Hogan                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark R. Wilson clarkw@maestro.geo.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1303,9200,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9520484  Wilson    This award supports a three year collaboration between
              Clark  Wilson, Geological Sciences Department, University of Texas  at Austin,
              and Li Zhengxin, Shanghai Observatory of the  Chinese Academy of Sciences, on
              optical astromeric  observations as measures of global change. The project 
              involves use of optical astromeric observations of latitude  to investigate
              whether such measurements provide useful  measures of climate variability.
              Shanghai Observatory has  been designated as the international repository and
              analysis  center for these optical records, and analysis of the data  by
              Professor Li has revealed intriguing fluctuations which  appear correlated with
              recognized climate variations such as  the El Nino/Southern Oscillation.    The
              collaboration will combine the unique Shanghai optical  astrometry data
              collection and the experience of Professor  Li with the geophysical,
              computational and climate data  resources at the University of Texas at Austin.
              The  objectives of the proposed research are to determine whether  there is a
              physical basis to account for apparent  correlations between climate change and
              optical astromeric  data, and to interpret historical optical and
              climaterelated  time series in light of such physical relationships.  Although
              space geodesy has replaced less accurate optical  astrometry in monitoring the
              rotation of the earth, the  optical data of the past remain of considerable
              value. These  data are especially useful when combined to form a polar  motion
              time series for the pre-space geodetic period,  because it has been shown that
              polar motion measures global  properties of the distribution of air and water
              over the  past century when few climate-related observations are  available.   
                ***
