Title       : Investigation of Mechanisms of Facet Growth and In-Situ Fabrication of Si-Based
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9520893

Award Number: 9520893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kang L. Wang wang@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Goorsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9520893 Wang   The objectives of this project are to achieve fundamental
              understanding and control of facet growth in selective epitaxial growth, and to
              develop an in-situ  growth technique of nanometer scale heterostructures of
              Si/SiGe and Si/SiGeC. In-situ  facet growth of Si-based nanostructures using
              disilane based gas source molecular beam epitaxy will be studied; individual
              nanostructures will be self-isolated. The approach includes: (1) A theoretical
              model for understanding and control of facet growth. The model will take
              substrate orientations, pattern alignments, and heteroepitaxy of Si/SiGe and
              Si/SiGeC will be included into account. (2) Surface migration of various
              species, anisotropy of growth rate, and migration lengths for different facets
              will be studied. (3) Optical properties will be explored with large area
              photoluminescence and photoexcitation spectroscopy. A Scanning Near-field
              Optical Microprobe (SNOM) will be used to detect the luminescence from a single
              nanostructure cell. In addition, atomic force microscope and SNOM will be used
              to examine  mesas and to determine migration length, and size dependent growth
              rate. Crystalline quality and strain in the nanostructures will be assessed by
              X-ray diffraction. %%%  This research aims toward gaining an understanding of
              crystal facet growth in the nanometer scale and the control of fabricating
              nanostructures, free of surface damage and other effects. These nanostructures
              are expected to exhibit many new phenomena and improved properties, which are
              very important for ultra-large scale integrated circuits and nanoelectronics.
              The research addresses two bottleneck problems encountered with conventional
              methods: surface damage caused by direct dry etching and the limitation of
              lithography for achieving a desired feature size. Because of the pervasiveness
              of silicon integrated circuit technology and its enormous economic importance,
              the technological impact of the proposed program is potentially very large.  An
              important feature of  the program is the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials research. ***
