Title       : Virtual Reality Imaging of the Colon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9520388

Award Number: 9520388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $759918             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Vining dvining@wfubmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wallace C. Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Santago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas D. Bradham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1177,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9520388  Vining  Colorectal carcinoma is the second leading cause of cancer 
              deaths in the United States.  As with other cancers, studies  suggest that
              early detection and removal of precursor polyps  and small carcinomas reduces
              mortality.  Visualization of  the entire colon by means of X-ray images
              enhanced with  barium (a barium enema) or colonoscopy (endoscope) improves 
              polyp detection.  Both examinations have poor patient  compliance because of
              associated discomfort, inconvenience,  risk and cost.  colonoscopy has an
              advantage over barium  enema because it serves both as a diagnostic test and a 
              therapeutic procedure, as polyps are removed upon their  discovery.  However,
              colonoscopy is an invasive examination,  does not always reveal significant
              lesions, fails to reach  the far end (cecum) of the colon in about 15% of
              patients,  sometimes requires sedation, increases the risk of bowel 
              perforation, and is the most expensive of all bowel  examinations.    This
              proposal describes research to develop a new approach  for Virtual Colonoscopy
              (VC) examinations as a substitute  for the costly and invasive diagnostic
              colonoscopy (DC).  VC  combines helical CT scanning, 3D reconstruction, and
              high-  performance computing to examine the entire colon rapidly  and to lessen
              the discomfort  for the patient.  The aims of  this project are to generate new
              software for evaluating VC  examinations, to create an algorithm for measuring
              the  colon's wall thickness to highlight areas of abnormal  thickness, to
              validate the accuracy of VC with the foregoing  modifications, and to determine
              the cost-savings potential  of VC relative to DC.  The project involves a 
              multidisciplinary team of investigators, the results are to  be evaluated in a
              clinical setting by comparing the results  of VC relative to DC in patients
              undergoing usual care  colonoscopy, and the work plan includes educational 
              activities to promote a better understanding of the cost-  reducing issue.   
              Successful results from this project would  yield significant  clinical and
              public health benefits by way of the potential  for increased acceptance among
              patients, and doing so at  considerably lower cost and risks.  ***
