Title       : A Molecular Biologist's Computational Workbench
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9520465

Award Number: 9520465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Beach                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Kutter kutterb@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith B. Cushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Stidham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This grant will provide support for the infrastructure of the  molecular
              biology database research program at the evergreen  State College over the next
              year, maintaining a full-time  programmer for months and providing limited
              travel and software  upgrading.  Activities which will be enhanced by this
              support  include:    1.  Completion of publication of the analysis of the 
              bacteriophage T4 genome.  With its approximately 300 genes and  long years of
              study, T4 is the most complex virus for which the  entire sequence is known. 
              Many interesting phenomena have  already been observed, from both spliced- and
              folded-out introns  to nested genes and complex protein machines to a 26-amino
              acid  dual-function protein gene product to genes highly homologous  with
              eukaryotic proteins.  The computer support under this grant  will facilitate
              interaction among the members of the T4  community, and also work with various
              outside groups using the T4  data set as a model system for genoming analysis. 
              A major  activity will be to explore available tools for analyzing the 
              still-uncharacterized half of the genes involved in the  transition from host
              to viral metabolism after infection by large  virulent phages.  This work will
              also help to identify the most  useful candidate programs for a Molecular
              Biologist's  Computational Workbench.    2.  Support of collaborative efforts
              for object-oriented  molecular biology database specification, research and
              prototype  development.  This collaboration involves the Evergreen team  (Drs.
              Cushing and Kutter, Tom Stidham and several students), Tom  Marr and colleagues
              at Cold Spring Harbor and Tim Hunkapillar and  David Yee at the University of
              Washington.  Here, the major  current work involves development of a
              metadatabase for the  storage of complex multiple database sequence
              comparisons,  particularly important in facilitating comparing search results 
              across a range of search programs to tease out weak but  significant
              relationships from very large amounts of data .  The  metadatabase will be
              built upon the framework existing in the  Genome Topographer, an integrated
              database for genomic analysis  and viewing being developed by Tom Marr; we have
              been  collaborating with them for the last year on its expansion to 
              application to prokaryotic systems.  In a parallel effort Tim  Hunkapillar and
              David Yee will b implementing the sequence  comparison metadatabase in Sybase
              so that these two database  approaches can be compared in functionality and
              usability; we are  working together closely on this project.    3.  Provide
              support to students in the "Student Originated  Software" and "Molecule to
              Organism" programs who are involved in  the above projects.    The
              infrastructure thus supported makes it possible for molecular  biology and
              computer scientist faculty and students to work  together, sharing problems and
              solutions in facilitating analysis  of the complex ways that genomic
              information is organized and  expressed.
