Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coming to Terms: Negotiating a New Abortion Law
               in Unified Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9520276

Award Number: 9520276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Comaroff jcomaro@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520276  Comaroff  A major issue in the reunification of Germany has been the
              conflict between the relatively liberal abortion law of the former East Germany
              and the relatively conservative abortion law and jurisprudence of the former
              West Germany.  The conflict is complicated by the need to "come to terms with"
              the Nazi past and its disregard for human life.  This research uses
              ethnographic methods to examine how this legal conflict over abortion is being
              worked out and mediated in practice.  The co-P.I. will attend political
              meetings and judicial hearings concerned with shaping the law and conduct
              interviews with people directly involved in the law's formation.  In addition,
              she will investigate--through interviews, document analysis, and participant
              observation--how the revised law's mandate of pre-abortion pregnancy counseling
              advising women of the illegal, though unpunishable, status of abortion is being
              implemented at pregnancy counseling clinics.  This research should enhance our
              understanding of how law and practice are shaping an important issue in the
              democratic development of unified Germany.  %%%%  A major issue in the
              reunification of Germany has been the conflict between the relatively liberal
              abortion law of the former East Germany and the relatively conservative
              abortion law and jurisprudence of the former West Germany. This research uses
              ethnographic methods to examine how this legal conflict over abortion is being
              worked out and mediated in practice.  The co-P.I. will attend political
              meetings and judicial hearings concerned with shaping the law and conduct
              interviews with people directly involved in the law's formation.  In addition,
              she will investigate--through interviews, document analysis, and participant
              observation--how the revised law's mandate of pre-abortion pregnancy counseling
              advising women of the illegal, though unpunishable, status of abortion is being
              implemented at pregnancy counseling clinics.  This research should enhance our
              understanding of how law and prac tice are shaping an important issue in the
              democratic development of unified Germany.  ****
