Title       : The Topological Approach to Asynchronous Computability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9520298

Award Number: 9520298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Lynch lynch@theory.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nir Shavit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The choice of primitive coordination operations, whether  reading and writing a
              shared memory, message-passing, or  more complex operations, has become a
              crucial design issue.  To make such choices, one must analyze the behavior of
              multi-  process executions, reasoning about the multitude of  possible
              combinations of concurrent operations. This is an  unusually delicate and
              laborious task. The goal of this  research is to replace this need to argue
              about concurrent  executions with combinatorial conditions on the geometric 
              representation of problems. This should allow researchers  and designers,
              instead of analyzing behaviors, to apply  powerful mathematical tools to
              recognize when certain  protocols are impossible, to evaluate the power of 
              alternative synchronization primitives, or to make explicit  the assumptions
              needed to make a given problem solvable.    This project pursues the problem of
              characterizing and  classifying the power of synchronization primitives in 
              different models. Prior research has developed powerful new  tools based on
              classical topology for analyzing fault-  tolerant concurrent alogrithms and
              data structures in a  variety of models and architectures. This research has
              shown  that a large class of synchronization problems can be  associated with a
              high-dimensional geometric structure  called a simplicial complex, and that the
              computational  complexity of solving the problem using a given underlying 
              architecture is captured by certain topological properties  of the complex.
              These properties have been used to give a  complete characterization of the
              synchronization problems  solvable in asynchronous read/write memory, and to
              provide  impossiblity results and lower bounds for several known open  problems
              in both the asynchronous model and in the  synchronous message-passing model.
              These techniques are  being applied toward a comprehensive theory of 
              multiprocessor synchronization.  ***
