Title       : Dissertation Research: Paleovegetational Response to Volcanism: Eocene/Oligocene
               Lower Cedarville Flora, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9520826

Award Number: 9520826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard V. Fisher fisher@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520826  Fisher   At numerous sites in northern California, Oregon, and
              Washington, volcanic deposits preserve ancient vegetational types and make
              possible the critical analysis of trends in plant species replacement and
              habitat change through time.  Graduate student Jeffrey Myers under the guidance
              of Professor Richard Fisher at the University of California-Santa Barbara is
              studying deposits of Eocene and Oligocene age, ca. 30 million years old, in the
              West, to assess vegetational changes across a broad region of the landscape
              over a relatively short span of geological time.  The goal is to distinguish
              between a single, major secular shift in vegetation (moist humid tropical to
              seasonal temperate forest) or a more complex mosaic pattern of local habitat
              types.  Numerous deposits of the same age will be visited and sampled, and
              their major plant components identified; a critical aspect of the research is
              to incorporate modern analyses on post-depositional processes (so-called
              taphonomic processes like decay and local transport by water or by animals) so
              ensure that fossil deposits accurately reflect local vegetation.   Interest in
              global climate change and its environmental effects reinforces the need for
              fine-scale analysis of the fossil record.  The Eocene-Oligocene focus of the
              proposed research emphasizes a time of global cooling, with resulting shifts in
              temperate-zone vegetation.  How and over what timescales the vegetation changes
              in species composition are major unresolved questions in paleontology, to which
              this research brings a rigorous taphonomic approach.
