Title       : Dissertation Research: Middle Fort Ancient Villages and Organizational
               Complexity in Central Kentucky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9520855

Award Number: 9520855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9890               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dillehay    Under the direction of Dr. Tom Dillehay, Ms. A. Gwynn Henderson 
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research  focuses on
              prehistoric sites located in central Kentucky and  attributed to the Fort
              Ancient tradition, which flourished  between 1200 and 1400 AD. Ms. Henderson
              has extensive prior  experience in the region. The project consists of three
              phases.  First, literature will be reviewed to locate recorded site 
              information and to note related environmental data such as water  availability
              and soil fertility. Over 100 sites have been  recorded in the region to date.
              Secondly, intensive  archaeological survey will be conducted, both to verify
              recorded  information and to locate new sites. At each site, the surface 
              distribution of materials will be mapped and a controlled  collection made. In
              sites with poor visibility a combination of  screened shovel probes and soil
              cores will be used to collect  information the size and internal organization
              of the site. At  newly documented occurrences, larger test units will be 
              excavated. Finally the material collected will be subjected to a  number of
              analyses. Site sizes, distributions and ecological  associations will be
              examined. Ceramics and other items of  material culture will be studied to
              determine both chronology and  relations between sites. On this basis it should
              be possible to  reconstruct the social and political organization of Fort
              Ancient  groups and to gain insight into how they interact with their 
              environment.    The American midwest is of great interest to archaeologists 
              because of the large hierarchically organized societies which  emerged there.
              Impressive monumental architecture exists at sites  such as Cahokia and
              Moundsville and scientists wish to understand  the processes through which such
              complexity arose. The Fort  Ancient area is of interest because its inhabitants
              participated  in this general cultural tradition, yet for no clearcut reason 
              remained at a smaller scale level of organization. M s. Henderson  believes
              that through careful study of this negative case, new  understanding can be
              gained of broader societal processes.    This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed
              new light  on the development of social complexity and assist in the  training
              of a promising young scientist.
