Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9520489

Award Number: 9520489
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto R. Heredia   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Heredia the
              opportunity to obtain training in the analysis of linguistic structure and
              language processing at the University of California, San Diego.  Dr. Heredia's
              research interests have been on bilingual memory representations.  During his
              postdoctoral tenure he will learn new techniques for the `on-line` (real-time)
              study of language processing and be exposed to  new theoretical frameworks for
              understanding linguistic structure.  The research will involve comparing
              real-time processing in young bilinguals with performance by elderly adults and
              patients with Alzheimer's Disease.  Alzheimer's bilingual subjects will be
              tested to see whether their memory deficits are due to the deterioration of
              their memory structures, or alternatively, as a result of their memory
              processes deficits (e.g., data-driven vs. conceptually-driven processes).  In
              constructing bilingual or monolingual models of memory representation, the
              ultimate goal is to understand the architecture of cognition.  Both bilingual
              and monolingual research helps us to understand it.  Work on bilingual lexical
              and semantic processing attempts to understand bilingual semantic memory by
              applying and extending existing work on monolingual aging Alzheimer's patients
              to bilingualism.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
