Title       : Disseration Research: A Biomechanical Examination of the Evolution of Therapsid
               Hind Limb Posture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9520719

Award Number: 9520719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11200              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Hopson jhopson@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew A. Biewener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9520719    Modern  mammals differ from reptiles in having  an  upright,  rather
              than a sprawling stance.  This research will test the  hypothesis that
              therapsid dinosaurs, which were ancestral to  mammals,  were capable of
              switching between a sprawling  and  an  upright stance.  The biomechanically
              plausible range  of  fossil  therapsid  limb  postures will  be  calculated 
              from  measured  limb bone dimensions, estimated body weights,  and  model
              values of limb bone safety factors.  The safety factor  of  a bone is the ratio
              between its strength and the maximum  stress  to which it is normally exposed.
              In mammals,  safety  factors  of  limb bones range from two to four.  Weights 
              of  fossil  therapsids  will be estimated from  measurements  of  extant 
              reptiles and non-upright mammals.  Three-dimensional  analyses  of  locomotor
              forces and limb motion  in  reptiles  will  integrate  high  speed video, 
              recordings  from  force  platforms  during foot contact, and recordings of limb
               bone  strains.  If safety factors of reptile bones match those  of  mammals, 
              limb  postures for therapsids that  yield  similar  safety  factors  are
              biologically feasible.   Postures  that  yield  safety  factors  outside the 
              acceptable  range  were  probably  not part of therapsid biology.  The research
               will  contribute to knowledge of locomotor biomechanics in  living  reptiles 
              and  locomotor evolution in reptiles and  mammals.  The  biomechanical approach
              can be extended to other extinct  tetrapods,  and will place objective
              mechanical  constraints  on the reconstruction of fossil animals.
