Title       : Implementing an Environmental Geophysics Field Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9550974

Award Number: 9550974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estella A. Atekwana estella.atekwana@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Sauck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates geophysics into the undergraduate  hydrogeology and
              environmental programs.   A 5-week environmental  geophysics field course is
              being implemented and provides  students with hands-on experience and
              applications of geophysical  techniques necessary in resolving environmental,
              hydrogeological,  and engineering problems.   The aim is to provide the
              students  with the essential principles and experience in the integrated  use
              of several geophysical techniques and the ability to select  the appropriate
              method(s) in addressing different environmental  problems.   Students work on
              specific projects in order to  fulfill the following objectives:  acquire,
              process, and  interpret geophysical data, as well as provide written reports 
              for their projects.   This project specifically provides funding  for
              state-of-the-art geophysical instrumentation.  Several sites  within Southwest
              Michigan have been selected as teaching sites  for this new course.   Ongoing
              hydrologic investigations at these  sites have centered on aquifer
              characterization, contamination,  and aquifer vulnerability problems.   Using
              geophysical  techniques, students characterize an aquifer and define 
              contaminant plumes, thereby gaining valuable experience in the  use of
              geophysics in addressing environmental problems.
