Title       : SSC: "Camp SMART (Science, Math and Relevant Technology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9550768

Award Number: 9550768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia Hedden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Girls Inc, of Metro Dallas
	      3107 Cole Ave
	      Dallas, TX  752041303    214/941-0811

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Girls Incorporate of Metropolitan Dallas requests a 3-year grant  beginning in
              1996 for Camp SMART (Science, Math and Relevant  Technology).  The camp is a
              collaborative project between Girls  Incorporated of Metropolitan Dallas, a
              nonprofit agency serving  adolescent girls, and the Hockaday School, a private
              girls' school.   Camp SMART is a math and science study program for minority
              girls  entering grades seven through nine.  Objectives includes:  o    To
              capture and increase participants' interest in mathematics,       the sciences
              and the technological applications of both;    o    To increase participants'
              awareness of career opportunities in       scientific, mathematical
              technological fields;    o    To provide participants with minority women role
              models, thus       helping them see themselves as scientists and
              mathematicians;    o    To improve participants' academic performance through
              exposure       to positive role models, specific instruction in study and      
              problem solving skills, and provision of support through the       academic
              year;    o    To enroll 45 minority participants annually.    Methods to be
              employed include a 4-week summer program and  activities throughout the
              academic year.  The summer program  consists of: 1) four 45-minute classes each
              morning in mathematics,  science, computers, and study and literacy skills; and
              2) an  afternoon seminar on career exploration, which includes field trips  and
              presentations by professionals working in science and math  careers.  During
              the academic year, Camp SMART participants will  meet periodically for
              activities such as presentations by math and  science professionals and visits
              to local colleges.  Numerous  opportunities will be available throughout the
              course of the  project for participants to discuss their attitudes toward math
              and  science and changes in those attitudes resulting from participation  in
              Camp SMART.    Camp SMART contributes to the advancement of knowledge and 
              education by providing opportunities for i ntensive study of math  and science
              in unique environment.  The project opens opportunities  for minority girls to
              excel by providing them with hands-on  experiences with math and science as
              well as interactions with  people working in those fields.  ***
