Title       : Woksape (Knowledge)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9550533

Award Number: 9550533
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10960977           (Estimated)
Investigator: John Haas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oglala Lakota College
	      P.O. Box 490
	      Kyle, SD  577520490    605/455-2321

NSF Program : 1582      MODEL INST OF EXCELL NON-RESER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550533  Gagnon    VISION AND GOALS: Oglala Lakota College will create an 
              opportunity for SEM education which does not now exist through  Tribal or
              mainstream educational institutions.    PROGRAMS: Oglala Lakota College and
              Sinte Gleska University will  develop and administer bachelor's degree programs
              in  Environmental Science and Software Engineering, and a  pre-engineering
              associate degree in science. The degree programs  will be extended to Cheyenne
              River, Standing Rock, and Sisseton  Wahpeton Community Colleges through a
              distance learning mode.  These Tribal Institutions, collectively called the
              Oyate  Consortium, are Tribally chartered, and serve distinct American  Indian
              populations - a population which is significantly  underrepresented in SEM
              education. The model developed can be  easily replicated in the other
              twenty-six Tribal Colleges.    MANAGEMENT: Core management will consist of a
              Principal  Investigator, a SEM Curriculum Specialist/Co-Principal 
              Investigator, and the Sinte Gleska Site Coordinator and Vice  President. In
              years two to five site coordinators from the three  other Consortium member
              colleges will join the team. The  Principal Investigator will report directly
              to the OLC President.    SPECIAL FEATURES: Oglala Lakota College and Sinte
              Gleska  University, the only accredited graduate and four-year degree  granting
              Tribal Institutions, have recently gained land-grant  college status.    The
              Oyate Consortium is unique because of strong collaboration  among Tribal
              colleges and with other universities and industry.  This initiative, the first
              ever for Tribal College SEM program  development, has potential for unusual
              impact because Tribal  Colleges are community and nation-builders with the
              special  mission of helping tribes which are sovereign nations, become  more
              self-sufficient.    Oyate Tribal Colleges are unique because they reach
              students who  are not served adequately by ordinary universities. These are 
              students who live and work on geographically isolated  reserva tions, hold
              cultural values not appreciated by mainstream  institutions, or who have
              extensive family responsibilities.    The NSF Model Institutions for Excellence
              initiative offers a  unique opportunity for the Oyate Tribal Colleges and their
               twenty-six Tribal counterparts to reach the underrepresented  American Indian
              students, and to bring academic and technical  expertise to Tribal nations in
              ways that may make the difference  between extinction and tribal
              self-sufficiency.
