Title       : SSC: UCSC Summer Marine Science and Mathematics Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9550695

Award Number: 9550695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99398              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith H. McCarrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the auspices of the UC Urban Community-School Collaborative,  the Summer
              Session Office of the University of California Santa  Cruz (UCSC), in
              collaboration with the Monterey Peninsula Unified  School District (MPUSD), is
              developing a comprehensive Marine  Science/Mathematics Institute for African
              American students  entering or currently in the 9th Grade.  A Participants will
              be  selected from Seaside and Monterey High Schools.  The 5-week  residential
              summer program will be held on the campus of the  University of California
              Santa Cruz, Santa CA.  The inquiry based  core curriculum of math and science
              will incorporate four main  themes:  Scale and Structure, Energy, Stability and
              Change and  Systems and Interactions.  Discussions will focus on the natural 
              history, biology, ecology and geology of the Monterey Bay National  Marine. 
              The pedagogical emphasis will be on cooperative learning  while "doing
              science."  Close, Meaningful interactions with  university faculty and students
              during laboratory and field  experiences will be integral components of the
              summer and academic  year programs.  The summer curriculum will be augmented by
              courses  in library research techniques, work processing and spread sheet 
              operations and On-line information retrieval systems.  The  innovative
              Residential Program will include field trips and  workshops on academic/career
              development, conflict mediation,  developing interpersonal skills, time
              management and study skills.   The year-round follow up program will include
              mentorship/tutorial  programs, internships and parental information, education
              and  support services.  The active participation of high school teachers  from
              both schools during both the summer and academic year  programs, will provide a
              vital link to the students year round and  facilitate monitoring of the
              participants' academic progress.  ***
