Title       : Enhanced Plastic Recycling Experiments to Further Improve Undergraduate
               Materials Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9550857

Award Number: 9550857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Liu cfpl@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom L. Waskom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ray E. Richarson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since plastics account for approximately 20 percent of the  landfill volume,
              recycling plastics will play a significant role  in reducing solid waste flow
              to the already congested landfills  in the nation.   Students must be educated
              in the methods to  recycle plastics and to produce products from recycled
              materials  in order to protect the environment.  This project enhances 
              materials recycling experiments by adding a drying experiment, an  injection
              molding process, and a study of melt property for  recycled plastics.   Over
              several courses, and with an  integrative overview at each stage, students are
              being involved  in a series of plastic recycling experiments.  These
              experiments  include collecting and cleaning postconsumer containers, 
              grinding, extrusion compounding and pelletizing, drying,  injection molding,
              controlling melt behavior, and testing the  final properties for recycled
              plastics.   Students are now able  to produce products from recycled plastics
              with an injection  molding machine, to control the quality, and to improve 
              efficiency of the processing of the recycled materials.  Students  in the
              technology majors and non-science-majors can gain  fundamental understanding
              and practical experience through this  series of experiments.   They are
              educated with knowledgeable  insights of reducing, reusing, and recycling
              plastics to protect  our environment and to conserve natural resources.   This
              project  could serve as a model of materials education in the nation for 
              undergraduate students concerning the materials and product  cycles and their
              impact on the environment.
