Title       : VPW: Homotopy Methods for Analysis and Simulation of Electronic Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9550153

Award Number: 9550153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ljiljana Trajkovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,5936,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Finding dc operating points, steady state, and transient responses  of
              electronic circuits are essenntial tasks in electrical circuit  simulation and
              involve nonlinear differential/algebraic equations.   Traditional methods for
              solving such systems of equations often  fail, are difficult to converge, and,
              often cannot find all the  solutions.  Dr. Trajkovic will investigate the
              application of  homotopy methods to solving nonlinear equations describing
              power  electronic and switching circuits and power systems flow equations, 
              that traditionally pose simulation difficulties.  Experiments with  homotopies
              may lead to the development of better circuit simulation  tools and to better
              understanding of relationships between homotopy  methods and the behavior of
              nonlinear circuits.  Dr. Trajkovic will  spend three months with the Electrical
              Engineering Department at  the University of Wuppertal, Germany where she will
              collaborate  with Professor Wolfgang Mathis and his students.  Their "Theory
              and  Computer Aided Design of Electronic Circuits " group actively  pursues
              research in circuit theory and simulation.  This will be a  continuation of her
              research activities at Berkeley, with emphasis  on theoretical work based on
              experiments with various homotopies.    Interactive activities include: 
              teaching a graduate course in  "Advanced Circuit Theory" that will introduce
              students to  analytical results that provide insights and understanding of 
              complex behavior of electronic circuits; holding a workshop/seminar  series on
              "Application of Homotopy Methods in Solving Engineering  Problems," with
              special emphasis on circuit simulation and solving  equations describing
              nonlinear circuits; and organizing informal  workshops where female students
              make presentations and get advice  about their research and career goals.
