Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9550594

Award Number: 9550594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Jacobsen jacobsen@ea.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique A. Ainsworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              African American, American Indian, and Latino students are severely 
              underrepresentated in the Los Angeles Unified School District's  (LAUSD)
              advanced math and science sequence.  Of the approximately  640,000 minority
              student who start out in the educational pipeline,  1% transition to calculus,
              and fewer than 3% take physics.  Of  those who complete these courses, few
              students meet scholastic  standards for admission to an engineering or science
              major in the  University of California system.    The UCLA School of
              Engineering and Applied Science and the LAUSD  Urban Systemic Initiative will
              implement a six-week summer and 12-  week academic year, commuter and Summer
              Science Camp for 40 African  American, American Indian, and Latino students in
              eight and ninth  grade.  Our major goal is to increase students' access to 
              educational experiences that: 1) set high expectations; 2) enhance  competence
              in advance math and science; 3) provide a instructional  approach that unifies
              the learning of math, science, and  technology; and 4) promote aspirations for
              professions in technical  careers.  Proposed activities include:    Math
              Connections:  A math curriculum emphasizing the  interrelationship algebra,
              geometry, and technology through group  discussions, computer exercises, and
              collaborative problem-solving  workshops.    Science Project:  Rocketry and Sea
              Vessels.  Two projects will form  the thematic focus to introduce the
              scientific process and explore  applications in team-oriented physics, math and
              related careers.   Each project will involve students in physics
              demonstrations,  interactive hands-on laboratory activities, field excursions
              to  industrial sites, and lectures from quest speaker and specialists  in
              various fields.    Career Explorations and Parent Involvement:  Major features:
                Educational planning sessions, career fair, college day,  mentorships, role
              model quests speakers, and five family day  events.    Follow-up:  Support from
              the Information Technology Division of the  LAUSD wi ll ensure long-range
              tracking through the first year of  college.  Academic year Saturday Academies
              will reinforcement and  feedback on student course enrollment and performance. 
              ***
