Title       : SSC: "Delaware State University Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9550751

Award Number: 9550751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustav Ofosu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mildred D. Ofosu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Delaware State University
	      1200 N. Dupont Highway
	      Dover, DE  199012277    302/736-4901

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals of the Delaware State University Summer Science Camp are  to increase
              students awareness of mathematics and science careers,  to develop a deep
              appreciation for mathematics and science in  underrepresented minority students
              (African-Americans, Native  Americans and Hispanics), to improve and strengthen
              students  academic preparation in science and mathematics.  The objectives  are
              to build the confidence levels of students so positive  attitudes will
              gradually replace negative attitudes toward science  and mathematics, to
              maintain the students high interest in science  and mathematics by mentoring,
              counseling and continuing with  follow-up activities during the academic year.
              to develop  participatory laboratory activities, to expose students to 
              professional role models through interactions with local scientists  and
              mathematicians, to use the team approach to expose students to  scientific
              principles, laws and theories via group science  projects, to increase the
              depth of the student's prior experiences  in reading interpreting and
              communication through the individual  tutorial conference technique, and to
              urge parent to become more  involved in their children education.  The methods
              to be employed  are hands-on classroom activities, computer-assisted
              instruction in  each subject area, science exploratory field trips and
              experimental  demonstrations in research laboratories.  Local scientists, SSC 
              staff, those in industries, undergraduates will serve as role  models. 
              Students will get the opportunity to present their science  projects to the
              community and will be engaged in follow-up  activities during the academic
              year.  There is expected to be an  increase in underrepresented minorities who
              are committed to  attending graduate school and obtaining Ph.D. degree in
              Science,  Mathematics and Engineering. The challenge is to provide productive 
              citizens that are versatile and well-trained to met the nation's  need of
              scientists.  ***
