Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp With SPACES and Schooner"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9550693

Award Number: 9550693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42258              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Rosenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Kasper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Newlan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Schooner Inc
	      60 South Water Street
	      New Haven, CT  065192822    203/865-1737

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As we move into the 21st century, science and technology play an  increasingly
              important role in all aspects of our society;  therefore, it is imperative that
              our future decision-makers develop  a positive attitude toward solving problems
              through science  education as well as to comprehend the impact of science and 
              technology on the individual, culture and society.    The New Haven SPACES
              Initiative will identify 50 youth with at-risk  factors operating in their
              personal lives.  They will be enrolled  in the New Haven SPACES Initiative and
              participate in a three-level  program designed to develop positive attitudes in
              personal growth,  career development and interpersonal and global relations.   
              The proposed six-week summer camp will provide an intensive hands-  on
              experience with science and math activities for youth entering  the seventh,
              eight and ninth grades.  An important part of the  program will focus on
              aquatic ecology featuring canoe trips down  the Quinnipiac River to Long Island
              Sound.  The activities planned  for such a camp would accomplish the following
              objectives:   Positive Youth Development- Experiential education has proven 
              effective for knowledge gain and development of positive attitudes  and life
              skills.  This program would provide participants  development opportunities
              that enhance positive self-esteem,  feelings of accomplishment, responsible
              decision-making and problem  solving, and communication and personal management
              skills.  Improve  Science and Math Literacy- The summer camp setting will
              create and  informal participatory setting within which to foster 
              scientifically literate individuals who will effectively use their  science
              education to make wise decisions and become responsible,  problem-solving
              citizens.  Through active participation, youth will  learn how science and math
              relate to their lives and how they, as  individuals, impact their environment. 
              By using operational  processes of science and math in informal settings, the 
              participants will develop  a positive attitude toward learning.   Career
              Preparation-The activities planned will allow participants  to explore a
              variety of science and math careers.  Interaction with  professionals in these
              fields will enhance their experience and  knowledge.  Improved literacy skills
              will prepare participants for  productive employment in the fields of science
              and math  ***
