Title       : SSC: "Bennett College Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9550703

Award Number: 9550703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry A. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bennett College
	      East Washington and Benne
	      Greensboro, NC  27420    919/273-4431

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bennett College, a private, United Methodist Church affiliated,  four-year
              liberal Arts institution for women, located in  Greensboro, North Carolina,
              proposes to address the issues related  to the crisis in mathematics and
              science education for minorities  through the development and implementation of
              a year-round  Mathematics, Science and Technology Program for fifty middle
              school  students, seventh through ninth grade each year of the grant.  
              Participants will be recommended by area teachers, counselors and  parents. 
              The project which features a six-week summer camp and an  academic year
              Saturday program will include classroom, laboratory  and enrichment activities,
              provide self-paced mathematics and  sciences instruction, research activities,
              individualized tutoring,  outreach services, mentoring, life management skills
              development,  parent involvement and appropriate support systems and utilizes 
              communications technology, audio-tutorial and computer assisted  instructional
              techniques.    The staff will be comprised of public school and Bennett College
               mathematics and science instructors.  Local mathematicians and  scientists who
              will serve as role models, presenters and mentors.   Bennett College
              mathematics and science honor students will serve  as tutors, and laboratory
              and residence assistants.    The College has developed a comprehensive data
              base for project  assessment and evaluation.  The Office of Grants and
              Contracts  Management will conduct 2 internal programmatic and budgetary 
              evaluations per year.  An external evaluator will conduct both  formative and
              summative evaluations.  ***
