Title       : Computer-Assisted Interactive Calculus at Virginia Wesleyan College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9550934

Award Number: 9550934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Fanney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Garry E. Noe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Wesleyan College
	      1584 Wesleyan Drive
	      Norfolk, VA  23502    757/455-3202

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Thomas R. Fanney                                   DUE 9550934  Virginia
              Wesleyan College                          FY1995 $ 28,083  Norfolk, VA  23502  
                                            ILI - Instrumentation                            
                                       Project:                                              
                     Mathematics    Title: Computer-Assisted Interactive Calculus at Virginia
                        Wesleyan College           The Virginia Wesleyan College Department
              of Mathematics and  Computer Science is presently incorporating some of the
              many  innovative ideas stemming from the calculus reform movement into  its own
              curriculum, and is shifting from more traditional teaching  methods to those
              involving more experimentation and discovery in  the classroom.  The
              Department, which consists of six full-time  teaching faculty and several
              adjuncts, serves a sizable fraction of  the general student body through small
              sections of its introductory  courses, as well as a modest but talented group
              of majors in  mathematics and computer science.  In recent years the department
               has kept abreast of reform efforts advocating experiences that make 
              mathematics more relevant and interesting to the students, and has  begun to
              adopt these ideas in its classrooms, in part through the  use of graphing
              calculators and computer software.  It is now  preparing to take another step
              by offering, at the precalculus and  calculus level, laboratory courses styled
              after those in the  natural sciences.  The department is asking for aid in
              funding the  creation of a laboratory classroom to be used for hands-on, 
              computer-enhanced instruction of mathematics, physics, and computer  science
              courses.  This room would be equipped with a network of 13  Pentium
              microcomputer workstations, a central file server, a color  projector, and
              MAPLE and MATHCAD, the principle software  instructional tools.  The room would
              initially serve as the meeting  place for all calculus sections and selected
              precalculus sections.   The facility wou ld also be available to instructors of
              other math  and scienae courses and would ultimately be used in teaching most 
              upper-level mathematics courses as well.         VWC also has tutoring and
              mentoring outreach programs with  area K-12 schools that could benefit from the
              availability of such  a computer classroom.  The college's enrichment programs
              for these  at-risk students would be significantly enhanced in such a 
              technologically-advanced teaching environment.  Members of the  math/cs
              department have also expressed interest in future summer  math workshops that
              introduce contemporary teaching technologies to  area public school teachers.
