Title       : Center For Urban Science Education Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2001   
File        : a9550038

Award Number: 9550038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Mason                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5898444            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith O. Sandler jsandler@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Worth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/969-7100

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550038  Sandler    Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC) in collaboration
              with  Inverness Reqearch Associates and Horizon Research, Inc., will  form a
              collaborative with education and community leaders who are  currently involved
              in long-term efforts to reform science  education.  Over five years, the Center
              will support the  initiation, implementation, and institutionalization of
              district-  wide, K-8 science education reform efforts in school districts 
              nationwide.    The primarily activities of the Center will be Site-specific 
              consultation and support, and Institutes and Seminars focusing on  critical
              issues, common interests and role-specific challenges.  These institutes will
              provide opportunities for participants to  capitalize on cross-district sharing
              and collaboration.    Specifically the Center will:    1) Provide assistance,
              consultation and professional development  activities for at least 15 large
              school districts who are  beginning the science education reform process.  The
              Center will  help them to develop and effectively implement a strategic plan 
              for district-wide science reform focusing on building leadership  capacity to
              sustain and institutionalize quality science  instruction.  2) Provide
              professional development activities for districts with  reform programs already
              in progress.  These cities will  participate in the Center as leaders, as well
              as, participants in  professional development opportunities.  3) Develop and
              support a cadre of education leaders from the  districts participating in
              Center activities.  These specialists  will become leaders for others
              implementing science education  reform nationwide.  4)Establish a coalition
              among all participating districts who are  engaged in district-wide reform of
              science so that by the end of  the five years, there will be a self-sustaining
              permanent network  of district communicating with one another and working
              together  with the capacity to provide continuing assistance to additional 
              districts attempting to reform th eir science education programs.    The cost
              sharing for the project will be 34% of the NSF portion.  ***
