Title       : SSC: "Loyola/Aspira Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9550406

Award Number: 9550406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Betty Ruth Jones                        
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale F. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric R. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Loyola University Chicago in conjunction with Aspira of Illinois,  will offer a
              bilingual (English/Spanish) six week, commuter Summer  Science Camp integrating
              computer science, engineering, and physics  for thirty-five Hispanic middle
              school students.  The program  continues with a thirteen-week academic year
              follow-up.      The interdisciplinary activities begin with students being 
              introduced to basic computer architecture, after which they  assemble
              IBM-compatible computers for subsequently use in the  program.  Each week, the
              students experiment in three distinct  labs:  Digital electronics, Engineering
              design and control, and  Computer science programming, where computer concepts
              are  introduced through programming in Pascal language.  The summer  session
              includes career-oriented field trips to the facilities of  Argonne National
              Laboratories, Northwestern University, Chicago  Research & Trade (a securities
              trading firm), and People's Gas.   Students are paid a $120 stipend to cover
              their transportation  expenses and are granted a high school course credit
              through the  Chicago Public Schools.    Loyola/Aspira SSC replicates the DOE
              Loyola/Aspira Pre-Freshman  Enrichment Project (PREP), that in turn is a
              bilingual version of  an NSF Young Scholars Project redesigned for younger
              students.  The  NSF Young Scholars Project has already significantly affected 
              minority representation in computer science studies in Illinois.   
              Loyola/Aspira SSC's overall mission is to intellectually nurture  Hispanic
              students of limited opportunity, to provide them with  interest-stimulating
              experiences that enable and motivate them to  take college preparatory courses
              in science, engineering, and  mathematics, and to promote ultimately their
              entry into  sophisticated SEM careers.  ***
