Title       : PPD/MP: Access to English and Science Outreach Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9550468

Award Number: 9550468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry G. Lang HGL9008@RIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Albertini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Rochester Institute of Technology will conduct a three-year  project
              demonstrating techniques to increase participation of  deaf students in science
              education and career development.  The  primary premise of the project is that
              deaf students will  progress more rapidly in science education when they have
              full  access to the content and language of science and to information 
              concerning the past accomplishments of deaf people in scientific  professions. 
              The primary goal of the project is to improve  access to science for deaf
              students by fusing best teaching  practices used with deaf students from both
              science and English  language teaching.  The project will consist of the design
              and  delivery of regional workshops, the creation of a national  network of
              science teachers, and the evaluation and investigation  of change in teaching
              and learning science.  The regional  workshops will provide science teachers of
              deaf students in  mainstream and residential schools with a set of
              instructional  strategies and materials that integrate visual and interactive 
              presentations of science principles with explicit and interactive  uses of
              scientific English.  The specific goals are:  (1) to  develop and deliver a
              coherent set of instructional strategies  that may be used to teach the content
              and language of science to  deaf students; (2) to increase deaf students'
              access to  information about the accomplishments of deaf women and men in 
              scientific professions; and (3) to disseminate an effective  intervention model
              for enhancing science learning by deaf  students.  Regional workshops
              consisting of a two-day series of  seven sessions will be designed and
              implemented.  The attitude  and communication barriers deaf science students
              and deaf  scientists face will be described and the science teacher's roles  in
              breaking down these barriers will be presented.  Science  teachers will learn
              to deal effectively with the language  dimensions of science teaching when both
              deaf and hearing  students are in the cl assroom.  Finally, the training will
              focus  on critical thinking skills and the importance of visual and  hands-on
              experiences in the teaching of science principles.   Participants of each
              regional workshop will be expected to  identify target science principles
              (which appear difficult for  deaf students to learn) and best practices (which
              appear  successful with deaf students in science classrooms).  The target 
              principles will become the focus of prototype mini-lessons as  participants
              begin applying the strategies learned in the  regional workshop.  Evaluation of
              the effectiveness of the mini-  lessons (and strategies) will begin after each
              workshop.   Information will be disseminated through publications, conference 
              presentations, and a newsletter for the regional workshop  participants and
              other interested science teachers.
