Title       : The Business Agenda and School Reform: A Case Study of Charlotte, North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : RED 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9550763

Award Number: 9550763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roslyn A. Mickelson rmicklsn@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7262      RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project examines one community's efforts to reform local  education in light
              of the business critique of public schools.  the  research draws upon three
              distinct bodies of scholarship and  theory: the nature and process of school
              reform, the relationship  between workforce skills and economic productivity,
              and student  resistance to schooling.  Extending the principal investigator's 
              previous NSF funded study of these topics in one community,  Charlotte, North
              Carolina.  The study has three main goals: (1) to  identify the local labor
              force needs and to assess to what extent  the available workforce, especially
              noncollege-bound entry-level  workers, currently meets these needs; (2) to
              identify and describe  the actual reforms enacted in the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
              school  District since the late 1980s and to evaluate the effects of the 
              reforms with particular attention to the business critique of  schooling
              vis-a-vis workforce preparation, any overall improvement  in educational
              quality, and the educational equity effects of the  reforms for diverse
              populations of students in the district; and  (3) to assess adolescents'
              awareness of the labor force  opportunities which await them and to model ho
              these perceptions  shape their high school performance.  the significance of
              this  research lies in its uniqueness.  since the 1980s, the vocal and  active
              business community has articulated its concerns that schools  remedy this
              situation.  since then the Charlotte-Mecklenburg  Schools have undergone
              massive restructuring  No other study of  business-inspired school reform has
              holistically examined  restructuring, through the reform process, to an
              assessment of the  outcomes of the reforms.  Moreover, rarely does any analysis
              of  reforms as to their view of the relationship between schooling and  work
              and the role these perceptions play in their high school  performance.  thus,
              Charlotte can serve as a strategic site or a  critical case study for an
              exploration of these issues.
