Title       : Exploratorium Institute for Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9550098

Award Number: 9550098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5999680            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Rankin lynnr@exploratorium.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Kluger-Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550098  Rankin    With this project the exploratorium creates a national
              leadership  institute, the Exploratorium Institute for Inquiry, which  combines
              its extraordinary facilities and resources supporting  scientific inquiry with
              a "local laboratory" of Exploratorium-  stimulated district science education
              reform projects.  Designed  to foster high quality inquiry-based teaching and
              learning in the  nation's elementary schools, the Institute for Inquiry will 
              provide educators from across the country with advanced  professional
              development opportunities to augment science reform  initiatives already
              underway as well as support the development  of inquiry innovation in the local
              laboratory.  The five year  project will create a nexus of practitioners
              committed to  changing elementary school science and provide a gathering place 
              to integrate the experiences, ideas and insights of the nation's  inquiry
              designers and implementers.    Through a unique combination of theory and
              practice, the  Institute will give at least 800 elementary educators, from all 
              strata of the field -- such as lead and resource teachers,  science resource
              teachers, administrators, informal science  educators, principal investigators
              of science education reform  projects, scientists, university educators and
              national leaders  in the field -- an unusual and powerful opportunity to
              explore  inquiry-based teaching and learning.  Its components include two  and
              three week workshops designed to provide professional  developers with in-depth
              inquiry experiences in science and  learning, four day seminars for reform
              implementers with initial  exposure to inquiry instruction, and two day forums
              with provide  platforms for vigorous debate and review by national leaders on 
              critical topics in inquiry.  These activities will build upon a  local
              laboratory of inquiry innovation including advanced inquiry  projects,
              Exploratorium associate schools practicing inquiry, and  classroom teacher
              workshops.  An ongoing Inquiry Network for  p articipants will consist of an
              annual proceedings publication  and an Internet-based electronic communication
              network.    The cost sharing is 42% of the NSF award.  ***
