Title       : Development of Hydrogeologic Component of the Geology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9550929

Award Number: 9550929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Niemitz niemitz@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus M. Key  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides funds to install an educational water well  field
              laboratory for the purposes of teaching hydrogeologic  principles, groundwater
              resource evaluation, and contaminant  remediation.   The field consists of five
              wells variously spaced  and 200 feet deep.   The wells are fully instrumented
              to permit  measurement of aquifer hydraulics in a heterogeneous,  anisotropic,
              unconfined aquifer, as well as long-term monitoring  of water quality, static
              water level, and local precipitation.    The key instrumentation is an in situ
              water level  transducer/water quality probe/precipitation gauge datalogging 
              system that allows monitoring on a variety of time scales and  downloading to a
              portable computer for further analysis on and  off site.   This faaility
              permits the university to expand the  hydrogeology component of the geology and
              environmental science  curriculum at introductory and upper course levels at a
              time when  many students are entering the hydrogeology job and graduate  school
              market.   Hydrogeologic principles and their application  to water resources
              management and contaminant remediation are  being taught through a series of
              discovery laboratories at the  well field site.   The emphasis is placed on
              directed activities  that include the collection, analysis, and interpretation
              of  hydrogeologic data commonly preformed by a professional  hydrogeologist.  
              The level of sophistication increases at each  course level in the curriculum. 
               Introductory students explore  the surface and subsurface processes in the
              hydrologic cycle.    Upper-level students perform and evaluate pump/slug tests,
              water  sampling and chemical analysis, contaminant plume simulation,  well
              field siting methods, and geophysical logging techniques.    Student
              independent research projects can take advantage of the  unique site location
              between a perennial groundwater feed stream,  impermeable diabase dikes, and
              high-volume springs.
