Title       : Trace Fossils and Ichnofabric of the Kope-Corryville Sequence in the Type
               Cincinnatian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9550399

Award Number: 9550399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62572              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Droser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In spite of their obvious potential utility, trace fossils and  ichnofabric have
              been incorporated only rarely into stratigraphic  analyses.  For their
              potential to be fully realized, a predictive  model based on all aspects of the
              ichnological record must be  developed within a well-constrained stratigraphic
              horizon.  The  purpose of this research is to document discrete trace fossils
              and  their distributions, record ichnofabric indices, and describe the 
              ichnofabric from the Cincinnatian Kope-Corryville succession.  The  sequence
              and cyclo-stratigraphy of these strata have received  considerable attention in
              the past ten years and a high resolution  choronostratigraphic study is
              currently underway.  As a result, a  well constrained stratigraphic framework
              has emerged providing an  ideal opportunity to test the utility of the
              ichnological record in  stratigraphic analyses.  These strata have an
              additional advantage;  the Ordovician represents a critical time in the history
              during  this time.  This study will aid in our understanding of the history  of
              the benthic community during the Ordovician radiation.  Dr.  Droser will also
              attend the Third International Ichnofabric  Workshop at the University of
              Lopenhagen, Denmark and participate  in field trips that include visits to
              similar age strata to the  Cincinnationa Kope-Corryville succession but that
              represent very  different environmental conditions of deposition.    The
              interactive activities consist of five main facets:  teaching  one
              graduate-upper level undergraduate seminar in ichnology;  participating in
              additional paleontology and departmental seminars;  actively involving
              students, particularly undergraduates, in  research; leading general department
              field trips; and leading field  trips for middle school and high school museum
              volunteers at the  Cincinnati Museum of Natural History.
