Title       : The Use of an Automated Ion Analyzer in an Environmental Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9550818

Award Number: 9550818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Murray MURRAYTE@ETOWN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elizabethtown College
	      
	      Elizabethtown, PA  17022    717/367-1151

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many of the environmental problems facing the world today involve  inorganic
              contaminants (heavy metals, acid rain, acid mine  drainage, agricultural
              pollutants).   Undergraduate instruction  in environmental science must provide
              a means for investigating  these problems.   The use of an automated ion
              analyzer in  environmental laboratory courses and in student research projects 
              enables students to pursue questions that they were unable to  investigate with
              previous analytical techniques.   The LACHAT  flow injection automated ion
              analyzer has the capability to  analyze samples from different media for both
              cations and anions,  and is expandable to meet the needs of student research 
              interests.   The equipment is widely used in the private and  public sectors
              and provides students with important training on  equipment they will likely
              encounter upon graduation.   In  addition, the quantity and quality of student
              research projects  is improving, with timely studies of environmental problems 
              appropriate to the college setting in Pennsylvania.   The  students have access
              to agriculturally and industrially impacted  streams, lakes receiving acidic
              deposition and excess nutrient  loading, and acidic mine drainage sites.   The
              increase in  research opportunities for students can help them in their 
              postgraduation plans, whether they be in environmentally related  employment,
              or in graduate programs.
