Title       : SSC: "Roanoke River Valley Consortium Summer Science Camp (R2VCS2C)"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9550778

Award Number: 9550778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley Turnage   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Daly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennie Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Slemenda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roanoke Val Con Warren Co
	      109 Cousin Lucy's Lane
	      Warrenton, NC  27589    919/257-3184

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Roanoke River Valley Consortium which consist of five  predominately
              minority school systems located in rural poverty-  stricken Northern North
              Carolina in partnership with North Carolina  Central University (HBCU) proposes
              to offer a comprehensive camp  program.  The goals are to create a cohort of
              students (150 eight  grade African Americans over three years) and provide them
              a  foundation for lifelong interest in science and mathematics and to 
              encourage them to consider Science/Mathematics/Engineering/  Technology (SMET)
              as possible career choices.  The strategies to be  employed consist of a four
              week residential camp and an innovative  academic year follow-up program.  The
              residential camp will focus  on: the physical science discipline infused with
              mathematics and  integrated with life and earth science; career exploration and
               experiments in science laboratory with computer application.  Field  trips
              will reinforce classroom and lab work.  Innovative academic  year follow-up
              activities will consist of multi-year activities for  parents for their support
              and to increase students' confidence in  their academic abilities; camp-in
              field trip at North Carolina Life  and Science Museum; after school monthly
              meetings with master  teacher for career counseling and ongoing research; a
              series of six  Saturday Seminars with the mentor/assistant and master teacher 
              throughout the year for academic follow-up and assistance with  research; a
              mentorship program for "mentee" shadowing in the  workplace; the publication of
              biannual newsletter; and, the  establishment of R2VCS2C alumni group for
              continued career  counseling and involvement.  The significance of implementing
               R2VCS2C will show students' increase in: the science and  mathematics
              "pipeline" of well-prepared minority high school  graduates continuation in
              school; choosing to study more math and  science; academic performance in the
              sciences and mathematics; and,  an increase in the "pool" of potential
              scientists and  mathematicians for th e workforce.  ***
