Title       : Interactive Tools for the Introductory Physics Laboratory as the Basis for an
               Integrated Workshop Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9550932

Award Number: 9550932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard W. Wall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil Fleishon  (Principal Investigator former)
              Nilgun Sungar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter D. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides instrumentation to support a calculus- based  introductory
              physics workshop whose format and content is  extended to a "supercourse,"
              taught by a multidisciplinary  faculty team, that integrates the material found
              in the common  lower division science/mathematics/engineering core curriculum. 
                The course utilizes interactive technologies to produce a highly  visual and
              dynamic environment, creating interest and excitement  to motivate and to
              engender positive attitudes toward the  learning experience.   The goal is the
              development of cognitive  skills built on a firm conceptual base.   Learning is
              example  driven, inductively leading from observation of phenomena to  general
              principle.   The interplay of pictorial, graphical,  numerical, verbal, and
              analytic approaches to the analysis of  physical systems is stressed.   
              Coordinated activities utilize  locally developed and commercially available
              computer-based  tools.   The core technologies utilized are (1) data collection
               and display by interface to external probes, (2) video  digitization and
              analysis, and (3) systems modeling through  simulation.   Libraries of
              self-guided auxiliary activities allow  flexible paths of exploration for
              students of different  abilities.   Student and instructor support materials
              are  designed as coordinated standalone modules to ensure  transportability and
              flexible use of curricular elements in  different teaching contexts.
