Title       : AMP: Heartland's Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9550704

Award Number: 9550704
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5603386            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Sampson sampsonc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550704  Sampson    The Heartland's Alliance for Minority Participation  (AMP)
              program is a collaborative effort of eleven midwestern  universities and
              colleges whose purpose is to substantially  increase the quality and quantity
              of minority students receiving  baccalaureate degrees in science, engineering
              and mathematics  (SEM), and subsequently, to increase the number of minority 
              students pursuing graduate degrees.  There are two major  objectives of the
              Alliance:  to increase by 15 percent the number  of minorities SEM
              baccalaureate degree recipients in  participating institutions and to increase
              by 50 percent the  number of minorities at participating institutions who  earn
              doctorates in SEM disciplines in the next 10 years.    The Pre-college Outreach
              Program will emphasize the importance of  science and mathematics education in
              elementary and secondary  public schools and encourage high-ability minority
              students to  pursue SEM degrees.    The Post-secondary/Undergraduate transition
              Program will assist  SEM minority students in the transitions from high schools
              and  community colleges to four-year institutions.  This tier features 
              readiness seminars, tutorial assistance, support teams, summer  research
              opportunities and related enrichment activities,  designed to ensure the
              success of these students.    The Graduates Transition Program of study will be
              tailored to  individual needs, and include a dedicated mentor and financial 
              support during the post-baccalaureate year.  After successful  completion of
              the post-baccalaureate year, students will be  awarded fellowships to support
              their regular graduate study.  A  graduate fair will provide for additional
              minority recruitment to  the SEM programs of the participating research
              universities.
