Title       : Computer-Controlled Spectrometers in Undergraduate Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9550990

Award Number: 9550990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35283              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harmon B. Abrahamson harmon_abrahamson@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil F. Woolsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This addresses curricular needs by designing experiments to use 
              computer-controlled spectrophotometric instrumentation in the  undergraduate
              laboratory at all levels, for both majors and  nonmajors.   This enables
              students to receive the desired  exposure to these methods through hands-on
              use.  Two different  types of spectrometer are being used.   Fourier transform 
              infrared (FT-IR) instruments are being used heavily in organic  chemistry and
              to a lesser extent in analytical chemistry courses.    The second type is a
              modernized emission spectrophotometer based  on an existing
              spectrophotofluorimeter.   This is being used for  emission measurements in the
              ultraviolet and visible regions of  the spectrum.   This spectrometer also
              serves as a detector in a  Raman spectroscopy experiment.   The fluorescence
              spectrometer is  being used mostly in general, physical, and analytical
              chemistry  laboratories.   Both types of spectrometer allow ready spectral 
              subtraction and database searching and bring the advantages of  signal
              averaging and easy manipulation of spectra.   The  fluorescence data system
              also allows the determination of kinetic  parameters from time-varying data
              Both types of instrument are  being integrated into the laboratory courses
              serving chemistry  and chemical engineering majors at all levels from general 
              chemistry to senior research.
