Title       : Antibodies as Tools in Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9550918

Award Number: 9550918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Sullivan Sullivac@ac.grin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biology is implementing a revised curriculum  that emphasizes
              the process of science through investigative  laboratories.   Students begin
              their study of biology with  courses in Structure and Function of Organisms and
              Evolution and  Ecology in the first year.   In the second year, students take 
              courses in Molecular Genetics and The Biology of Cells.   The  latter course,
              which will emphasize the roles of proteins in  cells, is one of the primary
              targets of curricular improvements.    A modern course in cell biology is being
              taught by emphasizing  how cells are studied.   Students who have learned many 
              applications of techniques in molecular genetics to study cells  from their
              prior coursework can now attend a new section on  antibodies as tools in cell
              biology in the new course.   For this  project, a cryostat prepares frozen
              sections quickly and easily  and preserves the antigenicity of proteins from
              various  specimens.   These frozen sections are then stained with  commercially
              available antibodies with a greater likelihood of  success than the old method
              of using paraffin-embedded material.    Use of antibodies as tools to study
              protein distribution is also  a major part of the laboratories in an
              upper-level course in  developmental biology, a summer program for minority
              high school  students, and research projects in both the biology and 
              psychology departments.   In addition the use of this modern  instrumentation,
              communication of results to other students will  be emphasized.   For this
              emphasis and for improvment of  students' training in light microscopy, a
              research-quality  teaching microscope equipped for fluorescence microscopy, 
              photomicroscopy, and video imaging is also being purchased.    This microscope
              makes it possible for groups of students to view  their results together
              instead of in isolation.   This new  microscope also allows students to have a
              permanent record of  their results for later analysis.
