Title       : EPR Investigation of the Effect of Ultrasonic Irradiation in Bacterial Biofilms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9550423

Award Number: 9550423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalya Rapoport   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is centered on the elucidation of the mechanisms  involved in the
              recently discovered strong synergistic effect  between ultrasound irradiation
              and antibiotic therapy on bacterial  cell killing in-vitro.  Preliminary
              results have been published   Pitt et al. 1994  and a US patent application was
              filed by Dr.  W.G. Pitt (University of Utah) for the Antimicrobial Delivery to 
              Bacterial Biofilms.  However, the mechanism producing this  important and
              promising phenomenon is unclear.      In the present project EPR technology is
              being applied to monitor  the effect of ultrasound on 1) biofilm permeability
              and 2) trans-  membrane transport into cells of two paramagnetic compounds 
              (Tempone and 16-doxylstearate) and a spin-labeled antibiotic 
              carboxy-proxyl-gentamicin.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa are used as a  model
              bacterium.  The effect of ultrasonic irradiation of various  frequencies and
              intensities on the permeability of bacterial  biofilms will be monitored using
              a specially designed permeation  cell.  The possible disruption of bacterial
              cell membranes, changes  in lipid bilayer structure, permeability of cell
              membranes to  paramagnetic probes and antibiotic as well as their partitioning 
              between the membranes and cytoplasm will be monitored by EPR as a  function of
              the ultrasound frequently and intensity.    Interactive activities include: 
              teaching a junior level course in  materials science, and a graduate course
              entitled "Environmental  Issues in Polymer Technology"; lecturing in the
              departments of  Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, and Physics; serving as an ad
              hoc  member of the committee that administers Brigham Young University's  Women
              in Science Center; and speaking on past and present life in  Russia and about
              her friend and colleague, Audrey Sakharov.
