Title       : Laboratory Equipment for Microkernel based Embedded Systems Design Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9550805

Award Number: 9550805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11527              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. James Duckworth rjduck@ee.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hemant G. Rotithor  (Principal Investigator former)
              William Michalson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project is setting up a development platform for  embedded system
              design projects that will use a real-time  microkernel.  The platform includes:
              a) real-time microkernel  software used in designing embedded systems ranging
              from small  single processor systems to network distributed systems; b) core 
              hardware cards that contain base hardware required for any  embedded system
              development; c) an In Circuit Emulator (ICE);  and, d) 4-PC networked platform
              for hardware and software  development of embedded systems around the
              microkernel.  Major  use of this equipment occurs in undergraduate student's
              major  qualifying projects, which in addition to being significant also 
              provides the capstone design experience required by ABET.  The  use of these
              components is based on the philosophy of not  starting embedded system hardware
              and software development from  scratch.  Instead, tested hardware and software
              modules are used  and reused when possible so that the students can
              successfully  undertake and complete ambitious embedded systems projects.  
              Additionally, using a microkernel provides a systematic design  methodology,
              experience with tools commonly used by engineers in  the industry, and a better
              appreciation for the interaction  between operating systems, device drivers,
              and the underlying  hardware.  The emulator speeds up hardware and software
              co-design  processes significantly.  Having a dedicated development platform 
              for embedded system projects allows students to efficiently share  and access
              the equipment.  Training and experience gained with  this equipment will
              prepare students to better tackle complex  problems when they join the
              industrial work-force, and will help  in structuring a top quality program in
              embedded system design  that can serve as a model to others.
