Title       : SSC: "Pathways of The Math and Science Summer Program"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9550552

Award Number: 9550552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laila Denoya   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The State University of New York College at Fredonia prepares to  host the
              "Pathways of Mathematics and Science Summer Program."  The  need for the
              project in the target area (northern Chautauqua and  Cattaraugus Counties,
              Western New York State) is strong due to the  large number of minority
              students.  The target ares, considered  part of Appalachia by the federal
              government, is a region of hard-  working people, rich in multiethnic culture
              and heritage, but a  region whose population is primarily educationally and
              economically  deprived.  The project will serve 50 students annually from three
               target schools.  This four-week commuter project will provide  unique learning
              experiences in mathematics and science to encourage  the students to continue
              the study of math and science, to realize  the importance of these subjects in
              their everyday lives and  appreciate that both are interesting and enjoyable. 
              The summer  project has three modules:  I) Knowing the course-work; II) Knowing
               yourself; and III) Knowing the school system.  The content for  mathematics
              will be geometry, measurement, statistics, probability,  ratio, proportion, and
              algebra.  The content for science will be  ecology, environmental geology and
              mineralogy.  Instructional  activities are hands-on, independent study,
              intensive lab use, work  stations, and field trips.  Problem-solving,
              communication,  reasoning, and connection will provide students with the
              conditions  for learning mathematics and science.  An evaluation plan with 
              measurable outcomes will allow the project to make necessary  changes. 
              Community and institutional support are strong.  ***
