Title       : Theoretical Development and Modeling of Structural/ Environmental Effects in
               Electron Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1995     
File        : a9550398

Award Number: 9550398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim K. Baldridge kimb@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the development and application of state-of-  the-art
              theoretical chemistry to effectively calculate quantum  mechanical observables
              for complex systems involving solvent and  ionic species.  The ability to
              answer questions involving complex  molecular systems that involve solvent and
              ionic species will  significantly enhance the fields of bioorganic and
              medicinal  chemistry.  Two difficulties have impeded progress towards this 
              goal.  The first has been the inability to calculate efficiently  systems of
              sufficient size to be of interest to a broad range of  fundamental biological
              processes.  The second has been the problem  of coupling a meaningful
              description of the effects of solvent to  a quantum mechanical calculation. 
              This research aims to 1) develop  accurate models for the inclusion of solvent
              effects in quantum  mechanical calculations, and 2) test such models on an 
              experimentally studied electron transfer reaction.    Principle areas targeted
              for interactive activities include:  1)  research being carried out in
              theoretical chemistry; 2) teaching a  graduate-level computational chemistry
              course. (This course will be  a new addition to the chemistry curriculum at
              UCSD and as such will  be an overview course to pique interest in the subject
              among  faculty and students.  Future goals include expansion of the course  to
              allow student initiated projects to be developed and  formalization of the
              degree requirements in harmony with the  existing chemistry curriculum.); and
              3) offering a seminar course  (open forum - informal instruction) involving a
              weekly seminar  series for one quarter at UCSD in which women scientists in
              various  chemistry-related fields (academic and industrial), will be invited 
              to give talks.
