Title       : RIMI: Process Simulation and Design of Magnetic Czochralski Bulk Crystal Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9550759

Award Number: 9550759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Montoya mmontoya@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart H. Munson-McGee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550759  Montoya  The Chemical Engineering Department at New Mexico State
              University  (NMSU) is proposing a program to develop the technical and 
              professional skills of minority students and faculty.  The focus of  the
              research program is development of a validated process  simulation model of the
              magnetic Czochralski process, the most  frequently used commercial process for
              growing large bulk crystals.   Magnetic fields stabilize convection and
              turbulent flow in the  metallic liquid phase; the Czochralski process benefits
              form this  increased stability by producing uniform crystals with few defects. 
               Coupled to the modeling task is development of reliable estimates  of the
              thermodynamic and transport properties of the solid-liquid  system.  Also, a
              complete experimental understanding of the process  (albeit, the non-magnetic
              process at the current time) will be  obtained to verify the model.  After full
              characterization of the  experimental apparatus using pure materials, this
              initiative will  begin investigations of materials that have been successfully
              grown  only by thin-film growth, such as gallium nitride, a wide-band-gap 
              semiconductor which, when incorporated into a diode, is capable of  emitting
              visible blue light.  The outcome of a successful research  program will be the
              introduction of new processing techniques and  novel materials into industry,
              as well as creating new methods to  grow large quantities of ildustrially
              important semiconductors and  ceramics.    Resources will be developed for
              minority student and faculty  training.  Minority graduate and undergraduate
              students will be  directly involved with the research, and collaboration with
              the  National High Magnetic Field Laboratory will encourage the  development of
              external contacts for career development.   Publication of results will
              strengthen the reputation of both the  RIMI program and NMSU.  Computing
              facilities and experimental  equipment will be added to the NMSU College of
              Engineering,  providing facilities that wil l aid in obtaining further grants
              to  sustain current and future research.  The nature of the theoretical  work
              employed in this proposal, the number of crystalline systems  that are of
              interest to industry, and the lack of research into  magnetic-field assisted
              materials processing will sustain this  program well into the future.  ***
