Title       : Continuous Record of Permain to Triassic Climate Changes in High Latitude Rift
               Deposits from the Interior of Southern Gondwana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9550414

Award Number: 9550414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68294              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keddy Yemane kyemane@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves comprehensive sedimentologic and isotope  geochemistry
              studies on Permian to Jurassic clastic and chemical  deposits of a freshwater
              rift lake from the Mid-Zambezi Basin, in  southern Gondwana.  The objective is
              to document Permian to  Jurassic climate changes from the sedimentary record
              and to compare  the climate data to those obtained from equivalent
              time-intervals  in Laurasia.  The research will provide crucial field data and 
              produce a realistic conceptual climate model for large continental  interiors
              against which numerical model simulations can be tested  and refined. 
              Provenance and depositional environments will be  determined from petrographic
              and microfabric studies of sandstones  and carbonates, respectively. 
              Distribution of primary clay mineral  assemblages will be determined on <2um
              sediment fractions and the  variation through time interpreted in terms of
              climate regimes for  depositional times.  6-18O will be measured on meteoric
              calcite  cements from strat-bound early-formed concretions in shales 
              throughout the sedimentary succession to establish changes in  isotopic
              composition of meteoric waters and to infer surface  paleotemperatures.  C-org
              signatures from laminated primary lake  carbonates will be used to assess
              organic productivity of the  ancient lake.    Interactive activities include: 
              teaching one upper level  undergraduate course on palaeoenvironmental
              reconstructions from  continental deposits, mentoring three students in
              undergraduate  geology research, and expanding contacts with middle-school
              science  teachers of the School District of Philadelphia, visiting and 
              demonstrating class activities in Earth and Environmental Sciences,  as well as
              guiding motivated individuals.
