Title       : PPD/EP: Engineering for Persons with Disabilities: RASEM -A Regional Alliance on
               Science Engineering and Mathematics for Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9550064

Award Number: 9550064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1513302            (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McCarthy wmccarth@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550064  McCarthy  New Mexico State University will establish and operate a
              project  entitled "Regional Alliance for Science, Engineering, and 
              Mathematics" or RASEM.  The RASEM will be a Regional Center that  will work
              with other educational entities and organizations in  the three-state region
              for the purpose of encouraging students  with disabilities to pursue science,
              engineering, and mathematics  (SEM) careers.  The Center will provide
              leadership, coordination,  assistance, evaluation, and dissemination to state
              departments of  education, two- and four-year colleges, secondary schools, 
              national research laboratories, and public and private sponsors.   The
              three-year project will support strategies that remove  obstacles that impede
              students with disabilities from pursuing  careers in SEM fields.  The Center
              will also cooperate with the  Alliances for Minority Participation (AMP) and
              the Comprehensive  Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement (PMSA)
              programs in  assisting student participants through critical educational 
              transitions.  Students with disabilities at the secondary level  of education
              will be encouraged and assisted through strategies  that include conceptual
              videos, student stipends, adaptive  technologies, computer networking, SEM
              summer camps, and  supercomputer experiences.  Workshops will be offered to 
              precollege teachers and administrators to dispel stereotypes and  promote
              teacher involvement in support of students with  disabilities.  Strategies to
              be used on the college level will  include financial incentives, removal of
              impediments to effective  learning, and establishment of collaboration with
              other  educational partners.  These collaborations will stimulate  research
              opportunities and mentoring relationships.  RASEM should  assure a steady
              growth in the number of persons with disabilities  who select SEM career paths
              serving as a model for other centers  in the country.
