Title       : AMP: Xavier University of Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a9550701

Award Number: 9550701
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5465186            (Estimated)
Investigator: Murty A. Akundi makundi@mail.xula.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Price  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Xavier Univ of Louisiana
	      Palmetto & Pine Streets
	      New Orleans, LA  70125    504/486-7411

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550701  Price       Xavier University (XU) of Louisiana's Alliance for Minority
               Participation (AMP) program represents the combined resources,  facilities and
              faculties of 13 private, historically black members  of the United Negro
              College Fund (UNCF) in the Tennessee area:   Bennett, Fisk, Knoxville, Lane,
              Lemoyne-Owen, Oakwood, Philander  Smith, Rust, St. Augustine's, St. Paul's,
              Shaw, and VA Union.  With  strength in the natural sciences and in
              undergraduate research  capacity, the XU AMP's goal is to double, within five
              years, its  combined science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM) graduation 
              rate.  Improving SEM student retention rates, particularly among  students with
              strong intellectual promise but poor academic  preparation, will be a primary
              objective, as well as increasing  enrollments in the physical sciences and
              mathematics.       The AMP's goal and objectives will be accomplished by: 
              three,  new, shared bridge programs for entering freshmen; new entry level 
              physical science and math courses patterned after those that are  successfully
              offered by Xavier; improved articulation within dual-  degree engineering
              programs; and expanded opportunities for paid  and mentored undergraduate
              research experiences each summer in  industry, graduate institutions, and
              external research laboratories  for bridge program participants as they become
              sophomores, juniors  and seniors.       Working collaboratively, 12 Campus
              Coordinators will seek and  implement articulation agreements for students with
              selected  graduate institutions; effect share access to on-line academic 
              resources for students; organize undergraduate research  conferences, and
              develop academic support strategies in the context  of each participating
              campus and its students.  In addition, UNCF  will contribute funds for
              scholarships and academic supports to the  program, as well as its fund-raising
              and media expertise.       Over five years, the program will impact 4,712
              students, all  of whom will be African Americans, raisi ng the number of
              graduates  from the 1994 figure of 388 to 816.  The increase in SEM graduates 
              will represent a seven and one-half increase in the national  production --
              from institutions that enroll just one percent of the  Nation's African
              American college students.       Dr. Leonard Price, past Chair of XU's
              Chemistry Department,  and a distinguished African American educator and
              researcher, will  be Principal Investigator.  Dr. Willie E. May, Chief of the 
              Chemistry Analytical Division of the National Institute of  Standards and
              Technology, will be Chairman of the AMP's Advisory  Board.  William H. Gray,
              III, President of UNCF, will serve as  Chairman of the AMP's Governing Board,
              which initially will be  composed of the presidents of the participating
              institutions but  expanded to include national educational and SEM experts and 
              officials.       Ongoing program assessment will inform the AMP's advisors and 
              administrators and the program.  It will be comprised of:  data  gathering to
              monitor progress toward the goals, and evaluation to  determine the
              effectiveness, quality, and acceptance of the  program's various components.
