Title       : SSC: "Summer Science Camp"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9550637

Award Number: 9550637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Teoh htstep@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Old Westbury
	      BOX 210
	      Old Westbury, NY  115680210    516/876-3000

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The State University of New York/College at Old Westbury's Summer  Science Camp
              (SSC) will systemically improve the math and science  performance of students
              from underrepresented and undeserved  populations.  As in the past, SSC will
              serve as a crucial link in  the science and mathematics "pipeline" by providing
              summer programs  for 7th and 8th graders in preparation for entry to the highly
               successful Science and Technology Entry Program (STEP).  For 8  years, STEP
              has offered summer and academic year programs for over  one thousand two
              hundred minority high school students.    The four week summer camp operates at
              two levels for fifty middle  schools students, accommodating their various
              stages of academic  preparation.  They receive intensive instruction in
              language,  mathematics, computer science and analytical skills, especially 
              useful in developing research oriented science projects.  Science  career
              opportunities are explored through activities such as field  trips to
              industries, government laboratories and college research  labs, complete with
              pre-tour briefing, post-tour evaluations and  informal meetings with
              scientistq, and with mentoring by  college/role models.  Group workshop
              strategies for reinforced  learning, motivation through team competitions, a
              supportive  environment, experienced staff and carefully chosen courses 
              tailored to students' needs are key elements in our SSC program.   Ancillary
              programs are used for developing students' positive  attitudes towards science,
              mathematics, engineering and technology  (SMET) careers, for increasing their
              academic confidence and for  encouraging parent participation in education. 
              Follow-up  activities during the school year are maintained by the New York 
              state support STEP program.    SSC's past success can be measured by the
              overwhelming numbers of  applications, the near-perfect student participation
              with a  completion rate of 98 and 92 percent for the past two summers, the 
              high level of continuation in the summer and academic  year  programs, high
              level of interest and continued study of mathematics  and science, and their
              academic achievements in the schools.  This  proposed three-year SSC
              reapplication benefits from the experiences  gained from past SSC and STEP
              program, offered during the summer  and academic years.  ***
