Title       : RIMI: Titanium Dioxide Catalyzed Photodegradation of Organophosphorous
               Compounds: A Kinetic and Mechanical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9550712

Award Number: 9550712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. O'Shea osheak@sevums.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramon Lopez de la Vega  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1762,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550712  O'Shea  The Ti02 catalyzed photodegradation of the organophosphorus 
              compounds will be carefully monitored and evaluated to determine  the kinetic
              parameters for the process.  These kinetic parameters  are of importance in
              evaluating and predicting overall rates and  efficiencies for the degradation
              of organophosphorus compounds in  multi-component systems and for reactor
              design.  The mass balance  between the initial substrates and the products
              formed during these  reactions will be used to determine the degree of
              mineralization.   Characterization of the reaction intermediates and products
              formed  throughout the course of the degradation will be used to establish  the
              course of the reactions.  Hydroxyl radical, superoxide anion,  and hydrogen
              peroxide are formed during the photocatalytic process,  each species will be
              independently generated and the product  distribution upon reaction with the
              simulants determined.  The  characteristic product distributions for hydroxyl
              radical,  superoxide anion, and hydrogen peroxide will be compared to those 
              observed for the Ti02 catalyzed photo-reactions to establish the  role and
              involvement of these intermediates in the Ti02 catalyzed  photodegradation. 
              Since the solutions pH, dissolved oxygen  concentration, and reaction
              byproducts can dramatically effect the  degradation process, these factors will
              be thoroughly investigated.   The use of additives to accelerate the process
              will also be  evaluated.  These studies will provide a fundamental
              understanding  of the factors governing the chemical reactivity of 
              organophosphorus compounds on photoexcited TiO2.  The information  obtained
              from the proposed investigations will find direct  application in the
              optimization and evaluation of semiconductor  catalyzed photooxidation as a
              means of detoxification of  environmentally threatening organophosphorus
              compounds, such as  chemical warfare agents and pesticides.    If supported
              this project will have a substantial impact on the  fundamental understa nding
              of the processes involved in TiO2  photocatalysis and the professional
              development of several  minorities into the chemical and environmental
              sciences.  One  minority faculty member, 4-5 undergraduate students (three
              which  currently plan to pursue a Ph.D. in Chemistry upon completion of  their
              BS degrees) and 2 masters students will be directly involved  in the proposed
              project.  Support will increases minority  participation in the PIs'
              laboratories by 50%.  ***
