Title       : AMP: University of Maryland System Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a9550593

Award Number: 9550593
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6507768            (Estimated)
Investigator: Freeman Hrabowski   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550593  Hrabowski    The proposed University of Maryland System (UMS) Alliance
              for  Minority Participation (AMP) is a comprehensive program that is  designed
              to extend and increase the impact of current initiatives  to increase
              substantially the quantity and quality of minority  students receiving
              baccalaureate degrees in science, engineering,  and mathematics (SEM).  The
              following UMS institutions will  participate as full partners in the proposed
              AMP:  1) the  University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC); 2) the University
               of Maryland College Park (UMCP); and 3) the University of Maryland  Eastern
              Shore (UMES), a historically black institution.  Additional  UMS institutions
              have expressed and interest in participating in  the proposed UMS AMP. 
              Discussions regarding additional UMS  partners for years two through five are
              underway.  Dr. Freeman A.  Hrabowski, III, President of UMBC, has received
              national  recognition for his leadership in developing innovative programs to 
              expand educational opportunities for minority SEM students, and he  will be the
              principal investigator for the proposed UMS AMP.  Dr.  Hrabowski received the
              National Science Foundation's 1994 Educator  Award for his outstanding
              commitment and dedication in the  education of minorities in the fields of
              science and mathematics.    Also participating in the AMP will be the following
              community  colleges located in close proximity of the participating UMS 
              institutions and that serve as the primary feeders of minority SEM  transfer
              students:  1) Anne Arundel Community College; 2) Baltimore  City Community
              College; 3) Catonsville Community College; 4)  Chesapeake Community College; 5)
              Howard Community College; 6)  Montgomery Community College; 7) Prince Georges
              Community College;  and 8) Wor Wic Community College.    In support of NSF's
              goals, the primary goals of the proposed UMS  AMP include the following:    1. 
               To produce approximately 800 minority SEM baccalaureate       recipients each
              year by the end of the 1999-2000 a cademic       year.    2.   To enroll at
              least 300 minority SEM graduate students per year       beginning in the fall
              of 1997.    The secondary goals of the proposed UMS AMP is to increase the 
              number of minority students entering SEM careers, especially  faculty
              positions.    The proposed AMP's design includes the following characteristics:
                      Strong commitment by institutional leaders to the program's      
              success;       Removal of financial barriers for minority students;       A
              Summer Bridge Component;       An Academic Year Component;       Focus on
              improving knowledge and skills;       Focus on motivation and support;      
              Focus on monitoring and advising;       Focus on academic and social
              interaction;       Focus on "filter" SEM course curricula revision; and      
              Involvement of feeder community colleges.
