Title       : A Workshop to Develop a National Agenda for the Future of Engineering Technology
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9550659

Award Number: 9550659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111319             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Sehi gsehi@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021421    513/226-2500

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A three-day invitational workshop is being held to examine issues and charter  
              a national agenda for the future of engineering technician education. The  
              workshop involves key individuals from business and industry, engineering   and
              engineering technology educators, top level administrators from two-year  
              colleges, and government representatives. The workshop participants are  
              involved in predicting, identifying, and rank ordering the changes that must  
              occur in the engineering technology education process over the coming decade.  
              In multiple breakout sessions the participants discuss many diverse issues;  
              such as Future Demand for Technical Skills; Nature of Future Technical  
              Employment; Industry Recognition of Associate Degree Engineering Technicians,  
              Curriculum Changes for Educating Future Technicians; New Instructional Tools,  
              Technologies and Techniques; Accreditation and Policy Issues; Strategies for  
              Development and Implementation of Alternative and Innovative Programs;  
              Effectiveness of Various National Movements (Tech-Prep, School-to-Work,  
              etc.);  Preparation of Future Community College Engineering Technology  
              Faculty; Articulation with Four-year Engineering, Engineering Technology,   and
              Other Science and Technology Programs; Assessment Process and Academic  
              Standards; Role of Professional Societies and Professionalizing Technician  
              Careers; and Varied Paths for Technicians.  The workshop report will be  
              disseminated to academic institutions, private sector, and selected  
              government agencies. Planning and implementation of the workshop is a  
              cooperative effort involving Sinclair Community College, the American   Society
              for Engineering Education (ASEE), the Technology Accreditation   Commission of
              the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (TAC   of ABET), and the
              National Science Foundation (NSF).
