Title       : Teaching Mathematical Thinking through Space Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1998  
File        : a9550493

Award Number: 9550493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George W. Bright                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $812994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace Feurzeig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              *  9550493  Feurzeig    The goal of this three-year project is to develop four
              curriculum units to replace or supplement current classroom materials on key
              topics in algebra, geometry, calculus, and topology.  These units will
              introduce some of the most fundamental and central ideals of  modern
              mathematical thinking to a broad population of high-school students and
              teachers through a series of  highly graphic and interactive computer-assisted
              explorations, experiments and games.  The first three units can be used
              separately within the standard algebra, geometry or calculus courses.  Taken as
              a whole, they prepare the way for a series of exploratory journeys in the world
              of  one-, two-, and three-dimensional space forms, which comprise the specific
              subject matter of the last unit.  As another alternative, units can be joined
              to provide a one-semester course, either in place of pre-calculus or as an
              optional  fourth-year college preparatory course.  The four units will support
              from 10 to 18 weeks of instruction.    The first year of the project will focus
              on development and informal trials of the activities and supporting software;
              the second year on continued materials development, staff development,
              classroom implementation, pilot trials, and formative evaluation; the third
              year on teacher development, field testing, evaluation, and dissemination. 
              Local high schools  will participate in the  pilot trials and field tests.  The
              research, development, and teaching will be carried out by an interdisciplinary
              team of mathematicians and mathematics education consultants with expertise in
              curriculum development and evaluation.  The project team will work closely with
              the developers of ARISE, the NSF Comprehensive high-school curriculum project
              underway by the Consortium for Mathematics and its Applications (COMAP), to
              publish  project materials in the widely distributed series, High-school
              Mathematics and its Applications (HiMAP.)  ***
