Title       : MIE: The University of Texas at El Paso: A Model of Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9550502

Award Number: 9550502
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13600117           (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin C. Flores flores@ece.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Riter  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550502  Riter    The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is a national leader
              in Hispanic education. Over 60 percent of its more than 17,000 students are
              underrepresented minorities and an estimated two-thirds are the first in their
              families to attend college. Approximately 85 percent of UTEP's students come
              from El Paso County, a fast growing urban region representative of many large
              southwestern cities that now have, or soon will have, a majority of their
              population composed of groups currently underrepresented in the science,
              engineering, and mathematics (SEM) workforce. UTEP, however, is unique in that
              it is the only major urban university in the Southwest whose ethnic
              distribution matches the demographics of the region it serves. The Model
              Institutions for Excellence (MIE) program provides UTEP the opportunity to
              serve as a model for the urban university of the future, one with a mission to
              serve a multicultural population where minority students comprise the majority.
                 UTEP's MIE project will address the major impediment to increasing the
              number of bachelor's degrees in SEM disciplines: the unacceptably high
              attrition of entering SEM students. UTEP proposes a dynamic approach to meeting
              the needs of entering students, needs that will change as local school
              improvement programs, such as the NSF-funded El Paso Systemic Initiative,
              improve area students' preparation in mathematics and science. UTEP's MIE plan
              will help first-year students understand how to succeed in college, reduce
              class size in first-year courses, and present a broad picture of what SEM
              disciplines are about and the opportunities that careers in these fields
              provide. Most importantly, through MIE, UTEP's faculty commit to the concept
              that they are responsible for more than classroom instruction, that they are
              also responsible for the development of the entire student and the creation of
              an on-campus environment that supports learning and personal development. Since
              many of these activities will utilize undergraduates a s mentors and peer
              instructors, an additional benefit will be the provision of meaningful work
              experiences for a student body composed of people with financial
              responsibilities they must meet while attending school.    UTEP will also use
              MIE to accelerate the introduction of active learning strategies into all of
              its SEM courses. Such strategies include cooperative learning,
              computer-assisted instruction, the linking of English composition courses with
              SEM courses, and peer instruction. To make active learning and effective
              teaching a reality, MIE will serve as a catalyst for a change in thinking about
              the mission and responsibilities of faculty by working to modify the major
              determinants of faculty rewards from research to the promotion of learning.   
              MIE will provide resources to enrich the quality and increase the quantity of
              SEM programs through addition of faculty and staff and the upgrading of
              infrastructure in the degree programs likely to yield the greatest increase in
              SEM graduates. A goal of MIE will be to ensure that every SEM student
              participates at least once in a professional enrichment experience by serving
              as a research assistant in an on-campus research project or as an intern or
              co-op student in government of industry. Finally, MIE will impact the
              university educational infrastructure by providing resources to improve UTEP's
              ability to advise students, track their progress, and evaluate the
              effectiveness of programs.    UTEP will manage MIE through a unique combination
              of expertise in academic and student affairs. The Principal Investigator is a
              national leader in engineering education with experience managing large
              interdisciplinary programs. The Co-PI brings similar experience in the student
              affairs area. They will work with an advisory committee of key faculty,
              administrators, and regional SEM leaders from industry and government to change
              the very nature of SEM education at UTEP.            2 University of Texas at
              El Paso
