Title       : Intergrating Programing into Engineering Education through Context-Setting and
               Scaffolding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9550458

Award Number: 9550458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Guzdial guzdial@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550458  Guzdial    Our world is changing in ways that make learning a critical
              skill-a  verb, not a noun.  When our engineering students enter the  workplace,
              they will find: That organizations as a whole need to  learn, and that
              individuals who can learn are highly valued (Senge,  1992), that the half life
              of their engineering knowledge is  something on the order of five years
              (Lohmann & Stacy, 1990); and  that the artifacts they design and build must
              lend themselves to  being learned by their users; and it makes sense to design
              them so  that users can learn the artifacts easily (Norman, 1993; Soloway, 
              Guzdial, et al., 1994a).    Modern cognitive science has cast new light on
              learning. We know  that successful learners are active learners: They seek to 
              understand deep structure in what they learn, they integrate what  they learn
              into what they knew previously, and they index learned  knowledge so that it is
              usable later (Farnham-Diggory,  1990;kolodner, 1993).  Passive learners who
              rely on knowledge being  served to them in terms of lectures and presentations
              are not  successful learners-we cannot expect passive learners to be able to 
              learn from new situations without someone there to package the new  knowledge
              for them.  Active learners learn based on two components:  * Activity: Students
              who are active learners are actively doing,  and are learning in order to
              better engage in that doing. Support  which enables a student to be successful
              and learn from an activity  is called scaffolding (Palincsar, 1986;Wood,
              Bruner, et al., 1975).  * Context: The situation in which students learn has a
              significant  impact on what students learn and how well they may use the
              learned  knowledge later (Farnham-Diggory, 1990).    My research and teaching
              plan are geared to prepare students for  life in a learning society.  My
              research is focused on defining,  implementing, and evaluating methods that
              lead to active learning,  particularly using (1) context-setting and (2)
              scaffolding  techniques. I apply the se methods in engineering education
              because  of the critical need for engineers who can learn and the ready  access
              to engineering educators who are willing to explore  innovative methods in
              education at Georgia Institute of Technology  (Georgia Tech). My teaching plan
              has two focuses: (1) on using  these same methods in my own and other computer
              science education  and (2) on teaching these methods to others.    The specific
              research I propose in this research is to apply the  methods of scaffolding and
              context-setting to enabling the use of  programming as an activity in
              engineering education. My hypothesis  is:  *    Programming can be an effective
              and efficient activity for  engineering education, achievable by (1) redefining
              the activity of  programming and (2) creating environments to support this 
              redefinition based on techniques of context-setting and  scaffolding.   
              Products of this work:  *    An empirically evaluated theory of the
              technological context-  setting and scaffolding needed to integrate a complex
              activity  (programming) into a range of domains in engineering education.  *   
              The creation of a general programming environment to improve  engineering
              education by providing students with the opportunities  to define and debug
              processes in a domain-oriented manner.  *    A set of courses at the
              undergraduate, graduate, and  continuing education levels to inform students
              about educational  technology.  Impacts of this work:  *    Engineering
              education will be improved through use of a tool  for students in active
              learning.  *    Educational technology will have a theory to guide future 
              development of supportive and guiding structures in software to  achieve active
              learning.  *    Improvements in computer science education based on the 
              research into context-setting and scaffolding.  ***
