Title       : Student-Made Instructional Science Video Laboratory Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9550808

Award Number: 9550808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Gerencher gerenche@moravian.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank T. Kuserk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn M. Grandi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Floyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert H. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moravian College
	      Main Street & Elizabeth Avenue
	      Bethlehem, PA  18018    215/861-1300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project improves the instructional capability of the  laboratory component
              of the basic core curricular course,  Revolutions in Science, by enhancing
              specific student video  acquisition and production facilities.   The course,
              which is  team taught by Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Earth Science 
              faculty, serves non-science-majors and science majors alike, and  includes the
              full range of student abilities.   The course's  video laboratory project
              requires the 55 to 70 students enrolled,  working in groups of 3 or 4, to
              create instructional videos on  science topics of each group's choosing.  
              Student responsibility  for the final video product extends from the initial
              research  phase through and including final editing.   The videos are 
              presented to their peers and the instructors at the end of the  course.   This
              program had depended upon home-quality equipment,  which necessarily involved
              inefficient component integration.    The nonlinear editing capabilities of the
              new equipment provides  a more professional and robust system, allows a broader
              range of  subject matter and techniques, increases production quality and 
              student efficiency, and provides a greater capability for the  production of
              student-made instructional science videos.   This  project may serve as a model
              for training other science faculty  in using this successful experimental
              approach to science  education.
