Title       : SSC: Technology Enhanced Applications of Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9550601

Award Number: 9550601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82463              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Edwin McClintock   (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiang Zhonghong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Florida International University (FIU), in collaboration with Dade  County
              Public Schools (DCPS) proposes a three year summer science  camp for selected
              at risk, underrepresented middle schools from the  Dade School District. 
              Sixty-six students will participate during  year 1, and 88 for years 2 and 3. 
              The proposed project, Technology  Enhanced Achievement in Mathematics and
              Science (TEAMS), is a major  expansion of the Partnership of Academic
              Communities (PAC),  bringing substantive enrichment to this partnership between
              DCPS  and FIU.  PAC provides underrepresented, at risk students their 
              mathematics, science and technology instruction on the FIU campus,  using
              university faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, and  resources.    
              TEAMS is proposed as a combined commuter and resident program, with  7th and
              8th graders commuting and 9th graders in residence,  providing the more mature
              students a full-day scientific immersion,  with afternoon and evening research
              and laboratory experiences.   The five weeks, four days per week summer
              experience will be  supplemented by 9 academic year Saturday sessions,
              featuring non-  academic scientists, mathematicians, and engineers  e.g., a
              Bell  South mathematician, and IBM systems analysts, and a City of Miami 
              Planning engineer .    Dade County Public Schools' Urban Systemic Initiative
              leader  teachers in mathematics, science and technology, FIU faculty in 
              mathematics, the sciences, computer science, mathematics education,  science
              education, statistics, and graduate students, will all  directly provide
              workshops, field activities, and seminars.   Likewise, professionals from
              business, industry, and particularly  the technology industry will provide to
              the students of TEAMS  enjoyable, meaningful experiences that are
              non-traditional, rich  and demanding and enriching hands and minds-on,
              predominantly  technology integrated.  Drawing from an already proven
              successful   for these students in the PAC project  base, the curriculum and 
              instruction w ill exemplify the reform of math and science (NCTM  Standards and
              NSTA Standards).  It will foster mathematical and  scientific thought, build
              positive attitudes and solid knowledge  bases in these fields.  It will utilize
              NSF support  funded  and  other rich new curricula  Mathematics in Context .   
              The goals of TEAMS are: 1) to enrich at-risk, underrepresented  students'
              experiences in math, science and technology, designed to  improve their
              attitude toward and valuing of the sciences; 2) to  provide scientific ways of
              thinking and reasoning and systematic  learning/study experiences sufficient to
              success-oriented education  and self-concept enhancement; 3) to provide
              experiences paving the  way for an economically successful occupation, with at
              least  adequate mathematics, science and technology for this success; and  4)
              to build confidence sufficient that some participants may choose  to major in
              scientific areas.  ***
