Title       : RCMS: Navajo Community Collge Science Honors Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9550752

Award Number: 9550752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Bauer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Grey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dine College
	      P O Box 126
	      Tsaile, AZ  86556    520/724-6671

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550752  Bauer    The Shiprock Campus of Navajo Community College is operated by
               the Navajo Nation and serves over 500 students per year in the  largest
              population center of the Navajo Nation.  The College is  requesting support
              from the National Science Foundation to  continue and expand the operation of a
              Science Honors Program for  Navajo students entering science fields.  Support
              is requested  for 1) a full-time Project Coordinator, Student Support 
              Coordinator, Academic Tutors, and Secretary; 2) funds for staff  travel to
              implement and coordinate the program and for student  travel for enrichment
              activities; and 3) scholarships for twenty  students per year.  This support
              will result in the recruitment  of fifteen academically well-qualified students
              each year to the  Shiprock Campus of Navajo Community College in science fields
               (ten funded through NSF support, two through Johnson & Johnson  Environmental
              Scholarships, two from Lawrence Livermore National  Laboratory's American
              Indian Program, and one additional  Environmental Scholarship funded through a
              Department of Defense  program).  These students will be provided with
              financial  assistance, travel funds to visit local industry, national labs, 
              and to conferences to make research presentations.  They will  initially
              participate in a summer program to prepare them for  college-level coursework
              through academic enrichment, cooperative  learning and study skills. 
              Subsequent summers will be spent in  research placements in other university
              programs, or at national  laboratories or private industry (all expenses
              provided through  programs of these institutions).  Math workshops for calculus
               classes are modeled after successful programs at UC Berkeley and  CalPoly. 
              Partnerships with four national laboratories two large  corporations, and ten
              large regional universities provide  scholarship internships, long-term
              equipment loans and networking  assistance.  This project has the potential of
              preparing a  steadily increasing number of you ng Navajo students to succeed in
               science because of its location and the unique mission of Navajo  Community
              college.
