Title       : RIMI: Ultrafast Dynamical Processes in Chemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9550705

Award Number: 9550705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. Lopez-Garriga sonw@caribe.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge A. Vera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan G. Gonzalez-Lagoa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jose E. Cortes-Figueroa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1762,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550705  Lopez-Garriga  The Chemistry Department of the University of Puerto
              Rico at  Mayaguez, presents a research proposal to (1) create a cluster of 
              research scientists, (2) establish a research facility dedicated to  study fast
              kinetic and dynamic processes in chemical systems, (3)  assist in the education
              of the students in the department, and (4)  strengthen the existing research
              capabilities.    The cluster, ULTRAFAST DYNAMIC PROCESSES IN CHEMICAL SYSTEMS,
              will  focus its scientific activities on (1) subpicosecond studies of  ligands
              in heme proteins, (2) resonance Raman spectroscopy with UV  picosecond
              excitation, (3) ultrafast photolysis studies of ligand  displacement reactions,
              (4) formation of agostic bonds and  cyclometalation in organometallic
              complexes, and (5) dynamic  studies of surface photochemical reactions.  The
              major goal of the  cluster is to make significant contributions to the
              scientific  community in the research areas of interest indicated above and to 
              assist in the scientific and intellectual development of students  in our
              University.    Our University is committed to develop the department as a
              center  of excellence in chemistry and provide the adequate education and 
              research training for undergraduate and graduate chemistry  department in the
              last five years.  The construction of the new  chemistry building, with over
              100,000 sq. ft. of laboratory space,  is approaching completion and is expected
              to open in the 1995-1996  academic year.  The new building will serve as the
              main site for  the research operations of the cluster.  This support reflects
              the  major role and commitment from the University to:  (1) science  education
              and training of hispanic and black graduate and  undergraduate students in
              modern spectroscopic techniques, (2) the  involvement of high school students
              in basic research, and, (3)  improving the research competitiveness of Puerto
              Rico in the  sciences.    To develop the intellectual capabilities of our
              undergraduate and  graduate students  and members of the proposed research
              cluster,  nationally recognized speakers will be invited to present and 
              discuss their research findings related to dynamical processes in  chemical
              systems.  The cluster proposes an external advisory board,  whose members will
              be chosen from the speakers of the conference.   They will meet with the
              investigators to review the progress  accomplished and will provide written
              recommendations, to be  included in the RIMI reports for future development as
              overall  performance.    With the approval of the herein proposed research
              program, the  Chemistry Department will add a major thrust to its research 
              programs nurtured initially by a previous RIMI Program, MRCE, and  EPSCOR. 
              Therefore, the University will be able to increase further  the quality and
              training excellence of our undergraduate and  graduate students in modern
              spectroscopic techniques.  Thus, our  students will find a better niche for
              advanced degrees and  additional training in prestigious universities and our
              sprawling  pharmaceutical industry will be better served.  In a similar way, 
              researchers will be more professionally assisted resulting in a  concomitant
              increase in productivity.  ***
