Title       : CPMSA: "Project Banneker: Achieving Excellence in Mathematics and Science"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a9550559

Award Number: 9550559
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3662832            (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Mackiel mackielj@ops.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Gaughan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Omaha Public Schools
	      3215 Cuming Street
	      Omaha, NE  681312024    402/557-2400

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will substantially increase the enrollment,  achievement and
              preparation of African American students in the  Omaha Public Schools for
              university studies in mathematics and   science.  Teachers will learn to use
              appropriate adaptive  instruction to meet the needs and interests of their
              students.   High standards of achievement consistent with state and national 
              frameworks will be used to judge student success on standardized  and
              performance based assessments.  The project has been planned  and will be
              implemented with the guidance of a representative  Advisory Council.  School
              staff will use a Total Quality Management  approach to analyze the documented
              results of their work, revise  strategies, and implement them.  Staff will
              participate in a  professional development curriculum designed to change
              instruction  and enrollment in advanced science and mathematics.  Articulation 
              among schools will be improved by increasing personalized  information about
              the success and needs of African American  students.  Support for student
              interest and motivation will be  addressed by enrichment and community support
              activities.  Students  will have a number of enrichment opportunities including
              summer  camps that will demonstrate use of science and mathematics in  ecology,
              agriculture, health services, finance, engineering and  others.  Students will
              master science and mathematics curriculum  with school and community based
              tutoring when necessary.  The  project will serve as a collaboration point for
              a number of  existing programs in the community and school system, clarifying 
              objectives and coordinating services.  The project will be  carefully evaluated
              and judged and will be implemented to assure  continuation after NSF funding is
              ended.  Records and materials  will be organized so the project can be
              described for replication.  ***
