Title       : SSC: Residential SummerScience Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9550675

Award Number: 9550675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Al Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. Lederer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U-Chico Fdn
	      
	      Chico, CA  95926    916/895-4044

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The California State University, Chico proposes to conduct a  residential summer
              science camp on its campus for 50 Native  American youth from rurally isolated,
              northeastern California, in  the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades.  Over a
              three year period  this amounts to 150 students being served.  The camp will be
               composed of two, two-week sessions each summer.  These sessions  will take
              place during the month of July.  This program will be  delivered by University
              faculty and staff, and American Indian  youth counselors will be role models. 
              The curriculum will be  conducted through the College of Natural Sciences. 
              Because the  world of the Native American student is relatively limited in the 
              science and mathematics areas, this camp will provide exercises and 
              experiences that students can relate to.  The activities will be  hands-on,
              involving students in learning practical aspects of  design, analysis, and
              manufacture while learning and reinforcing  the content and principles of
              chemistry, biology, physics, math,  and engineering which apply.  This SSC
              program will follow students  through a tracking program to establish
              completion of middle  school.  The University will also provide individual
              career  counseling to each of the students to determine their individual 
              interests and goals and determine the most appropriate path to  achieve these
              goals.  Finally, this SSC program would be the only  one of its kind in the
              Western Region, focusing entirely on Native  American youth.  ***
