Title       : Planning Grant for a "Prime-Time" TV Science Drama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9550660

Award Number: 9550660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Hirshon bhirshon@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald F. Wheeler  (Principal Investigator former)
              Leon M. Lederman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              95-50660  Wheeler      PLANNING GRANT FOR A "PRIME-TIME" SCIENCE DRAMA   
              ABSTRACT     This is planning grant that will enable the AAAS to bring together
              a group of scientists, science educators, and television writers/producers to
              develop the concept and initial scripts for a television series about science
              that would be broadcast in prime time by one of the major networks. 
              Tentatively entitled "The Dean," the series would be the story of a Dean of
              Arts and Sciences at a university which is modeled after a small M.I.T.  The
              University has made it reputation by being at the forefrmnt of scientific
              research.  The Dean is in the center of an exciting and fascinating vortex. 
              Each week the Dean deals with issues that range from social implications of new
              types of new types of genetic engineering research to the intrigue of procuring
              top secret military contracts.  The issues are presented as stories about
              people -- the scientists, the students, CEOs and politicians who try to
              influence the Dean as he/she grapples with the scientific issues.     Specific
              activities during the planning phase include:    o Bringing together an
              advisory group to develop storylines that maximize the amount of science
              without damaging the prime-time, entertainment constraints.  o Writing of an
              initial script and an outline of the major elements of a series.  o
              Presentation of the concept and script to top executives at major networks to
              assess their interest in and possible commitment to the series.     The key
              personnel in the planning phase would be Gerald Wheeler, Director of the AAAS
              division for Public Understanding of Science and Technology; Leon Lederman,
              physicist and initial creator of the general concept; and Adrian Malone,
              television producer of such major series as "The Ascent of Man" and "Cosmos."
