Title       : SSC: "Meadowcreek Science Institute"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9550617

Award Number: 9550617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke K. Elliott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Valen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Conrad L. Stanitski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meadowcreek, Inc
	      P O Box 100
	      Fox, AR  72051    /   -

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Meadowcreek Science Institute is a four week residential  science program
              for minority students from throughout Arkansas who  are entering the seventh,
              eight or ninth grades.  A total of 50  different students who have an interest
              or aptitude in science,  engineering or mathematics (SEM) will participate in
              each year of  the three year program.  The primary goal of this initiative is
              to  encourage underrepresented minority students from Arkansas to  pursue
              secondary and university level studies and subsequent  careers in science,
              engineering and mathematics.  Students will  explore energy, physics,
              mathematics, chemistry. geology.  hydrology, biology, ecology, horticulture and
              environmental science  thrmugh active participation in a diverse natural
              setting.    Students will take part in scientific, hands-on, and interactive 
              activities while in residence at Meadowcreek's 1500 acre outdoor  classroom
              which includes an 18,000 square foot solar powered  education center.  Students
              will experience the excitement of  scientific discovery as they study biology
              by the side of a stream  or sample beneficial insects as part of a mathematics
              activity.   The program is designed to make the sciences relevant while 
              developing communication skills and cooperative approaches to  problem solving.
                 The Meadowcreek Science Institute will inspire students to reach  beyond
              self-imposed limitations through interactions with teaching  assistants,
              mentors and other role models.  Field trips will enable  students to see
              science in action, while exposing students to  professionals in a variety of
              scientific fields.  The program  collaborates with the Arkansas Statewide
              Systemic Initiative,  Arkansas Science Crusade, Arkansas STRIVE, Teachers of
              Tomorrow and  the Arkansas Educational Cooperatives.  Student progress will be 
              carefully tracked and mentors will maintain contact and continuity  with
              students throughout the year.  A program advisory committee  will monitor the
              entire program as well as follow-up and ev aluation  activities.  ***
