Title       : Crossing Boundaries - A Bioorganic Approach to Chemistry at Pomona College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9550975

Award Number: 9550975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85339              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Selassie CSelassie@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher E. Rohlman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A project-focused laboratory curriculum in Organic Chemistry and  Biochemistry
              is being developed to enhance the creation of an  interesting and pragmatic
              pedagogical interface between two  traditional disciplines.   In the search for
              commonality, this  hybridized approach to a problem also brings forth needed 
              relevance to the curriculum.   It gives students the opportunity  to work in
              teams; to design their own unique procedures for  synthesis, isolation, and
              characterization of bioactive  molecules; and to examine their reactivities and
              activities.    This approach enhances discourse and subsequent learning as well
               as fosters mutual understanding.   Exposure to modern techniques  as well as
              state of the art equipment certainly widens student  horizons and improves the
              employment prospects of those students  who wish to stop at the B.S.  level.  
              In Organic Chemistry, it  presents a more cutting-edge technique to
              approximately 30  percent of the sophomore class, each year, who will have the 
              opportunity to indulge in chemical and enzyme kinetics with  state-of-the-art
              UV spectrophotometers and use computational  software to assess their results. 
               In Biochemistry, students  utilize both low-pressure and high-performance
              liquid  chromatography, as well as spectroscopic studies, to focus their  new
              structural perspective on the isolation and biophysical  characterization of
              enzymes, which are the target of therapeutic  agents and metabolic regulation.
