Title       : A Series of Nested GC-MS Applications in the Introductory Chemistry Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1995    
File        : a9550890

Award Number: 9550890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis A. Leber p_leber@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claude H. Yoder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Hess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project designs a set of nested or interrelated experiments  employing gas
              chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) as a  technique that exposes students
              to the use of this versatile  instrument at ever-increasing levels of
              sophistication.   Because  the intent is to incorporate GC-MS in the
              introductory general  and organic chemistry laboratory sequences, an 
              instrument-intensive research-like experience has been designed  for each
              laboratory sequence around an interdisciplinary theme:   Environmental
              Chemistry for the general chemistry laboratory  (analysis of an artificial
              "gasoline" mixture followed by water  and soil analyses contaminated with
              gasoline and/or pesticides)  and Plant Assays for the organic chemistry
              laboratory (a fatty  acid, methyl ester analysis of a plant extract using
              standards  synthesized by the students and synthesis, identification, and 
              characterization of a series of plant growth hormones).   The  assumption in
              designing each project in this manner is that  students gain sufficient mastery
              in GC-MS by a sequential series  of applications and that exposure to modern
              instrumentation,  especially in a hands-on format, is highly desirable.   The 
              thematic basis for the projects creates links with the related  disciplines of
              geosciences and biology.   Many aspiring premeds  take biology, if not geology
              courses, so the bridging laboratory  concept helps those students see the
              relevance of their  laboratory work from several disciplinary perspectives.  In
              both  the general and organic chemistry laboratory sequences, the 
              organizational paradigm of "Synthesis, Structure, and  Identification" is
              enhanced by the integration of the GC-MS with  its dual capability of
              separation and identification.
