Title       : VPW: Waveform Relaxation Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1996  
File        : a9550154

Award Number: 9550154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The advent of new generation of massively parallel computers has  caused
              previously efficient numerical algorithms to be reexamined.   Massively
              parallel computers are comprised of many hundreds,  sometimes thousands of
              processors.  For a numerical algorithm to  fully exploit the power of such
              machines it must be able to be  'decomposed' into largely independent pieces
              which can be  distributed across the available computer processors.  The
              waveform  relaxation method is such a method for solving systems of ordinary 
              differential equations and time-dependent partial differential  equations.  In
              addition to its advantages in parallel processing,  it also allows different
              integration step sizes to be used for  different subsystems, resulting in
              substantial savings in  computation for some applications.  The theoretical and
               experimental studies suggest that the waveform relaxation method  has a great
              potential for developing reliable, scalable efficient  parallel algorithms for
              solving a wide range of differential  equations.  The objective of this
              research is to further  investigate the nature of the waveform relaxation
              method, and  develop fast scalable parallel algorithms for solving certain type
               of ordinary differential equations and time-dependent partial  differential
              equations.  The long term goal of this research is to  make the developed
              algorithms applicable to real-world  computational problems, such as the real
              time integration of  torpedo or missile trajectories, modeling of earthquake
              effects on  buildings, and simulation of fluid-structure interaction.  This 
              work will involve the algorithm design, theoretical analysis with  a possible
              focus on the search of optimal convergence rate, and  numerical testing on
              sequential and parallel computers.    Interactive activities include:  teaching
              a course at the graduate  level on  numerical linear algebra, numerical partial
              differential  equation, or on parallel numerical computation; and leading an 
              interdisciplinary research seminar seri es on scientific computation  and
              applications to which both local and national researchers will  be invited to
              participate.
