Title       : Implementation Proposal - MIE Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a9550504

Award Number: 9550504
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1502000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Arratia um_jarratia@suagm0.suagm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando A. Diaz  (Principal Investigator former)
              Miriam Falero-Gil  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Universidad Metropolitana
	      PO Box 21345
	      San Juan, PR  009281345    787/751-0178

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550504  Diaz    The Universidad Metropolitana (UMET), one of the three 
              institutions of the Ana G. M ndez University System (AGMUS), will  implement
              the first phase of a ten-year model comprehensive  institutional development
              program to substantially increase the  number of quantity of minority science,
              mathematics and  engineering (SEM) BS degree graduates. The goal of the program
              is  to: a) increase the number of SEM majors and the number of  students going
              on to graduate school and science teaching; b)  develop the capacity to
              institutionalize and sustain this growth  and to continue to expand and improve
              well beyond NSF support;  and c) develop a well-documented, replicable model
              for similar  Hispanic institutions. UMET will attract talented students from 
              its highly successful pre-college programs, but it will focus on  increased
              recruitment, retention and advancement of low-income,  disadvantaged students
              who are traditionally excluded from SEM  careers. UMET's vision is to create an
              environment of high  standards and high expectations for all SEM students in
              which the  entire university is involved in offering an array of rigorous, 
              varied and exciting state-of-the-art SEM academic programs, that  places
              quality instruction and learning at the center of its  activities, and that
              provide the nurturing, extensive academic  and personal support, enrichment,
              and resources students need to  be highly prepared for graduate work.    The
              program will include a comprehensive revision and  restructuring of the entire
              current SEM curriculum, new  baccalaureate programs in physics, biology,
              chemistry, computer  science, and mathematics, and a pre-engineering transfer
              program.  It will also include: increases in the number and quality of SEM 
              faculty; a pre-freshman summer bridge program; student  scholarships;
              significant increases and strengthening of  undergraduate research; systematic
              academic performance  assessment and monitoring; enhancement of SEM facilities
              and  equipment; an undergraduate-t o-graduate transition program and  formal
              collaborations with graduate schools to provide transition  experiences and
              secure admission to graduate school. A Science  Support Center (SSC) will be
              developed as a hub for a host of  student supports and faculty development. A
              monitoring,  evaluation and student tracking system will be developed, along 
              with extensive documentation of the model program for  dissemination. The
              program will be developed in collaboration  with DOE National Laboratories,
              other universities and industry.    This initiative will require fundamental
              institutional changes in  academic and administrative policies and structure to
              overcome  traditional barriers to SEM development, as well as a  considerable
              investment of UMET's own resources. As a private  institution, UMET and AGMUS
              have the institutional flexibility  and the commitment to SEM to produce the
              types of institutional  changes required as well as the demonstrated commitment
              to  investing considerable amounts of its own resources to SEM.         
              6Universidad Metropolitana
