Title       : AMP: Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9550765

Award Number: 9550765
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry Davidson davidson@regents.state.la.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Ford  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550765  Ford    The Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP) is a 
              comprehensive statewide coordinated program aimed at substantially  increasing
              the number and quality of minority students earning  baccalaureate degrees in
              science, engineering and mathematics (SEM)  areas.  In the long term, the
              program design will lead to  significant increase in minority SEM graduate
              enrollment in U.S.  graduate schools.  It is estimated that Louisiana
              institutions will  increase to 500, the minority undergraduate SEM enrollment,
              while  increasing graduate enrollment nationally to 100, by 1999.      LAMP
              strategy centers on enhancing and coordinating existing SEM  pipeline
              activities at Louisiana institutions, supporting  undergraduate student
              research activities and introducing strategic  statewide and regional academic
              and research activities to promote  networking and technology exchanges.  The
              LAMP implementation would  continue the expansion of the State's SEM
              infrastructure and join  the several systemic initiatives and EPSCoR programs
              coordinated  through the Louisiana Board of Regents.  Twelve institutions 
              initially will manage a variety of campus-based programs and  participate in
              several statewide and regional projects.    Southern University and A&M
              College, the LAMP lead institution is  an 1890 Land Grant university with a
              nationally recognized systemic  model for physics education and is slated,
              under a recently court  approved settlement agreement, to develop doctorate
              degree programs  in Science and Mathematics Education, Material Science,
              Biomedical  Sciences and in Administration and Information Systems over the 
              next 10 years.  Southern University System, parent organization to  Souther
              University campuses in the major metropolitan areas of  Baton Rouge, New
              Orleans, and Shreveport, enrolls more than 36% of  all African American college
              undergraduates in the State of  Louisiana.  Southern University and A&M College
              will provide  management leadership to array of campus coordina ted minority 
              participation enhancement activities around the State.    Grambling State
              University, the fourth public Louisiana HBCU, as  well as private Xavier
              University and Dillard University, both of  New Orleans will be active LAMP
              participating institutions.  RCMS  projects at grambling State University,
              Southern University and A&M  College, Xavier University and the University of
              New Orleans will  collaborate with LAMP and serve as models for transporting to
              other  Louisiana institutions.  Louisiana State University, Tulane  University,
              of Southwestern Louisiana, University of New Orleans  and Southern University
              and A&M College will manage programs at the  undergraduate/graduate interface
              and harness the projects of  increased SEM undergraduate degree production.   
              These impressive projections are conservative in view of a recent  higher
              education desegregation settlement agreement pledging  substantial state
              resources to expedite the movement of state HBCU  institutions toward
              comprehensive graduate status through  establishment of new graduate programs,
              fund other race recruitment  and scholarships, and support articulation among
              institutions.  The  plan for expanding diversity on college campuses makes
              available  additional resources to meet the goals of the LAMP, including 
              improved facilities, increased student support and enhanced  faculty/mentor
              support systems.    Establishing LAMP closes a critical gap in the nation's SEM
               pipeline.  Implementation of the LAMP moves the nation  substantially toward
              its goal of awarding 50,000 undergraduate  degrees and 2,000 doctorate degrees
              annually by 2000.  Louisiana  relatively large African-American population puts
              the State in a  unique position to make significant contributions to the
              nations  goal of increased minority participation in the SEM enterprise.   the
              timing of this application makes it possible for unprecedented  federal/state
              synergism to result in substantially increased  resources and program
              development activities consis tent with NSF  AMP goals.
