Title       : SSC: "Summer Academy for African American Males in Math and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9550777

Award Number: 9550777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katura C. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith S. Shay  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CHROME (Cooperating Hampton Roads Organizations for Minorities in  Engineering),
              a collaborative partnership southeastern, Virginia,  will operate three math
              and science Academies for African-American  males.  The goal of the Academies
              is to increase the pool of  African-American males interested in and prepared
              for SMET careers.   Specific objectives are to: (1) stimulate more positive
              attitudes  toward and interest in math and science, (2) raise the level of 
              awareness of SMET careers and interest students in SMET careers,  (3) encourage
              students to complete high school, (4) prepare them to  enroll and succeed in
              Algebra I and higher math and science  courses, (5) develop understanding of
              the scientific process, and  (6) improve communication skills.   The Academies
              will be an  integral part of a broad and remarkably effective regional 
              initiative which has been promoting minority and female  participation in SMET
              for eleven years through CHROME.  Students  will receive extensive and
              continuing enrichment and support  through high school via the very effective
              network of school-based  CHROME clubs as well as Academy follow-up programs. 
              The nurturing  environment, team structure and many group activities will help 
              solidify a supportive and enduring peer group.  Each student will  have a
              mentor, one of many local African-American in SMET careers,  who will take a
              personal interest in and encourage the student,  discuss career interests and
              paths, and provide ongoing support.   Students also will be exposed to role
              models of minorities in math  and science in the university faculty and
              students, work site  contacts, and guest speakers.    A total of 75 rising 7th
              and 8th grade African-American males will  be served at three sites, sponsored
              by partner universities:   Hampton University, Norfolk State University, and
              Old Dominion  University.  The partners offer both predominantly (or, in the
              case  of ODU, significant) minority student populations and strong SMET 
              research and degree programs.   Students will be drawn primarily  from four
              minority-majority urban school districts in Hampton Roads  and selected for
              their interest in and need for the program.  ***
