Title       : Mathematics and Science Teacher Enhancement through Chaos and Fractals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9550052

Award Number: 9550052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1110170            (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz-Otto Peitgen peitgen@acc.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Barba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara E. Nunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. Voss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angie L. Matamoros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lee C. Klingler  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Laurence Wantuck  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9550052  Peitgen    MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE TEACHER ENHANCEMENT THROUGH CHAOS
              AND FRACTALS    Florida Atlantic University targets 200 middle and secondary
              school teachers in Broward County, Florida, with enhancement experiences in the
              exploratory and creative aspects of  chaos and fractals.  The first year of
              this 39-month project is devoted to preparation and planning:  fifteen lead
              teachers participate in a three-week summer institute; and write, pilot, and
              revise several CATEs (Curriculum and Textbook Enhancements) prior to the
              project's larger-scale teacher enhancement activities in subsequent years.   In
              years 2 and 3, school teams of mathematics and science teachers  are recruited
              from the middle and secondary schools in the Broward County system.  They
              complete an initial three-week summer institute and participate in follow-up
              activities during the academic year plus one-week in the subsequent summer.   
              Development, field testing, and revision of CATEs is one component of the
              project; these are clusters of activities that explore ideas drawn from chaos
              and fractals, and which are used to enhance a topic in the curriculum or to
              connect a topic with other parts of the curriculum.  CATE's are written and
              based on the Broward County School District curriculum and their state-adopted
              textbook series.  After use throughout this project and further evaluation and
              testing, the CATEs will be revised for broader use and published.  
              Springer-Verlag of New York has made a commitment to serve as publisher.   
              Project evaluation, in addition to collecting ongoing data for formative
              evaluation, addresses some of the larger questions:  Does the teaching style of
              the teachers change (as reflected in interviews and in their portfolios) as
              they become more focused on problem solving?  Does the learning of the students
              (as reflected in interviews and in their portfolios) suggest that they, too,
              are adopting a more open-ended, exploratory/confirmatory model with respect to
              mathematics?  Evaluation activiti es include interviews, videotaping, standard
              and open-ended items, and in-class observations.   Cost-sharing from Florida
              Atlantic University and the Broward County School System represents 83% of the
              NSF award amount.
