Title       : A Machine Vision Application Teaching Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9550986

Award Number: 9550986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Buchwald   (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Barnes  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard L. LeBoeuf  (Principal Investigator former)
              Leonard Gold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With machine vision proliferating in the U.S.  as an affordable  tool for
              automation and quality assurance, it is becoming  increasingly important that
              engineering technology colleges  produce technicians and technologists capable
              of designing and  integrating machine vision applications.  Unfortunately, the 
              machine vision application process is not taught at any  engineering or
              engineering technology program in the country,  since most programs that
              include machine vision prefer to  concentrate on vision theory and processing
              algorithm  development.  This project addresses this critical need through  the
              acquisition and integration of industrial quality machine  vision equipment for
              an Automated Manufacturing Systems (AMS)  laboratory and through the
              development od laboratory exercises  aimed at teaching the process of applying
              machine vision and  lighting technologies for real industrial projects.  
              Acquiring  the needed equipment - including an Application Lighting 
              Investigation System (ALIS) - through this project corrects this  problem and
              creates a truly unique teaching laboratory that  fulfills industry's need for
              automation technicians and  technologists.  The potential impact of this
              project is as  widespread as is industrial automation.   In the university 
              immediate area, there are at least five companies that are using  or are
              considering using machine vision, and nationwide there are  certainly hundreds.
