Title       : Dayton Partnership in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9153916

Award Number: 9153916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick K. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Lasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Matczynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three year program, a collaborative of public and                         
              private sector organizations and business in Dayton, Ohio,                     
              will address needs for the improvement of the K-12 science                     
              education program in the Dayton Public Schools.  This will                     
              be accomplished through in-service training of teachers and                    
              through pilot testing and assessment of components of a                        
              revised science curriculum.  The collaborative brings                          
              together the resources of 27 partners.  The lead agency will                   
              be the University of Dayton.                                                   
                                                                                             
              University faculty from science disciplines, science                           
              education, and teacher education will provide academic year                    
              and summer coursework to help teachers from five elementary                    
              and secondary Professional Development Schools in the City                     
              of Dayton Public Schools improve content knowledge and                         
              science teaching skills.  A seminar series for secondary                       
              level teachers will be taught by scientists, engineers, and                    
              other personnel employed by private sector partners.                           
                                                                                             
              The participating teachers will receive intensive training                     
              to prepare them for roles as trainers and on-site resource                     
              staff for personnel in other schools within the district.                      
              Training will emphasize the development of critical thinking                   
              skills and the use of interactive learner-centered science                     
              lessons.  Content areas to be covered for elementary                           
              teachers includes environmental science and organismal                         
              biology.  Biology, geology, chemistry, and physics will be                     
              offered to secondary teachers. Fifty elementary school and                     
              30 secondary school personnel from the five Professional                       
              Development Schools will participate in the project.                           
              Workshops will take place both during the academic year and                    
              summer months. Summer workshops will be two weeks in                           
              duration.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              An amount equal to 151% of NSF costs has been provided as                      
              cost sharing.
