Title       : AMP: Texas Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9153745

Award Number: 9153745
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5319940            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karan L. Watson watson@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal describes the creation of a Texas Alliance where the             
              Texas A&M University will lead an alliance of nine Texas                       
              Universities (Texas A&I, Corpus Christi State, Laredo State,                   
              Prairie View A&M, Texas A&M at Galveston, Texas Women's University,            
              Texas A&M University, Tarleton State, and West Texas University),              
              31 Texas community colleges, 67 initial industry partners, and 12              
              national laboratories joined in a comprehensive coalition dedicated            
              to improving the quality of the undergraduate and graduate                     
              education of minorities in engineering, mathematics and the                    
              sciences through a program of enhanced preparation, recruitment,               
              transfer and retention.  Eleven fundamental goals were presented               
              which support six major components:                                            
                                                                                             
              1.   Texas Summer Research Internships Program - This program is               
                   the backbone of the Texas Alliance.  It is designed to provide            
                   a comprehensive financial support mechanism to participating              
                   students while they interact with scientists and engineering.             
                                                                                             
              2.   Pre-College Program - This program will support TexPREP which             
                   is designed to strengthen problem solving skills and promote              
                   awareness, interest, and dedication to achieving the goal of              
                   entering college level engineering and science degree                     
                   programs.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              3.   Transfer Stipends - This program will award Transfer Stipends             
                   to students in their final year of a science or pre-                      
                   engineering degree track at the participating community                   
                   colleges.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              4.   Texas Alliance Stipends - This program supplements the Texas              
                   Summer Research Internship Program by guaranteeing students               
                   that complete a summer intern academic year stipends support.             
                                                                                             
              5.   Non-Traditional Student Stipends Program - This program awards            
                   stipends to minority women with young children to assist these            
                   women to continue or start their science or engineering                   
                   education.  This is a supplemental award.                                 
                                                                                             
              6.   Internships at Monterrey Tech - Five summer research                      
                   internships for study at Monterrey Institute of Technology in             
                   Mexico for minority students.  Students will be allowed to                
                   work in a major center of research were Anglo culture is not              
                   the dominant experience.
