Title       : Professional Development for Exhibit Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9153891

Award Number: 9153891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $727747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Duensing   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe Ansel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Semper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Exploratorium proposes to conduct a staff development                      
              program to help 36 museum professionals expand their exhibit                   
              development capabilities.  Our intent is to conduct a 2 year                   
              program in which eighteen participants a year will take                        
              part.  Each year, Eploratorium senior exhibit development                      
              staff and quest faculty from other science museums, will                       
              hold a one-week seminar; this will be followed by a four-                      
              week internship at the Exploratorium.  The year would                          
              conclude with a week long seminar on the educational and                       
              programmatic use of exhibits.  A maximum of two persons from                   
              any single museum would be allowed to participate in the                       
              program enabling us to serve a minimum of 18 and a maximum                     
              of 36 museums from around the United States.  Candidates                       
              would have to demonstrate an appropriate level of                              
              professional experience and committment. A significant                         
              aspect of the program is the individual attention the                          
              Exploratorium will provide by organizing the internships to                    
              occur in six consecutive sessions, each limited to three                       
              participants.  A senior exhibit developer will act as a                        
              mentor/advisor for the participants and help them experience                   
              the process of turning ideas into variable exhibits.                           
              Participants will be able to make use of the exhibit staff,                    
              shop resources and the participating museums would obtain a                    
              core set nof 20 exhibits; these would be selected from a                       
              matrix of over 100 possible exhibits.  In this way museums                     
              would aquire refined and innovative exhibits which would                       
              best serve their individual pedegogical and technical needs.                   
              These exhibits would be built by Exploratorium staff with                      
              the directinvolvement of the program participants.                             
              Selections would be made during a week-long consultation                       
              visit with Exploratorium staff.
