Title       : THE WAY THINGS WORK
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a9153976

Award Number: 9153976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2588012            (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin Getchell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sesame Workshop
	      
	      New York, NY  10023    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Children's Television Workshop is embaring on a ground-                   
              breaking experiment in informal science education: the                         
              production of an entertaining animated series of 13 half-                      
              hour programs for Saturday morning commercial television,                      
              based on David Macaulay's bestselling book, The Way Things                     
              Work.  The audience will be six- to eleven-year olds, with                     
              special focus on minority and economically disadvantaged                       
              children.  The series' primary goal will be to entertain                       
              children with lively and appealing characters in a dramatic                    
              storyline, while stimulating children's interest in the                        
              scientific principles behind the workings of familiar                          
              machines and illustrating the action of their parts.  NSF                      
              support will enable CTW to adapt the CTW Model -- the                          
              collaborative process used in earlier NSF-supported                            
              programs, 3-2-1 Contact and Square One Tv -- to the                            
              opportunities of the animation format and the realities of                     
              the partnership with a commercial network.                                     
                                                                                             
                   Through a development agreement with CBS, CTW has begun                   
              the process of developing the series concept, characters,                      
              and storylines.  Upon successful completion of this phase,                     
              production will follow with an anticipated broadcast                           
              premiere in fall 1992.  NSF's $2.36 million support will                       
              allow this project to be possible by completing the series'                    
              funding; it will allow CTW to conduct significant formative                    
              research and summative analyses of educational impact, and                     
              to reach large minority and economically disadvantaged                         
              audiences through wider promotion and the creation and                         
              distribution of complementary print materials.
