Title       : Introducing Sputtering Technology to Physics Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9153050

Award Number: 9153050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11236              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Shea sheamj@csus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles P. Newcomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this project is to make available to                  
              undergraduate physics majors and other students the equipment                  
              necessary for fabricating material samples by means of                         
              sputtering technology.   The Department of Physics and                         
              Astronomy at CSUS is presently revising its program to include                 
              more emphasis on applied topics, especially in the areas of                    
              Solid State Physics and Optics.  The preparation of material                   
              samples and the subsequent characterization of their electrical                
              and optical properties is an important basic skill in any such                 
              program.   Students are being introduced to the theory and                     
              practice of sputtering and then using the technology to                        
              fabricate and characterize samples with interesting electrical                 
              and optical properties in several upper-division courses.The                   
              physics department is in the final stages of modernizing and                   
              adding elective concentrations in the BA and BS degree                         
              programs.   These changes make the programs more closely match                 
              the career goals of present-day students and introduce subject                 
              matter into the curriculum of more relevance to the                            
              semiconductor and optics industries that are moving into the                   
              Sacramento area in ever greater numbers.  Eventually the                       
              department expects that this will attract more students to a                   
              physics major.   The purchase of this sputtering equipment                     
              makes it possible to offer students hands-on experience in a                   
              very important area of solid state physics and optics which is                 
              of particular importance to those pursuing an advanced degree                  
              or a job in experimental research or industrial work.NSF grant                 
              funds are being matched with funds from non-federal sources.
