Title       : Student Watershed Research Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9153815

Award Number: 9153815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley M. Jarrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this "Student Watershed Research Project" is                    
              to promote collaboration between science teachers and                          
              cooperating scientists to involve students in significant                      
              scientific research as an integral part of science                             
              instruction during the regular school day.  The 3-year                         
              program will develop and disseminate training,                                 
              instructional materials, and support enabling student                          
              collection, interpretation, and communication of scientific                    
              data in a local watershed.  Middle/high school teachers                        
              will participate in aquatic research, and  develop                             
              instructional plans to involve their students.  Reliable,                      
              replicable data collection procedures for use with students                    
              will be developed or adapted from existing sources and                         
              validated in cooperation with scientists from universities                     
              and government agencies.  Under the guidance of their                          
              teacher, students will collect and analyze physical,                           
              chemical, and biological data from a local watershed.                          
              Through a project-developed computer conferencing system,                      
              students will contribute their data to a regional data base                    
              and discuss their findings across school and municipal                         
              boundaries.  Teachers will receive information and support                     
              electronically to continue collaboration with peers and                        
              cooperating scientists.  Students will interact with the                       
              scientists for questions and discussion.  Student data will                    
              be contributed to public agencies and university research                      
              projects.  Teachers and students will present findings,                        
              discuss issues, and attend additional training workshops at                    
              a regional convention involving all project participants.                      
              Project-developed training, materials, and methodologies                       
              will be packaged for dissemination to any district                             
              interested in adopting the program.                                            
                                                                                             
              The project runs from September 1, 1991 to September 30,                       
              1994.  The cost sharing by the institution is 34% of the                       
              amount requested from NSF.
