Title       : Teachers' Learning from Reform: The Case of Mathematics Instruction in
               California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9153834

Award Number: 9153834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis M. Fennell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2479130            (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope L. Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Michigan State University will conduct a four-year study of                    
              teachers' learning from mathematics education reform efforts                   
              in California.  The study will focus on four reform                            
              elements: tests, texts, professional development and the                       
              California Mathematics Framework.   The professional                           
              development models to be studied are six exemplary NSF-                        
              funded Teacher Enhancement projects.  The study will attempt                   
              to answer such questions as how teachers change and learn in                   
              response to current reform movements, what influences their                    
              learning, and how do teachers' personal and professional                       
              biographies affect what they learn.  In all 102 elementary                     
              school teachers will be studied, thirty intensively and 72                     
              less intensively.  In addition, a mail/telephone survey will                   
              be conducted with 800 California elementary teachers to                        
              investigate more broadly the influences of policy on teacher                   
              thinking and practice, to gather information on the                            
              understandings, ideas and practices of a larger group of                       
              elementary teachers, and to contribute to the development of                   
              indicators useful to studying change.  The survey will also                    
              allow the PIs to place the teachers whom they had observe in                   
              depth in the context of a representative sample of                             
              California teachers.  From the study, case studies and                         
              evaluation instruments will be developed which will                            
              contribute to innovations in teacher education, teacher                        
              change, and reform.                                                            
                                                                                             
              In studying the change process, this project has great                         
              potential for stimulating the construction, investigation,                     
              documentation and refinement of effective approaches for                       
              teacher enhancement.                                                           
              MSU's cost-sharing accounts for 12% of the NSF budget.
