Title       : Improving and Implementing Technology in Calculus with Advanced Placement
               Teachers: A National Force for Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9153852

Award Number: 9153852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $979943             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kenelly   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Clemson University Foundation will conduct a four-year                         
              program to develop materials that can be used to train AP                      
              calculus teachers and to help them successfully implement                      
              the use of graphing calculators in their calculus                              
              instruction.  Four sets of materials will be developed: a)                     
              a set of references, b) a set of workshop materials, c) a                      
              set of instructional examples, and d) a set of prototypic                      
              test items.  Criteria for which areas of calculus materials                    
              will be developed are the importance of the calculus                           
              concepts in the AP calculus syllabus, instruction of the                       
              concepts may be significantly changed when graphing                            
              calculators are used, and the set of currently available                       
              reference materials does not sufficiently explore the use                      
              of graphing calculators in teaching the concepts.                              
                                                                                             
              Clemson University, as the site of the AP Calculus reading,                    
              will use the materials developed to create a cadre of 350                      
              high school and college mathematics teachers, themselves AP                    
              calculus readers, who will be trained and well-equipped as                     
              a national team of AP Calculus workshop leaders.  The                          
              training will consist of 9 days of summer institutes held                      
              over the four year period.  It is anticipated that in the                      
              next four years, these workshops leaders will deliver over                     
              a thousand workshops for approximately twenty                                  
              thousand second-wave calculus teachers.  The emphasis is on                    
              the implementation of the graphing calculator in calculus                      
              curriculum because the AP Calculus Committee of the College                    
              Board has issued policy statements to the effect that                          
              beginning in May 1993 (May 1995), both the Calculus AB and                     
              Calculus BC examinations will contain questions for which a                    
              scientific (graphing) calculator is necessary of                               
              advantageous.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Clemson University, the College Board, Educational Testing                     
              Service, Hewlett Packard, and Texas Instruments                                
              cost-sharing account for 119% of the NSF budget.                               
                                                                                             
              The project has the potential for improving the conceptual                     
              and problem-solving content of existing high school                            
              calculus courses through enhancing calculus teachers'                          
              capacities to incorporate computing technologies into their                    
              courses.  If any institution can have an impact on                             
              introducing technology into the teaching of secondary                          
              school calculus, it may well be the College Board.  And                        
              Dr. Kenelly's connections with the AP Program and his long                     
              experience with the College Board are key strengths of this                    
              proposal.
