Title       : Empowering Teachers: Mathematical Inquiry Through Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1995      
File        : a9153760

Award Number: 9153760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1270452            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Carter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fadia Harik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Olds  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              BBN Systems and Technologies will conduct a three-and-one-                     
              half-year program to develop and assess a comprehensive                        
              teacher enhancement program to foster the strategies, art,                     
              and practice of mathematical inquiry teaching in middle                        
              school mathematics classrooms.  The program employs                            
              interactive computer software and video technology as key                      
              instructional tools for fostering inquiry learning and                         
              teaching skills.  The program will comprise four graduate-                     
              level courses, two of which, Reasoning About Data and                          
              Mathematical Exploration and Experiment, were developed in                     
              a recently completed teacher enhancement grant.  The two                       
              new courses, Animated Geometry and Interactive Algebra,                        
              will draw extensively on computer activities for supporting                    
              inquiry teaching.  The courses will be field-tested at the                     
              University of Massachusetts, Boston; Lesley College,                           
              Cambridge; and the Educational Collaborative.  Careful                         
              documentation of the extent to which teachers change as a                      
              result of these courses will be undertaken.  The courses                       
              will be endorsed by the Massachusetts Department of                            
              Education and disseminated statewide by the Massachusetts                      
              Corporation for Educational Telecommunications.  National                      
              dissemination will be instantiated through pre-conference                      
              workshops of relevant organizational meetings such as NCTM                     
              or AERA.   Over 240 middle school teachers will be involved                    
              in the development and piloting of these courses.                              
                                                                                             
              Logo Computer Systems, Key Curriculum Press, EDCO, MCET and                    
              BBN cost-sharing accounts for 7% of the NSF budget.                            
                                                                                             
              Developing teacher enhancement materials which creatively                      
              make use of the latest technology is indeed desirable.  BBN                    
              produces products that are at the cutting edge of                              
              technology.  And the Massachusetts Corporation for                             
              Educational Telecommunications provides and excellent                          
              avenue for dissemination of the course materials so                            
              developed.
