Title       : Blackfeet Mathematics and Science Education Improvement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9153850

Award Number: 9153850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard N. Vandeberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blackfeet Community Col
	      P.O. BOX 819
	      Browning, MT  594170819    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will improve the quality of mathematics and                       
              science education on the Blackfeet Indian Reservation                          
              through a multi-faceted program:  1)  A two day reservation-                   
              wide conference designed to bring together various community                   
              groups, along with state officials, university system                          
              personnel, and national leaders; 2) four intensive two-week                    
              summer workshops for local educators, students from BCC, and                   
              interested community members; 3) eight 1 to 2 day workshops                    
              during the regular academic year for local educators,                          
              students from BCC, and interested community members; 4) the                    
              piloting of a Mathematics and Science Associate Degree                         
              program involving 10 Blackfeet students.  The reservation                      
              wide conference will include:  education policy makers such                    
              as school board members and district administrators, Bureau                    
              of Indian Affairs and Indian Health Service officials,                         
              Tribal Elders, Montana State University personnel, and                         
              officials from the Office of Public Instruction; nationally                    
              known Indian educators and scientists; local teachers,                         
              parents and students.  The focus will be the current state                     
              of math/science education on the Blackfeet Reservations.                       
              The summer workshops for 16 teachers and 10 students will                      
              study new methods for improving math/science education among                   
              American Indian students and adaptation of activities to the                   
              Blackfeet culture.  The academic year workshops will                           
              acquaint 20 educators with nationally known math/science                       
              curriculum projects; their content and pedagogy.                               
                                                                                             
              An unusual feature of the project is having Blackfeet                          
              students mentor practicing teachers to provide a cultural                      
              background for teachers.  Mentoring for math/science content                   
              in the other direction provides science/cultural balance in                    
              a meaningful way.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The Principal Investigator for the project is Mr. Gerard                       
              Vandeberg.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 37% of the NSF award.
