Title       : Imaging Science Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9153884

Award Number: 9153884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1348850            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Aprison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Sci & Ind
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The museum of Science and Industry, Chicago, in                                
              collaboration with the University of Chicago, proposes to                      
              develop a major new exhibit on "Imaging Science."  Imaging                     
              science is a new field rapidly emerging from its roots in                      
              the physical, biological, and behavioral sciences, and the                     
              graphic arts, and is becoming increasingly important in all                    
              areas of scientific research.  The primary rationale for                       
              developing an exhibit about imaging science, and related                       
              programming, is to enhance the overall scientific literacy                     
              of four million visitors that come to the Museum each year.                    
              In view of the scientific, medical, educational, and                           
              cultural value of images, the Museum and University of                         
              Chicago believe that an exhibit on imaging science will have                   
              broad appeal to museum visitors of many different ages and                     
              backgrounds.  Today, scientific imaging empowers us to look                    
              inward, at the infinite complexity of ourselves, and outward                   
              to the edge of our universe.  The main thrust of the exhibit                   
              will be to teach visitors how images communicate knowledge.                    
              Technological advances in computer workstations, that are                      
              revolutionizing scientific study, will be highlighted.                         
              Exhibit sections will also identify imaging science                            
              breakthroughs that will impact the lives of students and                       
              members of the workforce in the 1990s and beyond.
