Title       : ROLE OF EDUCATIONAL STAKEHOLDERS IN CREATING TELECOMPUTING INFRASTRUCTURE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9153955

Award Number: 9153955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82478              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Tinker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7257,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a proposal from the Technical Education Research Centers, Inc.         
              (TERC) to focus attention on the needs of educational telecomputing by         
              holding a founding meeting for a Consortium on Educational Telecomputing       
              with follow-on organizational activities.  The goal of the Consortium is       
              to improve education by stimulating the provision of quality                   
              telecomputing-based learning at the lowest possible cost to schools.           
              This Consortium would create and disseminate education telecomputing           
              software and curriculum in mathematics and science both by pooling             
              funding available to members and by seeking additional funding from            
              government and business.  The Consortium would also coordinate the             
              establishment and interconnection of networks and hosts.                       
                                                                                             
              The founding meeting of the Consortium is tentatively scheduled for            
              Cambridge April 18-19, 1991 with 55 participants of which 25 will be           
              subsidized by the requested funding.  TERC is contributing to the costs        
              of the meeting and additional funding is expected from corporate               
              sponsors.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The establishment of this Consortium represents a novel development for        
              educational reform.  It is a conscious attempt to employ a strategy of         
              pooling interests and resources available to states, provinces and             
              corporations and others interested in education to create and share            
              software, curricula and expertise.  It envisions essentially public            
              dissemination mechanisms which could result in substantial savings at          
              the school level.  Although there are unique factors which favor the           
              success of this particular effort, the Consortium idea might have              
              application in other areas of interest to the NSF.  The conference also        
              provides a unique opportunity to both determine and influence the              
              planning of the states and other organizations concerning educational          
              telecomputing.  One of the results of the grant will be the broad              
              dissemination of a report that summarizes these issues.                        
                                                                                             
              This project is jointly supported by the programs for Applications of          
              Advanced Technology and Science & Mathematics Education Networks.
