Title       : The Utilization of Science Museums by African Americans: Factors Influencing
               Free-Choice Visitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9153972

Award Number: 9153972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49968              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Falk falk@ilinet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Learning Innov In
	      1310 Harbor Road
	      Annapolis, MD  214034719    301/268-5149

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This research is to examine free-choice leisure behavior                  
              of African Americans as it relates to the utilization of                       
              science museums.  Hard statistics for African American museum                  
              visitors are not available; but preliminary data based on                      
              visitor profile studies undertaken by individual organizations                 
              suggest that of the three categories of visitor frequency, most                
              African American visitors fall into the lower two: infrequent                  
              (one or two times per year) or not at all.  (The vast majority                 
              of frequent visitors are non African Americans.)                               
                                                                                             
                   The purpose of this research is to dig deeper into the                    
              question of the utilization of science museums by African                      
              Americans.  Not only will the relationships between variables                  
              identified in previous studies (socio-economic,                                
              cultural/ethnic, institutional, and regional factors) be                       
              examined but others such as how individuals learn about museum                 
              programs and the structure of the African American family                      
              (household) will also be included.                                             
                                                                                             
                   The research will begin by collecting base line visitor                   
              profiles at a zoo, aquarium, natural history museum, and a                     
              science center.  Detailed information relating to the past                     
              history of museum-going will be collected by means of                          
              interviews of randomly selected African American and White                     
              family visitors at several science museums.  Finally, indepth                  
              interviews regarding leisure time activities and preferences                   
              will be conducted in six African American and racially mixed                   
              communities representing different socio-economic levels.                      
                                                                                             
                   The ultimate goal is to analyse the attitudes of African                  
              Americans toward museums and to provide an understanding of the                
              variables involved that will be of use to museum program                       
              planners and educators as they design their activities.  The                   
              desired result is for this segment of our society to have a                    
              better opportunity to benefit from the rich resources of these                 
              informal science education institutions.
