Title       : Modeling Understanding to Study Conceptual Change in Learning Physics....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1994   
File        : a9153989

Award Number: 9153989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey I. Dykstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will investigate existing examples of                             
              conceptual change over a range of topics in physics in order                   
              to discern different types of conceptual change and to                         
              identify instructional strategies effective at inducing                        
              them.  The result will be a taxonomy of conceptual change                      
              which associates types of conceptual change with                               
              instructional strategies to facilitate the change process.                     
              These strategies will be developed on the basis of the                         
              investigators' classroom experience and a careful study of                     
              current work in student conceptions and conceptual change,                     
              as well as selected examples of conceptual change in the                       
              history of mechanics.  The field work will gather                              
              information about students' conceptions through various                        
              interview and diagnostic methods as well as computationally-                   
              based protocol analysis, including use of computational                        
              linguistics, term clustering and knowledge representation.                     
              This work will provide information for building conceptual                     
              representations which will explicitly depict particular                        
              elements and organizations of students' conceptions that are                   
              critical to the process of conceptual change.  The utility                     
              of natural language processing and other computational                         
              analyses in extracting information and the development of                      
              conceptual representations will be demonstrated.  These                        
              techniques will guide the construction of the conceptual                       
              change taxonomy.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research will have several outcomes:  1)  a deeper                        
              understanding of the role conceptions in understanding                         
              physics and solving physics problems, demonstrating that the                   
              task of physics instruction is one of changing belief                          
              systems and not merely one of imparting facts and problem-                     
              solving skills, 2)  a more detailed analysis of alternative                    
              conceptions and the nature of conceptual change and 3)  a                      
              taxonomy of conceptual change associated with strategies                       
              which seem to induce particular types of conceptual change                     
              that can guide teachers in the classroom.
