Title       : Massive Intervention in Elementary & Middle School Mathematics Instruction:
               Private Sector, University & School DistrictCollaborative Utilizing the
               National One-to-One Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9153941

Award Number: 9153941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredricka K. Reisman freddie@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Gispan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Drexel University will conduct a two-year program to enable                    
              58 elementary school teachers to become mathematics teaching                   
              specialists who will do all the grades 1-8 mathematics                         
              teaching in 10 elementary and 3 middle schools in the School                   
              District of Philadelphia.  The 13 Principals from                              
              participants' schools will also participate in the program.                    
              The project will improve the content knowledge, pedagogical                    
              skills and assessment techniques used by the participants.                     
              Mathematical content knowledge will include estimation,                        
              measurement, probability and statistics, transformational                      
              and projective geometry, topology, applied mathematics and                     
              problem solving.  Participants will learn to use diagnostic                    
              teaching strategies in teaching mathematics and will                           
              incorporate assessment as an interactive feedback device to                    
              focus instruction.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The project will involve the private sector in creating a                      
              video tape resource library of activities concerning real                      
              world mathematics applications for classroom use.  It will                     
              engage private sector engineers and scientists in one-to-one                   
              mentoring partnerships with teacher participants.  The                         
              project will also involve the active participation of the                      
              Franklin Institute Science Museum.  Participants may earn                      
              11.5 graduate quarter credits which may be applied toward a                    
              Master's degree.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project has the potential for causing systemic change                     
              in grades 1 through 8 mathematics instruction in the School                    
              District of Philadelphia.
