Title       : NAVIGATION: A Cultural and Technological Look at Finding One's Way
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9153962

Award Number: 9153962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $586264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Humphrey tomh@exploratorium.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Pearce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Exploratorium proposes to create a multidimensional                        
              exhibition on the theme of navigation.  The exhibition                         
              proper will contain approximately 20 new interactive                           
              exhibits dealing with topics of human orientation,                             
              wayfinding/exploration, the importance of time in                              
              navigation, maps and navigation traditions.  Alongside the                     
              exhibits we will display real navigational artifacts                           
              borrowed from other museums.  We have identified                               
              approximately 40 existing exhibits which, while not in the                     
              main show, will receive textual modification to show their                     
              relation to navigational topics.  In addition to the                           
              exhibition of artifacts and interactive exhibits, we will                      
              present a series of lectures, theme weekends, and                              
              demonstrations of navigational techniques.  During the run                     
              of the show we will host a Symposium On The American                           
              Encounter wherein we will hold an open forum of lectures and                   
              discussion of historical, anthropological and social                           
              consequences of cultural encounter on the North American                       
              Continent.  We will produce both a brochure and a high                         
              quality catalog for this show.  In addition we will create                     
              written "pathways" of organization of this museum-wide show                    
              to bring to focus different features and approaches to                         
              navigation.  Our education departments will play a leading                     
              role in creating more formal programs for our visitors.  The                   
              physical show will be reproduced in a travelling version to                    
              tour nine venues in the three years following its opening at                   
              the Exploratorium.  We will collect the results of our                         
              researchers in a dissemination package to be made available                    
              to others in the field.
