Title       : The Impact of Late Eocene/ Early Oligocene Climate Change on the Continental
               Biota of Patagonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0087636

Award Number: 0087636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Kay   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Madden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5911,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The end of the Eocene and the beginning of the Oligocene mark an
              important change in world climate, when it transitioned from 'greenhouse' to
              'icehouse'. The timing and biotic impact of the change has been studied in the
              continental records of North America, Europe and Asia and they show a response
              to both local and global influences. As yet, however, no continental mammal and
              plant sequence has been studied in the Southern Hemisphere. Recent revision of
              the ages of rock units and biotas in Patagonia has demonstrated that the
              Sarmiento Fm at Gran Barranca in Patagonian Argentina spans the late Eocene
              through early Oligocene interval; this is the only known continental vertebrate
              and plant sequence so far identified from the Southern Hemisphere that spans
              this interval. Preliminary analysis of the mammalian herbivores suggests that
              dramatic changes occurred over a comparatively short interval of geologic time.
              The same sedimentary interval contains plant microfossils that document
              important change in the plant communities. This proposal requests funding for
              further study of this terrestrial biotic change.  The geochronology of the
              Sarmiento Fm at Gran Barranca will be refined using radiometric dating,
              chemical identification of tephra, and paleomagnetism.
              Stratigraphically-controlled collections will be made of vertebrates and plant
              microfossils. Climate change and its impact on the biota will be assessed 1) by
              documenting changes in mammalian community structure (richness, origination and
              extinction rates and ecological morphology); and 2) by documenting changes in
              vegetation and floral composition from the study of phytoliths. 

