Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Synthesis and Verification of High Performance
               Timed Circuits and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0087281

Award Number: 0087281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris J. Myers myers@ece.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5921,5978,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0087281
Myers

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Chris Myers of the University of Utah and Professor
              Tomohiro Yonder of the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan.  The researchers
              will be undertaking a study of synthesis and verification of high performance
              timed circuits and systems.   In order to continue to produce circuits of
              increasing speeds, designers are considering aggressive circuit design styles
              such as self-resetting or delayed-reset domino circuits.  These design styles
              can achieve a significant improvement in circuit speed as demonstrated by their
              use in a gigahertz research microprocessor d(guTS) at IBM.  Designers are also
              considering asynchronous circuits due to potential higher performance and lower
              power as demonstrated by the RAPPID instruction length decoder designed at
              Intel.  This design was three times faster while using only half the power of
              the synchronous design.  These new timed circuit styles, however, cannot be
              efficently and accurately analyzed using traditional static timing analysis
              methods.  This lack of analysis tools is one of the reasons for the lack of
              mainstream acceptance of these design styles.  The collaborators aim to develop
              practical tools for the synthesis and verification of timed circuit design
              styles.  They will plan to unify the best aspects, from both groups of
              researchers, of their analysis and verification methodologies and then plan to
              develop techniques for the synthesis and  verification of industrial-scale
              systems.  These systems will include a combination of both datapath and control
              circuits.  They will develop methods using automated abstraction in which
              datapath components will be verified partially and control parts completely. 
              They will then use hierarchical information to determine how the abstraction is
              to be performed.

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. This research
              advances international human resources through the participation of a graduate
              student.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

