Title       : Robots in an Introductory Survey Course in Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a0087963

Award Number: 0087963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6423               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lonnie R. Fairchild fairchlr@plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Lavelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) We are using mobile robots as a unifying theme in an
              introductory survey course in computer science, for students of all majors. Our
              breadth-first survey course covers topics in logic circuits, machine
              organization and assembly-level programming, programming in a higher-level
              language, computability, artificial intelligence, and social concerns.
              Breadth-first courses are useful for non-majors as well as computer science
              majors, but face the problem of providing enough depth and suitable projects to
              develop real understanding of the material. Our projects involving the design
              and construction of simple robots provide a means for connecting the different
              topics of a survey course and enable a pedagogical approach in which students
              learn by doing (rather than by being told). Interesting problems with multiple
              kinds of solutions are being used to challenge a broad range of students and
              encourage participation by those who have been hesitant about their abilities
              in technology, science, or mathematics. 

We are building upon work performed
              at MIT, Swarthmore, Wellesley and Colby where robots have been used to generate
              interest and make the course material more accessible to students. Our adaption
              is to take the work from these highly selective institutions and bring it to
              our students while simultaneously enhancing the content to include machine
              organization.

