Title       : Theoretical Solid State Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0087088

Award Number: 0087088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $948000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin L. Cohen mlcohen@uclink.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Louie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0087088
Cohen
This grant supports a long-range, broad-based research program
              in condensed matter physics and materials science.  The research covers the
              fields of semiconductors, metals, surfaces and interfaces, defects,
              superconductivity, materials under pressure, clusters, fullerene-based
              materials, nanotubes, conjugated polymers, and many-electron effects in solids.
               The major objective is to use quantum theory to explain and predict the
              properties of materials.  Emphasis is placed on using realistic models, close
              collaborations with experimentalists, investigations and suggestions for
              producing novel and useful materials, development of new theoretical
              approaches, and predictions related to electronic and structural properties of
              solids.
 
Many new techniques based on quantum theory were developed in this
              research program to enable accurate calculations for real materials.  In
              particular, the ab initio pseudopotential method and total energy techniques
              are applied within the density functional formalism to compute ground-state
              properties.  Excited-state (spectroscopic) phenomena are investigated using a
              first-principles self-energy approach based on the GW approximation for
              quasiparticle excitations and an ab initio two-particle Green's function method
              based on the Bethe-Saltpeter equation for optical excitations.  Other studies
              rely on variational and diffusion Monte Carlo approaches, molecular dynamics
              simulations, dielectric function methods, BCS theory, density functional
              perturbation theory, and extensions of standard many-body theory.

Proposed
              projects include understanding and predicting properties of nanotubes and
              nanocrystals; hard materials and mechanical properties; semiconductors,
              heterojunctions, and materials under pressure; NMR chemical shifts in solids
              and liquids; electron-hole interaction and optical properties of solids,
              defects, and polymers; quasiparticle excitations, lifetimes, and electron
              correlations in solids; and quantum computing and ransom access devices for
              computers.

The research program has a strong history of supporting graduate
              students and postdoctoral associates.  Because of this extensive involvement of
              graduate students and postdoctoral associates in these projects, expertise and
              knowledge are transferred nationally and internationally.
%%%
This grant
              supports a long-range, broad-based research program in condensed matter physics
              and materials science.  The research covers the fields of semiconductors,
              metals, surfaces and interfaces, defects, superconductivity, materials under
              pressure, clusters, fullerene-based materials, nanotubes, conjugated polymers,
              and many-electron effects in solids.  The major objective is to use quantum
              theory to explain and predict the properties of materials.  Emphasis is placed
              on using realistic models, close collaborations with experimentalists,
              investigations and suggestions for producing novel and useful materials,
              development of new theoretical approaches, and predictions related to
              electronic and structural properties of solids.

The research program has a
              strong history of supporting graduate students and postdoctoral associates. 
              Because of this extensive involvement of graduate students and postdoctoral
              associates in these projects, expertise and knowledge are transferred
              nationally and internationally.
***

