Title       : LTREB: Assessing Mechanisms of Primary Succession on Mount St. Helens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0087040

Award Number: 0087040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger del Moral moral@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087040
del Moral
This LTREB proposal is to extent the continuous record of
              primary plant succession on Mount St. Helens to 25 years. It will clarify and
              extend the understanding of primary succession mechanisms developed in earlier
              studies. Public documentation includes data from permanent plots, grids, and
              photographs available from two web sites. It will improve our comprehension of
              how communities are structured and will help to develop more effective
              strategies to rehabilitate landscapes devastated by human impacts. Previous
              work has shown how distance affects community development, that microsites were
              crucial in early succession and that chance dominates early species assembly.
              By now, pioneer species have established, but initial patterns dictated by
              habitat stress, heterogeneity and isolation persist. There is scant evidence
              that initial colonists are being replaced by better-adapted ones. This study
              will compare development on widespread substrates and atypical, geographically
              isolated sites. It will investigate the development of community homogeneity
              and of positive associations among establishing species, assess evidence for
              deterministic control of community structure, evaluate the importance of
              habitat heterogeneity, attempt to determine rates at which species expand their
              distributions, and evaluate how rapidly developing habitats affect their
              immediate surroundings. Permanent plots and grid monitoring remain the backbone
              of this study. These data will be augmented by studies of species composition
              in relationship to environment, development of stable, repeatable assemblages,
              effects of trees on invasion, dispersal limits along transects, landscape
              effects and turnover rates in permanent plots. At the end of this study, a
              comprehensive discussion of how communities are initiated, developed and
              invaded will be possible.

