Title       : A Nanomaterials/Nanoelectrochemical Route for Communication Between Biochemical
               Processes and IC Chips
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0087676

Award Number: 0087676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Martin crmartin@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Weihong Tan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	XYZ on a Chip: A
              Nanomaterials/Nanoelectrochemical Route for Communication Between Biochemical
              Processes and IC Chips
Proposal Number:		CTS-0087676
Principal
              Investigator:	Charles Martin
Institution:			University of Florida


The
              development of arrays of electrochemical sensors based on nanomaterials to
              detect different analytes is to be demonstrated with biosensors.  The unique
              aspect of this project is that the transduction of the binding event is
              accomplished directly on the chip.  The team will develop processes based on
              redox sensors and electrochemical oligonucleotide sensors.  Technical
              challenges include confinement of sensing elements to micron dimensions, signal
              transduction, and device control and signal processing.  The proposed work in
              electrochemical sensor technology will establish an interface between
              electronics and electrolytes.  A means to isolate and confine biochemical
              processes on chips for making amperometric measurements will be developed. 
              Novel microelectrode configurations, previously developed by the PI, will be
              utilized in an array format for rapid assay experiments.  The development of an
              on-chip potentiostat is proposed. Integration of an onboard controller,
              integrated circuit, and sensor is planned. This effort to provide electrical
              communication between biochemical processes and integrated-circuit technology
              may have applications in molecular electronics, biosensors, and bioartificial
              organs.  The proposed work will complement the NSF Engineering Research Center
              at their institution.  This project is co-funded by the Engineering Education
              and Centers Division.


