Title       : ROLE: Tracking the Course of Mathematical Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0087396

Award Number: 0087396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1719612            (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Anderson ja+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cameron Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Koedinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to improve our ability to track how students solve
              mathematical problems.  This research will use eye tracking to make real-time
              inferences about what the student is thinking and fMRI imaging to make
              inferences about different styles of problem solving.  This research is done in
              the context of both the ACT-R theory of human cognition, which allows us to
              produce computational models of cognition, and a series of cognitive tutors for
              mathematics education, which are based on the ACT-R theory.  The ACT-R theory
              is a theory of how the cognitive system adaptively uses procedural and
              declarative knowledge to achieve its goals.  The research will focus on the
              algebra tutor that is currently in use in high schools and is being adapted for
              use in middle schools.  The research will be concerned with the effect of
              different mathematical representations on problem solving and with different
              strategies for mathematical problem solving.  There will be three lines of
              research.  One, involving eye movements, will document the instructional
              opportunities associated with eye movements in the context of the cognitive
              tutors.  It will particularly focus on the eye movements associated with
              competent use of graphical, tabular, and symbolic representations of functions.
               The second line of research, involving fMRI brain imaging, will study brain
              activation markers of the course of mathematical problem solving.  It will
              particularly focus on distinguishing between students who use an informal,
              verbal form of reasoning with students who use a symbolic, visual form of
              reasoning.  This line will also look at how we can merge information from
              imaging and eye scanning to make both methodologies more effective.  The third
              line of research will study how one can use the information from fMRI scanning
              and eye tracking to produce more effective instruction. The three lines of
              research will converge on a culminating study that attempts to improve the
              effectiveness of the middle school tutor.  It will first use fMRI imaging to
              identify the learning strategies of individual students and then collect
              real-time eye movement to guide instruction as students are learning.   This
              will demonstrate how we can use some of the new emerging sensing technology to
              improve mathematics education. 

