Title       : Technology-supported Performance Assessment for Inquiry-based Science Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a0087751

Award Number: 0087751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Edelson d-edelson@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis M. Gomez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Reiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major challenge for the implementation of inquiry-based science learning is
              the implementation of assessment approaches that can capture the rich forms of
              conceptual learning and strategic reasoning that inquiry learning is designed
              to foster.  To address the challenge, science education reformers are
              advocating performance assessment approach, in which students are evaluated on
              the quality of their performance on cognitively demanding tasks. The goal of
              this research is to identify strategies to support performance assessment with
              technology, taking advantage of the Progress Portfolio, an inquiry-support tool
              developed at Northwestern University. The Progress Portfolio was designed
              initially to foster inquiry by providing tools for learners to create a visible
              record of their activities as an object for reflection, but prior studies
              revealed that the features that make the Progress Portfolio effective as a
              scaffold for reflective inquiry also make it a valuable support for
              assessment.. Accordingly, this research will conduct a pilot investigation of:
              a) the design of performance assessment frameworks to take advantage of
              technology supports, b) the design of technology supports for performance
              assessment c) the application of these technology-supported performance
              assessment frameworks in the design of inquiry-based science curricula, d)
              support for teacher implementation of performance assessment, and e) the
              effectiveness of the technology-supported performance assessments at capturing
              student progress and providing reliable feedback to teachers and students.  The
              project will benefit from a collaboration between researchers from Northwestern
              University with expertise in technological supports for inquiry learning, and
              researchers from the University of California, Berkeley and SRI with expertise
              in performance assessment and curriculum development.  

This project
              addresses the ROLE themes of Research on SMET learning in educational settings
              and Research on SMET learning in complex educational systems.

