Title       : Ferrar Basaltic Tuff-Breccias Formed by Direct Eruption: Evaluating an
               Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0087919

Award Number: 0087919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Elliot   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087919	
Elliot

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the
              initial phase of magmatism associated with the break-up of Gondwanaland.
              Mesozoic break-up of Gondwanaland was marked by a major magmatic event during
              which voluminous basaltic magmas were erupted at the surface and intrusive
              sills and dikes were emplaced at depth within the underlying sedimentary
              sequence. In Antarctica, the extrusive rocks include thick tuff-breccias
              (coarse pyroclastic rocks) hypothesized to have formed by subsurface explosive
              interaction of basaltic magma and water in aquifers. Volcanic fields where
              rising magmas interact explosively with water in aquifers, or at the surface,
              are widespread in modern rift settings. In terms of areal extent and thickness
              of deposits, depth of magma/water interaction, and dominance of basaltic
              tuff-breccia, in comparison with other well documented examples these basaltic
              pyroclastic rocks in Antarctica constitute a unique volcanic field. Study of
              the paleovolcanology of these rocks will yield important new information on the
              origins and emplacement mechanisms of tuff-breccia deposits and on the
              evolution of volcanic fields in which tuff-breccias form a significant
              component.

The goal of this research project is to understand the processes
              involved in the formation of these exceptionally thick tuff-breccias. The
              objectives of the research are to: (1) document the three-dimensional
              architecture of the basaltic pyroclastic rocks; (2) establish the depth of
              magma/water interaction; (3) evaluate aquifer recharge; (4) establish the
              nature and extent of the volcanic field and its paleovolcanologic setting; and
              (5) evaluate the hypothesis that these tuff-breccias are the result of direct
              eruption from volcanic vents.

The large-scale three-dimensional
              relationships of the pyroclastic rocks will be established by field examination
              of lateral and vertical changes in facies (rock associations), and
              relationships to adjacent rock units. Rock samples will be collected for
              examination of microscopic structures and textures that provide clues to the
              modes of interaction, eruption and emplacement. Sedimentary rock fragments in
              the tuff-breccias will be systematically sampled for comparison of the
              lithology and palynology with that of the underlying rock sequence and thus
              establish the time-dependent changes in depth of magma/water
              interaction.

Building on reconnaissance work, the results of this study are
              expected to have broad implications for understanding how tuff-breccias are
              formed by phreatomagmatic processes (the explosive interaction between magma
              and water) and the tectonic settings in which it occurs. Results are also
              expected to develop the paleovolcanologic setting of the Transantarctic
              Mountains during the Jurassic.


