Title       : Resource Management for Broadband Satellite Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0087266

Award Number: 0087266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Rosenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Broadband satellite systems have an important role to play in the delivery
              of multimedia applications.
In this proposal we concentrate on GEO
              (geo-synchronous) based satellite networks. GEO based systems
deliver
              continuous services to a specific region with a single satellite. They play an
              ever-increasing role in
the public and private Internets, due mostly to their
              large geographic coverage, inherent broadcast
capabilities and fast
              deployment. They are attractive to support data, audio and video streaming;
              bulk data
transfer such as software updates or dissemination of Web caches;
              and applications involving limited
interactivity such as distance learning.
              They are also attractive to provide broadband access to users who are
either
              beyond the reach of the terrestrial network, or have particular needs for
              broadcast/multicast
applications or fast deployment.
     We will focus in
              this proposal on Next Generation Satellite Networks that comprise one (or more)
              GEO
satellite with some form of onboard processing (OBP). Two of the essential
              issues regarding broadband
satellite network are 1) end-to-end resource
              management, and 2) network availability.
     Resource management is key to
              deliver acceptable Quality of Service (QoS) to services while
              providing
adequate efficiency. It is central to any satellite system, be it a
              bent pipe or an onboard processing (OBP)
satellite system. Indeed, in order to
              offer flexibility and efficiency to bursty applications, the capacity of
              the
multiple access uplink has to be managed using some bandwidth on demand
              (BoD) scheme.
     We define network availability as the ability for the
              network to offer some level of services to some
applications even during
              degraded periods. Most of the next generation systems will be using the Ka
              band,
which is known for its very difficult transmission characteristics. Many
              solutions involving variable rate
coding, power control, and/or variable
              modulation have been proposed to make this band friendly to
broadband
              applications. This proposal will not study directly those layer 1/2 mechanisms
              but rather study
how their use affects BoD and more generally end-to-end
              resource management.
     Hence the final objective of our proposal is to
              design and evaluate end-to-end resource management
for the Next Generation of
              Satellite Networks that interworks efficiently with the range of
              solutions
proposed by the air-interface designer to improve the availability
              of the transmission. In particular, we
want to understand the trade-off in
              terms of efficiency and system complexity.
     To achieve this ultimate
              objective, we will study:
1. Static end-to-end resource management for large
              GEO OBP systems. The term static refers to the
fact that the coding and
              modulation are fixed. The focus here will be to develop and
              evaluate
mechanisms that are scalable, robust, flexible and protect the OBP
              (i.e., the switch in the sky). We
will build upon our extensive previous work
              in the domain where we developed scalable, robust,
flexible end-to-end
              resource management for large GEO bent pipe systems.
2. Network availability.
              One of the main concerns of satellite network designers is to offer
              an
"appropriate" level of service to the users in spite of the difficult
              characteristics of the frequency
band. However it is not very clear what is
              meant by "an appropriate level of service" since it may
vary from a user to
              another or from an application to another. Most of the studies have focussed
              on
link availability without taking into account the networking and
              applications aspects. We believe
that coordinating the lower layers with the
              upper layers will give us a flexible and cost-efficient
solution allowing the
              system to deliver different levels of network availability to the
              users
depending on their need and their willingness to pay. Hence network
              availability can be seen as a
QoS requirement and should be defined and
              studied that way.
3. Designing end-to-end resource management for a system
              comprising layer 1/2 mechanisms to
dynamically improve the uplink availability
              so as to offer flexible and cost efficient services to the
users. We need to
              propose solutions and to evaluate them to ensure that the increase in
              complexity
is worthwhile in terms of efficiency. We will also propose and
              study some dynamic pricing schemes
integrated with the BoD so as to allow the
              users to indicate their willingness to pay for capacity in a
context where the
              total available capacity is variable due to link impairment.
