Title       : Jamming in Model Supercooled Liquids and Athermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0087349

Award Number: 0087349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea J. Liu liu@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0087349
Liu
This grant supports theoretical and computational research on the
              properties of disordered systems.  In particular, research will be done on the
              concept of jamming.  Many systems with no quenched disorder can jam, i.e.,
              develop a yield stress or an immeasurably long stress relaxation time in a
              disordered state.  These systems include supercooled liquids, colloidal
              suspensions, granular materials, emulsions and foams.  It has recently been
              suggested that the onset of jamming might lead to some degree of universality. 
              This is the concept of jamming.  Specifically, it has been suggested that
              different systems should show similar behavior as they jam, and that each
              system has a jamming phase diagram.

The concept of jamming will be explored
              using numerical simulations on two very different systems that both exhibit
              transitions to constrained dynamics.  The first is a quiescent thermal system,
              namely a binary Lennard-Jones mixture.  This model has been shown to jam as the
              temperature is lowered to the glass transition.  The second system to be
              studied is a driven, athermal system that has been shown to jam as the shear
              stress is lowered to the yield stress or as the density of particles is raised
              above close-packing.

One objective of the proposed research is to exploit
              the idea of jamming to gain new insight into the glass transition by applying
              recent ideas from granular materials (namely force chains) to supercooled
              liquids.  We will also test the idea of jamming by calculating the complete
              jamming phase diagram for a binary Lennard-Jones mixture.  Finally, we will
              test whether shear-induced fluctuations can be described by an enhanced
              effective temperature in binary Lennard-Jones mixtures.  The idea of an
              effective temperature is already widely used to describe unjammed granular
              materials and needs to be examined carefully.

At a minimum, we will learn
              much more about the behavior of two intriguing systems (supercooled liquids and
              sheared athermal packings), even if we discover that their connection is only
              superficial.  If the concept of jamming is correct, however, it will be
              extremely powerful because ideas derived from one system will be applicable to
              another.  The recognition that different systems can be viewed within a broader
              framework has revolutionalized a number of fields in the past.  It is important
              to explore the avenue of jamming because it may lead to new and deeper
              understanding of long unsolved problems such as the glass transition.
%%%
              
This grant supports theoretical and computational research on the properties
              of disordered systems.  In particular, research will be done on the concept of
              jamming.  Jamming commonly occurs to most of us in the form of traffic jams. 
              As too many vehicles try to pass through a constrained path, the smooth flow of
              traffic becomes stopped or jammed.  Many physical systems comprised of many
              particles can also jam, i.e., develop a yield stress or an immeasurably long
              stress relaxation time in a disordered state.  These systems include
              supercooled liquids, colloidal suspensions, granular materials, emulsions and
              foams.  It has recently been suggested that the onset of jamming might lead to
              some degree of universality among these diverse systems.  This is the concept
              of jamming. Specifically, it has been suggested that different systems should
              show similar behavior as they jam, and that each system has a jamming phase
              diagram.  In this research the concept of jamming will be explored using
              numerical simulations on two very different systems that both exhibit
              transitions to constrained dynamics. 
***


