Title       : ISE: Money
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0087783

Award Number: 0087783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1791162            (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Vandiver ray.vandiver@omsi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karyn L. Bertschi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Mus of Sci & Ind
	      1945 SE Water Ave.
	      Portland, OR  972143354    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MONEY is a traveling exhibition using the familiar and fascinating subject of
              money to build math skills and promote economic literacy.  The exhibit will
              provide an engaging and relevant context in which to explore mathematics using
              experiences such as making change, comparing prices, saving, balancing a
              checkbook, paying bills or budgeting -- which are all direct applications of
              math.  This exhibit will address the needs of children and their families for
              economic literacy as they make decisions that shape their futures.

Through a
              mix of hands-on interactives, audio and video components, computer-based
              activities, graphics, text and artifacts, the exhibition emphasizes the
              mathematical skills, concepts and problem-solving strategies necessary for
              economic literacy.  Areas in the exhibit will address the history of money, how
              it is made, prices and markets, and world trade.  Within these contexts,
              visitors will develop computational skills and gain an understanding of
              concepts such as operations, patterns, functions, algebra, data analysis,
              probability and mathematical representation.  The concepts are highly
              correlated with -- and build upon -- the NCTM National Standards in
              mathematics.

Families, children and learners of all ages will be able to
              experience the exhibit during its national tour.  There will be ancillary
              resources in the form of family take-home activities, a teacher's guide with
              classroom activities, and an exhibit website.

