Title       : Improvement of Mathematics Literacy in African-American Students: Preparation
               for Algebra and Higher Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0087664

Award Number: 0087664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1072913            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Davis fdavis@lesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Greeno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lesley University
	      29 Everett Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021382790    617/868-9600

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This three-year study will document in depth, and develop explanatory
              constructs for, practices in four urban schools where the schools and/or
              specific teacher have an outstanding record of placing or sustaining students
              in college preparatory mathematics:  a San Francisco middle school with large
              numbers of African-American and Latino students, a Boston K-6 pilot school with
              a similara demographic profile; and a high school/feeder school pair in
              Jackson, MS, with 99% African-American students.  The study will use
              ethnographic methods to examine classroom teachers', administrators', youth
              interactions, in the context of the school and community.  Classrooms and
              aftershcool learning environments will be extensively videotaped,  and
              interactions will be analyzed.  The analyses will detail the development of
              mathematical ideas as well as the social processes of teaching and learning. 
              As a secondary goal, the researchers will examine dimensions and varibles
              emerging from  the analysis and consider problems of measurement and
              "operationalization" for large-scale quantitative research.  The research draws
              on current theoretical perspectives and research methods on learning, including
              situated learning, integration of social and individual aspects of learning,
              communities of practice that indluence students' learning and identities as
              mathematics learners, and methods for analysis of discourse, paraticipant
              structures, and mathematics content.  The participating schools are members of
              the "Algebra Project," a middle schyool project founded in the mid80s to
              increase proportion of minority students who complete algebra siccessfully in
              late middle school or high school and enter college preparatory studies.
