Title       : Lubricants for Extreme Environments: An Atomistic Approach to Solving Friction
               and Stiction in MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0087866

Award Number: 0087866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grant grant@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline Krim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1602,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Christine S. Grant and Jacqueline Krim
North Carolina State
              University

Proposal 0087866
Lubrication for Extreme Environments: An
              Atomistic Approach to Solving
Friction and Stiction in MEMS
PROJECT
              ABSTRACT:
Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) are an emerging,
              cutting-edge
technology which relies on the microfabrication of small
              scale
mechanical components and the integration of those components with
              on-board
electronic processing. Today's  MEMS  rely heavily on
              silicon-based
materials and/or fabrication processes which were originally
              developed for the microelectronics industry. While such processes and materials
              have yielded working devices, the materials choices are largely historical and
              may ultimately not result in optimal performance and mechanical reliability.
              With the current impetus towards mechanical system dimensions  extending well
              into the nanometer regime, there is a growing need for concomitant studies of
              the mechanical, materials and tribological properties of sub-micron to
              molecular-scale systems.  Since it is well-established that the macroscopic
              laws governing such properties are inapplicable at the molecular scale, the
              need to carry out new and fundamental research relevant to the development of
              optimal, or even operational submicron-scale mechanical systems, becomes
              increasingly pressing. The work funded here involves development of such
              lubricants for use in extreme MEMS operating environments.
It is a direct, and
              integrated  extension of the PI and co-PI's current research programs.
The
              work to be performed will be comprehensive, involving the development of
              environmentally friendly stiction reducing chemical additives for the final
              rinse stages of MEMS devices, and the
examination of how such treatments
              affect the tribological properties of the devices
while in actual operation. 
              Vapor phase lubricants will be screened by means of modern nanotribological
              techniques on materials of relevance to MEMS. The most promising candidates
              will then be directly tested on
actual MEMS devices supplied by the PI and
              Co-PI's academic partner at NCSU, as well as on friction testing-MEMS devices
              produced at Sandia National Laboratories. The research will be meshed with the
              PI and
Co-PI's ongoing educational and outreach efforts. These include
              outreach activities to underrepresented groups, undergraduate research
              participation in all aspects of the work to be performed, public lectures on
              the topic of  nanotechnology and friction, and active involvement in
              undergraduate curriculum development on the topic of fundamentals of friction
              and lubrication.



