Title       : Enhancing Discovery-based Learning: Applications of a Low-vacuum, Scanning
               Electron Microscope to Undergraduate Laboratory and Research Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0087895

Award Number: 0087895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Castro jon.castro@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah L. Stoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yolanda P. Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven F. Wojtal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karla M. Parsons-Hubbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) 
Faculty from geology, biology, and chemistry are incorporating
              use of a Low-Vacuum Scanning Electron Microscope with Energy Dispersive
              Spectrometer (LV-SEM/EDS) into undergraduate science laboratories and research
              experiences. Scanning electron microscopy is an accessible technique for
              undergraduates and provides an important means for hands-on learning. The goals
              of this project are to: 1) develop students' skills of observation and analysis
              while using technologically-advanced equipment in coursework and research; 2)
              foster collaborative learning through development and implementation of
              learner-centered laboratories and experiments; and 3) promote interdisciplinary
              work and exchange of ideas between and within different groups of student and
              faculty researchers. To meet these goals, several discovery-based activities
              involving image and compositional analysis of a variety of specimens (e.g.,
              minerals, rocks, microfossils, semiconductors, plankton, synthetic crystals,
              and gunshot residue) are being implemented in courses across the curriculum
              (e.g., introductory through advanced courses in geology, biology, and
              chemistry). The project adapts curricular aspects of programs at Western
              Kentucky University, Hamilton College, Middlebury College, and Bowdoin College.
              Overall, the instrument is being incorporated into 15 courses throughout the
              science curriculum. Undergraduate students are working closely with faculty to
              prepare specific laboratory exercises. These student assistants are responsible
              for aiding the instructor in writing exercises, performing calibrations,
              acquiring images, and developing laboratory instructions. Exercises focussing
              on discovery of critical concepts and interpretation of data involve a wide
              variety of phenomena, including compositional variation in minerals, flow
              textures in volcanic rocks, plant morphology, surface degradation in fossil
              remains, microstructures in deformed rocks, peptide-mineral adhesion, and
              textures of metal oxide films. Students working interdependently on these
              projects in small, self-selected groups, are seeking a deeper understanding of
              course material in addition to developing a clear understanding of the physical
              principles basic to SEM. The results of this project are to be made available
              to the public and colleagues at other institutions through the world wide web,
              journal articles, and presentations at professional meetings. 


