Title       : Adaptation of an Exemplary Environmental Chemistry Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a0087555

Award Number: 0087555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29858              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Zheng yan_zheng@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Locke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) 

This project is adapting an environmental
              chemistry laboratory course, developed at the University of California,
              Berkeley, for undergraduate education in the School of Earth and Environmental
              Sciences (SEES). This curriculum is being supplemented with a section on an
              important environmental pollutant, lead, using lead paint analysis experiments
              developed at the University of Utah. An atomic absorption spectrometer, a set
              of field probes for dissolved oxygen, temperature and conductivity, and pH
              measurements, and a compact incubator are being obtained to complement
              equipment available in an existing environmental science laboratory which
              includes an ion-chromatograph and a field UV-Vis spectrophotometer.

The
              project uses a series of experiments involving field sampling, field analysis
              and laboratory analysis from two field sites. Five groundwater wells that have
              been recently installed on campus serve as one field site. The second site is
              Flushing Bay, located about 2 miles from campus. Combined sewer overflows
              discharge raw sewage during rainstorms into Flushing Bay. Students are
              comparing the Flushing Bay data with a much larger New York Harbor water
              quality data set available from the New York City Department of Environmental
              Protection. Students are also comparing the Queens College campus well data
              with United States Geological Survey data from monitoring wells at various
              locations covering a sequence of aquifers, some similar to those at Queens
              College. This coordinated set of activities is enabling students to investigate
              parameters characterizing and regulating water quality in ground water and in
              coastal water systems.

The incorporation of the leaded paint experiment is
              fulfilling three goals that are missing in the Berkeley curriculum. First, an
              important environmental pollutant found at trace levels but with high toxicity
              is introduced. Second, the handling of solid samples, an important aspect of
              environmental analysis, is used. Third, challenges in quantification of trace
              amounts of elements in a complex matrix characteristic of environmental
              samples, are presented. The service-learning approach offers an additional
              advantage in that it provides a connection between the knowledge the student
              acquire in the classroom and the application of that knowledge in a way that
              benefits the community at large. By providing undergraduates with training in
              state-of-the-art equipment and field experience, the project is introducing
              them to methods and techniques that are commonly used by environmental
              scientists and environmental consulting professionals. It also challenges and
              prepares students to pursue careers in environmental sciences and environmental
              science education.

