Title       : Incorporation of GC/MS Based Investigational Experiments into the Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0087767

Award Number: 0087767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37463              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chriss E. McDonald mcdonald@lycoming.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Franz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Holly D. Bendorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Mahler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lycoming College
	      
	      Williamsport, PA  17701    717/326-1951

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

Mass spectrometry is central to most strategies for solving
              structural problems in chemistry. The lack of a reliable mass spectrometer in
              the Department of Chemistry is the weak link in ongoing efforts to adapt and
              implement discovery-based activities into several laboratories. Specific,
              multi-week investigational experiments that exploit mass spectrometry (as well
              as complementary spectroscopic techniques) have been identified in the chemical
              literature and will be adapted and implemented into our curriculum in core
              courses (Organic Chemistry I and II, Inorganic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry I
              and II, and Advanced Analytical Chemistry), advanced elective courses (Advance
              Organic Chemistry, Organometallic Chemistry, and Spectroscopy and Molecular
              Structure), and a non-majors course (Chemistry in Context). A modern mass
              spectrometer will also significantly enhance the undergraduate research program
              offered within the context of Independent Studies projects and the summer
              research experience. The recently distributed pamphlet "Investigative
              Experiments for the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum" is to be expanded to
              include the new experiments and the current experiments upgraded to include
              mass spectra.
