Title       : Implications of longtailed traffic in networks: Analysis, measurements and
               management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0087404

Award Number: 0087404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi R. Mazumdar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   With the tremendous growth of the Internet and the ability to transport
              information at very high data
rates has come the realization that traditional
              assumptions on the stochastic nature of network traffic
ows are inadequate. A
              number of recent studies have demonstrated that long-range-dependence is
an
              important characteristic of traffic ows in current networking infrastructures.
              On the other hand,
the performance of networks and their ability to offer
              Quality of Service (QoS) depend on accurately
capturing (and exploiting)
              probabilistically rare phenomena. Studies of network performance
              with
long-range-dependent inputs are still very much in their infancy, and
              to-date have addressed only the
computation stationary buffer over ow
              probabilities.
     In contrast, there is a crucial need to study the rare
              excursions of the underlying stochastic pro-
cesses which capture the salient
              characteristics of network ows, and to understand how such excursions
affect
              network dynamics. These issues are important from the point of view of
              transient characteristics
of networks. For example the QoS perceived by users
              depends not only on the magnitude of loss but
how it takes place. In some
              applications consecutive losses even if rare can make transmissions to
              be
severely degraded while in TCP, losing a small number packets often can
              result in deterioration in
performance. To study these effects we must develop
              new results on the duration of over ows and the
amount of information lost
              during typical over ows.
     The goal of our research is to provide analytic
              insights, quantify performance, develop approaches
to measure relevant traffic
              parameters and provide rules-of-thumb for use in resource management
              and
scheduling traffic in networks with long-range dependent characteristics
              to meet QoS requirements.
The specific tasks that will be pursued to achieve
              our objectives are:
    Study the buffer over ow asymptotics for
              multi-buffered systems with heterogeneous longtailed
    inputs.
    Develop
              results for the heterogeneous sub-exponential case.
    Characterize the
              transient behavior during over ow periods for systems with longtailed and
   
              sub-exponential inputs with a view to understanding actual QoS given to
              users.
    Develop methods for differentiating between traffic types and
              estimating relevant parameters.
   Incorporate the insights obtained from the
              above analyses into our overall objective to define
   engineering rules for
              resource management and scheduling various types of sessions in networks.
    
              As a result of these investigations we will have a complete catalog of results
              to handle the very
diverse types of traffic which are present in networks. By
              considering both the stationary and transient
characteristics we will provide
              insights on the dynamics of loss which is essential to provide fine tuning
in
              order to deliver QoS at the application/user level which stationary analyses do
              not provide.
     The research spans fundamental modeling and analysis as well
              as statistical testing. On the theo-
retical side the implications go beyond
              the traffic engineering context and are expected to contribute
to applied
              probability, queueing analysis and asymptotic approximation. On the
              applications side, the
proposed work will provide insights and results of
              potential use in next generation networks.
