Title       : Adapting and Implementing the 'Workshop Biology' Concept for an Undergraduate
               Genetics Class
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  2000   
File        : a0087638

Award Number: 0087638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tammy Tobin-Janzen tobinjan@susqu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Susquehanna University
	      University Avenue
	      Selinsgrove, PA  17870    717/374-0101

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) The goal of this project is to increase student
              comprehension of and enthusiasm for genetics by developing a "Workshop
              Genetics" course to replace the traditional lecture/lab format currently in
              use. Genetics is a highly quantitative subject that is frequently a stumbling
              block for biology majors. Studies show that students enroll in genetics with
              misconceptions regarding everything from the cell cycle and mitosis to
              evolution. Furthermore, students have a particularly hard time relating many
              genetics concepts to their everyday lives. Nonetheless, most initiatives to
              improve science education have focused on introductory and general education
              courses. In order to rectify these problems, the "Workshop Biology" project,
              which was developed for a large general education class at the University of
              Oregon, is being adapted for implementation in the smaller, mid level genetics
              class. "Workshop Genetics" consists of four basic types of activities: Class
              Assemblies, Concept Activities, Investigative Laboratories, and Issues
              Activities. Additionally, a series of computer-based multimedia genetics
              problem sets are being developed through collaboration with John Pollack at
              Cornell University. All of these activities are being implemented with the help
              of undergraduates pursuing secondary education certification in biology. The
              success of the project goals will be assessed through collaboration with Dr.
              Patricia Nelson, Head of the Susquehanna University Education Department.
              Ultimately, this course will serve as a model for other upper level workshop
              science courses, will be disseminated via a "Workshop Genetics Homepage", and
              will be presented at ABLE and Strategies for Success Conferences.

