Title       : Neoproterozoic-Early Paleozoic History of the Scottish Promontory of Laurentia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a0087650

Award Number: 0087650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113756             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Connelly connelly@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Dalziel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087650
Connelly
Knowledge of the distribution of land masses on Earth during
              the Late Precambrian has wide ranging implications for plate tectonics,
              paleoclimate and biological evolution.  The Precambrian Hebridean Shield is a
              small fragment of ancestral North America (Laurentia) that detached during
              break up of Pangaea to become part of Europe.  Prior to assembly of Pangaea, it
              formed the tip of a major promontory of Laurentia (between the Labrador and
              Greenland margins) and may thus serve as a sensitive probe of interactions
              between NE Laurentia and other continents.  Although the history of this
              "Scottish promontory" is important to understanding global paleogeography in
              Neoproterozoic and Early Paleozoic times, its tectonic history remains
              controversial.
 
Isotopic ages and structural complexities in the
              metasedimentary Moine and Dalradian supergroups of Scotland have long been
              interpreted to reflect Neoproterozoic orogenic (Knoydartian) episodes
              overprinted by Early Paleozoic deformation and metamorphism.  Yet
              Neoproterozoic orogeny is unknown elsewhere in NE Laurentia and is instead a
              characteristic of Gondwanaland.  The existence of this anomalous Neoproterozoic
              event is based primarily on two independent methods of geochronology, but
              neither appear water tight. Furthermore, we recognize a regional suite of mafic
              dikes that may serve as a reliable temporal marker that requires metamorphism
              to have occurred later than is currently presumed.  If correct, Neoproterozoic
              orogeny in Scotland seems doubtful and deformation in these rocks is more
              likely related to the assembly of Laurentia and northwestern Europe during the
              Early Paleozoic (consistent with other regions along the Laurentian
              margin).

Field mapping of key lithologies form a framework for detailed
              geochronology and geothermobarometry that will constrain the timing of
              magmatism, deformation and metamorphism in this region.  Absolute ages of
              events will be used to test correlations of tectonic events along the
              Laurentian margin.  Discounting Neoproterozoic orogeny in Scotland would
              simplify the pre-Caledonian history of the Scottish promontory of Laurentia in
              which Neoproterozoic magmas would relate to two separate phases of protracted
              rifting during the Riphean (~900-800 Ma) and Vendian (~600 Ma) periods.  In
              turn, this would permit correlation of common events along this entire margin,
              and thus support a proposed two-stage 'breakout' of Laurentia as a discrete
              continent during the Neoproterozoic, hypothetically from the Rodinian and
              Pannotian supercontinents, respectively.  Alternatively, confirming the
              existence of Neoproterozoic orogeny in Scotland may dissociate Scotland from
              the rest of the NE Laurentian margin, thereby inferring crustal exchange
              between a Gondwanide continent and Laurentia during the latest Precambrian. 
              Either outcome will resolve the timing and nature of tectonic events along the
              margin of NE Laurentia, thereby contributing to our understanding of global
              paleogeography during an important segment of Earth history that includes
              remarkable biodiversity and anomalous climate events. 

