Title       : Examining the Impact of a Standards-Based Program on Student Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0087511

Award Number: 0087511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Romberg tromberg@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this proposal is to request funds to examine in depth data
              collected during the past three school years (1997 - 2000) for the
              "Longitudinal/Cross-Sectional Study of the Impact of 'Mathematics in Context'
              on Student Performance," funded by the National Science Foundation.  This study
              is an example of a research study on student learning of mathematics in complex
              educational contexts.

     The research model for the study is a structural
              model for monitoring changes in school mathematics designed to capture the
              impact that the dynamic, complex interaction of social context for learning,
              curricular content and materials, classroom experiments, and pupil motiviation
              have on student performance and further pursuit of mathematics.  The mo9del is
              composed of 14 variables and their theoretical interrelationships.  The study
              also featured a nonequivalent control-group, quasi-experimental design.  about
              80% of the students and teachers used "Mathematics in Context"; the remaining
              20% of the students used conventional curricla already available in the
              schools.  The longitudinal parat of the study involves tracking the performance
              of the three cohorts of students over the three years of study, and the
              cross-sectional part includes three cross-grade comparisons by year and three
              cross-year comparisons by grade.  Information from teachers, administrators,
              and students in grades 5, 6, 7, and 8 in four school districts has been
              collected and is now being entered into a database.

     The analyses will
              be directed toward both the longitudinal and cross-sectional comparisions an
              dtoward a set of questions about the implementation of standards-based
              programs, such as:  "Do students continue to develop number skills in sucha a
              program?"  or "Are such programs effectivie with students with differing
              backgrounds?"  or "Do teachers change their pedagogy when presenting content in
              non-traditional ways?"  To make the comparisons and to answer such questions
              the analyses will include exploratory descriptions of information related to
              each variable in the model, linear regression for a simplified model,
              structural equations to estimate path coefficients in the complete model, and a
              series of sub-studies examine in depth some patterns of relationships in the
              data.  Finally, based on these analyses a series of reports are palnned. 
              Currently a set of technical reports are being written on the creation of the
              data consturction instruments, the indicies for each variable, and the raw data
              that has been collected.  Funds in this proposal would make it possible to
              report on the cross-sectional and longitudinal findings and our answers to the
              set of questions about the "Mathematics in Context" (National Center for
              Research in Mathematical Sciences Education & Freudenthal Institute, 1997-98). 
              
