Title       : Collaborative Research: Western Divide West Antarctic Ice Cores (WAISCORES) Site
               Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0087345

Award Number: 0087345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard B. Conway conway@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin D. Waddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a program of ground-based geophysical measurements to map in
              detail the spatial variations of ice flow, accumulation rate, internal layering
              and ice thickness at the sites which have been identified as promising
              locations to drill the next deep ice core in West Antarctica.  The main
              investigative tools are a high- and low-frequency ice penetrating radar to
              image the topography of internal layers and the bed, repeat GPS surveys to
              calculate the present day  surface velocity field, synthetic aperture radar
              (SAR)  interferometry to calculate the regional velocity field, and short firn
              cores to calculate present day accumulation rates.  The data which will be
              collected will be used to as input to time-dependent ice flow and temperature
              models that will predict depth variation of age, layer thickness, and
              temperature.  As well as yielding an estimate of expected conditions before
              drilling, the mismatch between the model prediction and data eventually
              recovered from the core will help infer thinning and climate (accumulation and
              temperature) histories for the region.  The Western Divide, between the Ross
              Sea Embayment and the Amundsen Sea, has been identified as the region which
              best satisfies the criteria which have been established for a deep drilling
              site.  Preliminary site selection using airborne geophysical methods has
              identified several potential drill sites on the Western Divide where the
              climate record should be best preserved.  This work will contribute in a major
              way to the final site selection for the next deep ice core in West Antarctica.
