Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Urban-Rural Relations in the
               Jequetepeque Valley, Peru: Deciphering the Ritualization of Power in Moche
               Political Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0087146

Award Number: 0087146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Kolata a-kolata@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Mr. Edward Swenson will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. His research is centered on the late prehistoric
              period in the Jequetepeque Valley located on the northern coast of Peru. While
              this region is best known for the Inca civilization which united a large area
              of western South America under centralized political rule, the Incas were, in
              fact only the last in a series of kingdoms. A predecessor group, the Moche,
              achieved a similar result, although on a smaller scale, and their presence in
              the Jequetepeque Valley is characterized by adobe pyramidal mounds which mark
              primary and secondary centers, technically sophisticated and artistically
              exquisite ceramic and metallurgical artifacts and a complex centrally
              administered agricultural system with irrigation canals. Based on settlement
              size, it is highly likely that the site of Pacatnamu served as the focus of
              power and functioned as the central administrative center. Mr. Swenson wishes
              to understand both the degree of political centralization within the Moche
              kingdom and the mechanisms employed to integrate its constituent parts. He
              proposes several alternative models: on one extreme exists the possibility of a
              direct extension of urban control to the hinterland wherein intermediate or
              secondary level sites served as administrative outposts to enforce elite
              urban-based dominance. At the other, it is possible that economically
              autonomous communities that maintained a significant degree of independence. To
              assess these alternatives Mr. Swenson will take advantage of the fact that many
              of these sites are only minimally buried and well preserved. In fact it is
              possible to trace the walls of structures and determine their size and
              conformation. Based on their nature and the artifacts they contain, evidence
              indicates that many served ceremonial and ritual functions and with such data
              one can compare similarity of form among individual secondary centers and
              between these and the capital. Greater similarity will indicate a higher degree
              of unification indicative of greater centralized control. With National Science
              Foundation support Mr. Swenson will produce digital maps of the 15 to 20 known
              secondary sites in the valley. The result will be plan views of the sites and
              three-dimensional architectural models permitting a spatial analysis of
              ceremonial architecture. Archaeological materials which provide evidence of
              site function will be collected through both surface collection and limited
              excavation.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              data of interest to archaeologists who wish to understand how complex societies
              arose and were maintained. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist. 

