Title       : Forearc Deformation in the Central Andes: The Northern Terminus of the Atacama
               Fault Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0087431

Award Number: 0087431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Allmendinger rwa1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan L. Isacks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Allmendinger
0087431
The Atacama fault zone can be traced for nearly 1000 km
              in the 
forearc of the Central Andes.  The northern terminus of the fault zone
              
occurs just south of Iquique, Chile, in a series of complex blocks 
bounded
              by strike-slip, thrust, and normal faults.  Digital topography 
produced from
              satellite radar imagery shows that this area is one of 
the most tectonically
              active parts of the entire fault system.  The 
area overlies the general
              region where the Iquique ridge on the Nazca 
plate is being subducted beneath
              South America, and correlates well 
with a seismic gap in the Benioff zone
              that many seismologists 
believe will be the site of the next major earthquake
              on this plate 
boundary.  We are dating these young faults using Ar/Ar and
              Uranium 
series isotopic methods, and are also studying their kinematics using
              
measurements of slip directions on the well-exposed faults.  These 
field
              data are being combined and analyzed in a map view block 
restoration program
              developed at the Universite de Rennes (France), 
which will allow us to
              quantify the strain and rotation in the 
region.  Then, we can evaluate block
              rotation versus oroclinal bending 
hypotheses spurred by paleomagnetic data,
              as well as investigate the 
origin of proposed arc parallel compression. 
              Finally, our fieldwork 
and digital elevation model provides a well-documented
              "before" 
picture to compare to the "after" picture to be obtained following
              
the next great earthquake along this plate boundary, site of the 
largest
              earthquake on record.  Thus, eventually we will be able to 
document how the
              forearc of a major ocean continent convergence 
system deforms during Benioff
              zone seismicity.




