Title       : Towards enabling a 2-3 orders of magnitude improvement in call handling
               capacities of switches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0087487

Award Number: 0087487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malathi Veeraraghavan mv@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Karri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Toward building large-scale switches, the current industry focus is on
              increasing packet handling
capacities of switch fabrics from Gb/s to Tb/s.
              Although an increase in packet handling
capacities and line card data rates
              requires a corresponding increase in call handling capacities of
switches,
              this problem has received little attention. This is because most of the work on
              scalability
of packet switch fabrics has targeted connectionless internet
              protocol (IP) routers, while call handling
arises only in connection-oriented
              networks. However, in the last few years, resource reservation
to support
              Quality-of-Service (QoS) guaranteed flows has gained attention.
              Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) is addressing this issue by augmenting
              IP routers with connection-oriented
capabilities.
     In a
              connection-oriented network, the signaling protocol that is used to set up and
              release connections
impacts its call handling capacity. Signaling messages can
              be complex with many parameters
and timers and the state information
              associated with calls can become unwieldy.
Consequently, signaling protocols
              have traditionally been implemented in software. QoS control
solutions are
              being developed and evaluated based on the premise that call handling
              capacities do
not scale with the packet handling capacities of switch fabrics.
              This assumption regarding call
handling capacities has also relegated
              circuit-switched networks, including high-speed Wave-length
Division
              Multiplexed networks, to just serve as wires. This proposal challenges this
              basic
assumption by demonstrating call handling capacities in the order of
              millions of calls/sec. Changing
this basic assumption regarding call handling
              capacities would indeed have a far-reaching
impact on both QoS control
              mechanisms for packet-switched networks, and on the use of emerging
high-speed
              circuit-switched networks for challenging new applications.
     Our solution
              approach is to implement signaling protocols in reconfigurable Field
              Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA) hardware. FPGAs can be reprogrammed as
              signaling protocols evolve
while significantly improving the call handling
              capacities relative to software implementation. To
manage complexity, we
              propose to implement the basic and frequently-used operations of the
              protocol
in hardware, and relegate the complex and infrequently-used
              operations to software. In contrast
to stateless protocols, signaling
              protocols maintain state information for each call. To
manage associated
              memory requirements, we propose to maintain only the essential state
              information
for each call in hardware. In this project we propose to (i)
              implement a typical signaling
protocol in FPGAs, (ii) design a switch
              controller board using the signaling protocol FPGAs, and
(iii) quantify
              measures of the implementation to demonstrate achievable call handling
              capacities.
