Title       : LTER Cross-site: Collaborative Research - Assessing the Geographic and Temporal
               Consistency of Life History and Demographic Patterns: A Long-term, Multi-site
               Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0087096

Award Number: 0087096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225382             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Morris wfmorris@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087096
Morris
Ecologists increasingly understand the importance of spatial
              variability in natural systems, a recognition that led to the creation of the
              LTER network. However, we still know surprisingly little about spatial
              variation in the demography of individual species, creating an important gap in
              knowledge for both applied and basic ecology. The paucity of full demographic
              studies that span multiple populations across substantial geographic scales
              creates two general problems. First, population biologists are forced to
              extrapolate from the population dynamics and life history patterns found in
              single, well-studied populations to those occurring in distant parts of a
              species range. Such extrapolation is commonplace in conservation biology,
              comparative life history analysis, and climate change predictions, and is
              currently done with little understanding of how much spatial variation actually
              exists in the demography of individual species. Second is the question of what
              sets the range limits of species. While the physiological effects of climate
              are often well-known, the lack of broad-scale demographic studies makes it less
              clear how population dynamics vary near range limits, and thus the extent to
              which poor demographic performance versus other proposed factors, such as
              metapopulation dynamics, determine the distributional limits of species. As a
              result, we have little ground for building mechanistic predictions about how
              species ranges will shift as climate changes. 
	To address these problems, a
              demographic study of two widespread tundra plant species, moss campion and
              alpine bisort, will be conducted as part of this LTER cross-site research
              project. These species will be studied in 16 populations across two habitats
              and four geographic sites. These sites span most of the latitudinal range of
              the species in North America. The study is designed to parameterize stochastic
              matrix models for each population of each species. While multi-site demographic
              studies are unusual, ones that measure and properly analyze temporal
              stochasticity in vital rates are even rarer. In addition to statistical
              analysis of the means and variance in individual vital rates, the PIs will base
              much of the analysis on outputs of these stochastic models, including
              stochastic growth rates, stochastic elasticity values and extinction risk
              predictions. Furthermore, the work will utilize LTER climate data to tie
              spatial and temporal variability in vital rates to specific environmental
              factors. The results will be used to test for the strength and pattern of life
              history variation across geographic sites and habitats, and to determine how
              best to make predictions about demographic variability with limited data.
              Finally, specific tests will be conducted for demographic factors leading to
              both northern and southern range boundaries. Overall, this study will be the
              first multi-site, multi-year demographic analysis to carefully include temporal
              stochasticity and to explicitly test how and in what ways life history patterns
              vary across species' ranges. 

