Title       : Scientific Method in Organic Chemistry: A Laboratory Curriculum Using NMR
               Spectroscopy to Test Student Generated Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0087941

Award Number: 0087941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Burke BURKE@CHEM.WISC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans J. Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Schatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel H. Gellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

A comprehensive laboratory curriculum has been created that
              mimics the process of scientific discovery and illustrates the scientific
              method from the introductory organic chemistry laboratory courses to the
              advanced organic laboratory course. Many of the experiments for the new
              curriculum have been adapted from the literature and have been tested with
              small groups of students. Chemical questions are generated in pre-laboratory
              activities and are explored in the laboratory, the primary method of analysis
              being nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The NMR will be equipped
              with an automatic sample changer that allows the instrument to collect data on
              a continuous basis, a necessary feature for the curriculum innovations to be
              applied to a large-enrollment, introductory organic laboratory course. In this
              way, it is feasible to provide a significant number of spectra, not just one or
              two, to every student. A second innovative feature of the curriculum is the
              extensive incorporation of molecular modeling in the experiments using pre- and
              post-laboratory computational experiments and exercises. The method of
              distribution of data takes advantage of the campus information technology
              infrastructure so that students have "anytime, anywhere" access to their data.
              As many of the experiments are modifications of familiar experiments, this will
              facilitate adoption of our modified versions by other educators.
