Title       : SGER: Development of Distributed Knowledge Networks to Provide Decision-Support
               for Security-Economy Decisions in Operating Stressed Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0087152

Award Number: 0087152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. McCalley jdm@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vasant G. Honavar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research proposal addresses electric power system security, the ability
              of the high voltage transmission and generation interconnected grid to respond
              to disturbances in the network without equipment damage, load interruption,
              cascading outages, or blackouts.  It represents a component of reliability that
              is of great interest to those who operate the power system, as it is the
              security level that determines their flexibility in responding to the economic
              imperatives of the electric energy markets that have evolved during the 1990s. 
              Because of existing and future disincentives to constructing new transmission
              facilities, high voltage operating conditions are increasingly stressed, and
              the key to maintaining attractive energy prices is to efficiently utilize the
              existing transmission equipment.  Efficient equipment utilization involves
              careful balancing of the security level against the market needs a continuous
              decision making problem.  The underlying thesis In this proposal is that
              diversity of participants, heterogeneity and dispersion of required data, and
              Inherent complexity associated with today's security-economy decision-making
              problem necessitates development of new information management and
              decision-support Infrastructure.  Our objective is to develop the foundation
              for this infrastructure, using mobile software agents within a distributed
              knowledge network.  Anticipated results of the proposed research include:
              much-needed algorithmic and systems solutions for monitoring and coordination
              of complex, dynamic, deregulated power grids as well as for distributed
              decision making taking into account the financial needs associated with market
              efficiency as well as the engineering (but ultimately financial as well) needs
              associated with maintaining reliability of the electric power system.  The
              proposed work will result in a modular and extensible suite of distributed
              knowledge network tools for monitoring of dynamic, distributed systems in
              general, and power systems in particular.  A specific outcome is to be a
              working prototype simulator that will clearly illustrate the benefits of the
              approach. The broader impacts as envisioned by the authors are the social
              benefits that would accrue to the society and to the economy at large, due to
              improved decision-support for operating the high voltage electric energy
              system, a critical part of the US national
              infrastructure.













