Title       : Extending the Temperature Range of (U-Th)/ He Thermochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0087382

Award Number: 0087382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip V. Hodges kvhodges@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hodges
EAR-0087382

One way to explore the thermal structure of the Earth's
              crust over geologic timescales is by the judicious application of
              well-calibrated isotopic thermochronometers. Because the thermal structure of
              the upper crust reflects surface topography, low-temperature thermochronology
              also provides a powerful tool for studying paleotopography, and thus landscape
              evolution in mountainous terrains. A recent explosion in the application of the
              (U-Th)/He apatite thermochronometer, which has a nominal closure temperature of
                   ~70 C, has catalyzed a new era of research that integrates tectonic
              geomorphology with isotope geochemistry. However, high-fidelity reconstruction
              of topographic evolution over geologic timescales requires a more complete
              understanding of time-temperature histories than is currently provided by
              existing thermochronometers. In particular, we have relatively few ways of
              recovering thermal histories over the 200-300 degrees C interval. This proposal
              presents a program of laboratory investigations aimed at evaluating two new
              thermochronometers that may improve the situation: (U-Th)/He monazite and
              xenotime.  The rare-earth phosphates monazite and xenotime typically contain
              high concentrations of U and Th and thus have the potential of accumulating
              substantial radiogenic 4He over short timescales (104-105 yr). Calculations of
              nominal (U-Th)/He closure temperatures for these minerals using the ionic
              porosity model for rare-gas diffusion in minerals suggests that these systems
              may be useful thermochronometers over the ~200-350 degrees C temperature range.
              We are fortunate to have extensive collections of both monazite and xenotime at
              MIT as a consequence of a vigorous research program in U-Pb geochronology, and
              thus we are able to propose a series of basic 4He diffusion experiments that
              would be conducted on naturally occurring samples representing a broad range of
              compositions. Some of these experiments will focus on diffusivity as a function
              of grain size, others on the influence of compositional variability. A
              significant question, given the high concentrations of U and Th in these
              minerals, is the extent to which their 4He diffusion systematics is affected by
              radiation damage, and this will be evaluated explicitly through a series of 
              experiments. Based on in-house experience with monazite and xenotime
              microsampling procedures, we also have designed a set of empirical tests of the
              computational method commonly used to correct (U-Th)/He dates for alpha
              ejection. Collectively, these studies should permit a comprehensive evaluation
              of the viability of rare-earth phosphates (U-Th)/He thermochronometry.


