Title       : Collaborative Research - Relationship Between Subglacial Geology and Glacial
               Processes in West Antarctica: Petrological and Geochemical Analyses of
               Subglacial and Basal Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a0087390

Award Number: 0087390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Grunow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087390	
Grunow								

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative
              research project between the University of California-Santa Cruz, the
              University of Texas-Austin, and the Ohio State University to investigate
              sediment samples recovered from the base of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
              (WAIS). West Antarctica is a remote polar region but its dynamic ice sheet,
              complicated tectonic history, and the sedimentary record of Cenozoic glaciation
              make it of particular interest to glaciologists and geologists. Glaciologists
              are concerned with the possibility of significant near-future changes in mass
              balance of the WAIS that may contribute to the ongoing global sea level rise.
              Geologists are investigating in West Antarctica the fundamental process of
              continental extension and are constructing models of a polar marine
              depositional system using this region as the prime modern example. The
              subglacial part of West Antarctica has escaped direct geological investigations
              and all that is known about subglacial geology comes from geophysical remote
              sensing. Recent acquisitions of new, high-quality geophysical data have led to
              generation of several enticing models. For instance, subglacial presence of
              high-magnitude, short-wavelength magnetic anomalies has prompted the
              proposition that there may be voluminous (>1 million cubic km), Late Cenozoic
              flood basalts beneath the ice sheet. Another important model suggests that the
              patterns of fast ice streaming (~100 meters/year) and slow ice motion (~1-10
              meters/year) observed within the WAIS are controlled by subglacial distribution
              of sedimentary basins and resistant bedrock. These new geophysics-based models
              should be tested with direct observations because they are of such great
              importance to our understanding of the West Antarctic tectonic history and to
              our ability to predict the future behavior of the WAIS.

This research is
              designed as a pilot study to provide new geologic data, which may help to test
              the recent models inferred from geophysical observations. The new constraints
              on subglacial geology and on its interactions with the WAIS will be obtained
              through petrological and geochemical analyses of basal and subglacial sediments
              collected previously from seven localities. This investigation will take place
              in the context of testing the following three hypotheses: (A) the provenance of
              bedrock clasts in the glacial sediment samples is primarily from West
              Antarctica, (B) some clasts and muds from the West Antarctic subglacial
              sediments have been derived by erosion of the (inferred) subglacial Late
              Cenozoic flood basalts, and (C) the sediments underlying the West Antarctic ice
              streams were generated by glacial erosion of preglacial sedimentary basins but
              the sediments recovered from beneath the slow-moving parts of the WAIS were
              produced through erosion of resistant bedrock.

The individual hypotheses
              will be tested by collecting data on: (A) petrology, geochemistry and age of
              granitoid clasts, (B) petrology, geochemistry and age of basaltic clasts
              combined with mud geochemistry, and (C) clay mineralogy/paragenesis combined
              with textural maturity of sand and silt grains. The results of these tests will
              help evaluate the interesting possibility that subglacial geology may have
              first-order control on the patterns of fast ice flow within the WAIS. The new
              data will also help to determine whether the subglacial portion of West
              Antarctica is a Late Cenozoic flood basalt province. By combining glaciological
              and geological aspects of West Antarctic research the proposed collaborative
              project will add to the ongoing U.S. effort to create a multidisciplinary
              understanding of this polar region.


