Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Genetic Transposition of Baboon Endogenous
               Virus (BaEV) in Hybrid Old World Monkeys (Primates: Papionini)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0087329

Award Number: 0087329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford J. Jolly cjj1@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd R. Disotell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              More than 14 decades after the publication of "On the Origin of Species," the
              processes leading to the appearance and genetic stabilization of new,
              consistently distinct populations remains one of the least understood of
              evolutionary processes.  While a variety of mechanisms may be associated with
              genetic isolation, attention recently has focussed upon genome-level features
              that are both rapidly-evolving and can drastically reduce the ability of their
              carriers to interbreed and produce viable hybrid offspring.  A variety of
              recent evidence implicates transposable elements (TEs) in facilitating such
              reproductive isolation.  TEs are small (100-10kb base pairs) genetic elements
              that have retained their ability to move about within genomes.  Investigations
              conducted on organisms as diverse as fruit flies and wallabies suggest that
              there is a positive correlation between transposable element activity and
              sterility in inter-strain hybrids.  In order to determine how TE-mediated
              barriers to inter-population hybridization might evolve, it is necessary to
              examine the behavior of such elements in fertile hybrids and their progeny in
              naturally occurring hybrid zones.

The goal of this project is to investigate
              the relationship between TE amplification and hybridity by testing for evidence
              of baboon endogenous virus (BaEV) transposition in a graded series of Old World
              Monkey hybrids in the papionin group.  BaEV is an endogenous retrovirus that
              was once transmitted horizontally from individual to individual but now forms
              an integrated part of the vertically inherited genome of many Old World
              Monkeys.  Retroviruses are one of the most complex TE forms, with large genomes
              that can generate copies through the intrinsically driven process of reverse
              transcription.  This project will thus investigate the relationship between TE
              activity and reproductive isolation by testing BaEV amplification in papionin
              hybrids with varying degrees of hybrid ancestry.   

The specific aims of the
              proposed research are: to determine the degree to which BaEV amplification is
              correlated with hybrid sterility; to determine the degree to which BaEV
              amplification increases in hybrid papionins with increased evolutionary
              distance between parental taxa; to detect novel BaEV integrations in
              individuals with known parentage that may be attributable to specific
              hybridization events; and to determine the extent of BaEV sequence variation in
              a wild primate population.  These objectives will be accomplished by sampling a
              graded series of hybrid papionins reflecting different degrees of hybrid
              ancestry.  These data will serve as a first step in determining the
              contribution of TEs to reproductive isolation in papionins.




