Title       : Investigative, Laboratory-based Courses for an Urban Community College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0087959

Award Number: 0087959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Bluestone Cblue530@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Gorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Tricarico  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              donald tricarico  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queensboro Cmty Col
	      222-05 56th Avenue
	      Bayside, NY  113641497    718/631-6222

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Social Sciences - Other (89) 
A multi-disciplinary team of faculty is modifying
              existing foundation courses in the social sciences, by integrating modules that
              emphasize investigative, reasoning-based learning experiences that will be
              implemented in a computer lab. These courses collectively strengthen science
              and mathematics based learning experiences for Queensborough Community College
              (QCC) students, especially teacher education students, and are serving as a
              bridge to higher level courses. Courses are being modified so that the material
              is appropriately tailored for our students. They are being redesigned to be
              accessible, yet challenging, for the 2-year college student. The project is
              modifying foundation courses in psychology, economics, and sociology. The
              courses selected are part of our core requirements for most students including
              those in our teacher preparation program. In psychology, we are adapting and
              incorporating observational procedures developed in an NSF-funded psychology
              project at Macalester College. Also, basic concepts crucial to understanding
              simple statistical constructs that are central to research methods are being
              incorporated with modifications from an NSF-supported project carried out by
              CyberGnostics, Incorporated (award 9950671, "Visualizing Statistics: An On-Line
              Introductory Course," a web-based introductory course marketed through Duxbury
              press). In sociology we are incorporating new materials being developed at San
              Francisco State University in the Urban Studies Department. The project
              directors are also developing an interdisciplinary, investigative course
              targeted for higher-achieving students in order to facilitate an heightened
              understanding of the relationship between the social, economic, and
              psychological worldviews and the methods of inquiry in these disciplines. The
              effectiveness of new materials is being evaluated in a multi-tiered approach,
              including an assessment of students' mastery of concepts, attitudinal and
              self-efficacy changes, and the breadth of implementation. The materials
              developed are also being disseminated through presentations at CUNY faculty
              development seminars, the CUNY-wide disciplinary councils and through the
              resources of the CUNY WEB-based community. Faculty are presenting findings and
              writing articles for publication in discipline-specific media. 


