Title       : Air Entry Barriers: Mechanism for Creating High Permeability Pathways Above the
               Water Table
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0087228

Award Number: 0087228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Silliman silliman.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087228
Silliman

A substantial body of literature exist which demonstrates
              the importance of the zone of transition, dominated by the capillary fringe,
              from the vadose zone into the region at and below the water table.  However,
              there has been minimal study of the interplay of flow and transport mechanisms
              across this zone of transition in general, and specifically within the
              capillary fringe.  It is here hypothesized that heterogeniety will lead to
              unique flow, transport and geochemical characteristics within the zone of
              transition related, in part, to low gas-phase permeabilities that can be
              present at high moisture contents.    Air Entry Barriers (AEBs)and other
              impediments to flow and transport may form in situations in which fine-grained 
               overlie coarse-grained sediments.  During drainage, air may be prevented from
              entering coarse-grained sediments that are overlain by fines.  During
              imbibition, air may be trapped within zones of coarse material overlain by
              fines.  Such restriction on the movement of the air phase will have significant
              effect on and over time be affected by water-flow, chemical transport,
              geochemistry and microbiology in the zone of transition.

The central
              hypothesis is that due to AEBs, the moisture content, hydraulic conductivity,
              and flux of fluid and chemicals within coarse-grained sediments within the ZT
              will depend on: (a) the pore water pressure within the coarse-grained
              sediments, (b) the continuity  of the coarse sediments, (c) the position and
              continuity of the surrounding finer-grained sediments, (d) the history of
              fluctuation of the water table relative to both the coarse-grained sediments
              and the surrounding finer-grained sediments, and (e) the initial distribution
              of moisture content.  
   
This hypothesis will be addressed through
              laboratory experiments  on    flow and transport in homogeneous media, and in
              media consisting alternatively of simple layers, interconnected layers, and
              disconnected lenses of the coarse size fraction embedded within a fine size
              fraction.  Discrepancy between pore water pressure and measured moisture
              contents, plus observation of preferential flow pathways will be used to
              identify the presence of AEBs.   

