Title       : Partitioning of Highly Siderophile Elements at Elevated Pressure and
               Temperature: Constraints on Core Formation and Accretion of the Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0087584

Award Number: 0087584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Sharp tom.sharp@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hervig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sharp and Hervig
EAR-0087584

It is proposed to quantify the partitioning of
              the highly siderophile elements Au, Pt, Ir, and Os between silicate liquid and
              iron-sulfide liquid in chondritic material quenched from experiments at high
              pressures and temperatures. Such partitioning data will allow us to better
              constrain models for the accretion and differentiation of the early Earth. The
              conditions of the experiments (P = 1 to 25 GPa, T up to 2500  C) include values
              appropriate to a magma ocean presumed to have been generated during the early
              stages of formation of the Earth. Because the Earth accreted from
              volatile-depleted chondritic material, we will use a grade 5 or 6 H chondrite
              as the starting material. The range of conditions proposed will allow us to
              investigate the effect of pressure and temperature on partitioning for a bulk
              composition similar to the accreting Earth. Although much high-pressure work
              has been done on the moderately siderophile elements, little work has been done
              to measure the partitioning behavior of highly siderophile elements (HSEs) at
              high pressure. If our results show that the HSEs are not highly fractionated
              into the iron-sulfide melt, then the present-day abundance of siderophiles can
              be explained by a homogenous accretion model with metal-silicate equilibration
              in a deep magma ocean. If our data show strong partitioning of HSEs into the
              metal-sulfide phase then the mantle abundances of HSEs must be explained by a
              lack of equilibrium between core and mantle and heterogeneous accretion. In
              order to estimate the contributions of either homogeneous or heterogeneous
              accretion models, we must know the partitioning behavior of siderophile
              elements under conditions appropriate for accretion and core formation from
              chondritic material. In addition to measuring partition coefficients, we will
              use high-resolution electron microscopy to characterize the run products to
              determine if the HSEs are dissolved in the silicate or occur as micro
              nuggets.







