Title       : Using Atomic Absorbtion Spectroscopy to Introduce Quality Assurance/Quality
               Control in General, Analytical and Environmental Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a0087966

Award Number: 0087966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33835              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Weyh weyh@chem.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Devon A. Cancilla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
General chemistry students at Western Washington University
              (WWU) were introduced to important quantitative analytical laboratory
              techniques in the third quarter of the three-quarter general chemistry
              sequence. This experience was not extensive but it did allow the students to
              experience and understand quantitative techniques. However, one analytical
              experience was completely missing for these students. Instruments used in this
              laboratory allowed only for single analytical measurements. Further, there was
              no networking capability for the sharing of analytical data. Analysts in modern
              industrial, environmental, and pharmaceutical laboratories rely on analytical
              instruments that are configured to provide high sample throughput and are
              networked to allow wide access to the obtained information. High sample
              throughput is necessary because of the number of quality control samples which
              must be analyzed with every "real" sample. 

To introduce our students to
              Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC), we are using two atomic absorption
              spectrometers equipped with auto-samplers and networked to allow easy sharing
              and export of data. Flame Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) is an attractive
              technique to introduce in general chemistry given the simplicity of the
              principle, the importance of this modern technique, and its ability to measure
              metal concentrations in real world and environmentally important samples.
              Auto-sampling allows samples from an entire class to be interspersed with
              quality control standards and analyzed overnight. Networking allows students to
              access and transport all the data into a spreadsheet, prepare control charts to
              judge reliability, and draw professional conclusions regarding samples. The
              project is adapting a series of experiments from the Journal of Chemical
              Education so that they reflect this emphasis on QA/QC. 

The introduction of
              QA/QC in general chemistry is beneficial to students and faculty in several
              additional courses and programs. Some students continue in chemistry taking
              Analytical Chemistry and Instrumental Analysis. Others are environmental
              chemistry majors in Huxley College of Environmental Studies at WWU. The
              students in these courses and programs are able to advance their understanding
              and use of QA/QC given their introduction in general chemistry laboratory. In
              addition, significant improvement in laboratory experience is realized in these
              higher-level courses because more advanced instrument use and more
              sophisticated experiments are being carried out. For use in these advanced
              courses, one of the AAS units is equipped with a Graphite Furnace unit with
              auto-sampler. 

The total number of students affected is over 900 per year.
              In addition, the project is strengthening the ties between the Chemistry
              Department in the College of Arts and Sciences at WWU and the Environmental
              Chemistry Program at Huxley College of Environmental Studies at WWU. 


