Title       : Variability in Transport and Recruitment of Antarctic Krill Across the Scotia
               Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0087690

Award Number: 0087690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen E. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Klinck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Connection between Antarctic krill populations from the Antarctic Peninsula
              region with those at South Georgia is dependant upon: 1) successful recruitment
              of larval and juvenile age groups at the Antarctic Peninsula, 2) entrainment of
              Antarctic Peninsula krill into the currents associated with fronts in the
              southern portion of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, 3) survival of the krill
              during transport across the Scotia Sea, and 4) successful recruitment to the
              local krill population at a range of space and time scales.  The overall goal
              of this research is to examine environmental and biological variability
              associated with each of these components to determine the relative effect on
              Antarctic krill survival and recruitment.  The first research question
              considers the factors that control/influence variability in location of the
              large-scale circulation features, such as the southern Antarctic Circumpolar
              Current front and boundary.  The rationale underlying this question is that the
              location of these circulation features affects krill entrainment, the volume of
              Upper Circumpolar Deep water that is upwelled arrival time of krill at South
              Georgia, and potentially the extent of the Polar Slope Current outflow from the
              Weddell Sea.  The second research question considers the environmental and
              biological factors that allow successful transport of Antarctic krill between
              the Antarctic Peninsula and South Georgia.  The third research question
              considers the physical and biological factors that result in successful
              recruitment of Antarctic krill to South Georgia populations.  The fourth
              research question is focused on the entire Antarctic Peninsula-Scotia Sea
              system and is directed at determining the locations and/or conditions that
              result in success or failure in recruitment of Antarctic krill.  This question
              will consider if other locations for krill production and recruitment are
              possible given the constraints of passive advection, food availability, and
              recruitment.  This study is a joint effort between E. Hofmann and J. Klinck at
              Old Dominion University and Dr. Eugene Murphy at the British Antarctic Surve
              (BAS) in Cambridge, England.  The study will closely link to the BAS Ocean
              Ecosystem Dynamics Programme, which is investigating the variability of the
              South Georgia ecosystem.  The research will include analyzing, synthesizing,
              and integrating the large environmental and krill data sets collected by BAS
              around South Georgia with those from the Antarctic Peninsula region that are
              from historical sources, such as BIOMASS and the Palmer Long-Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) Program, and those from the South Shetland Islands and Elephant
              Island region obtained as part of the various data sets with biological and
              circulation models are essential for addressing the research questions and will
              lead to a greater understanding of the Antarctic Marine Ecosystem.

