Title       : The Role of Emotion in Propelling the SMET Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0087768

Award Number: 0087768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalind W. Picard picard@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry W. Kort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Reilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Justine M. Cassell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Exploring the Role of Emotion in Propelling the SMET Learning Process
The
              proposed research aims to build a computerized Learning Companion that will be
              sensitive to the affective aspects of learning and that will work with the
              child to facilitate the child's own efforts at learning. Learning complex ideas
              in science, math, engineering, and technology and developing the cognitive
              reasoning skills these areas demand often involves failure and a host of
              associated affective responses.  When learning proceeds via human-human
              interaction, it is often improved by communication of affective cues (such as
              frustration, confusion, or interest), and by adaptation of the learning
              experience to such cues (adjusting pace of presentation, interjecting
              motivation, offering an additional view, etc.).  When learning involves
              human-machine interaction, the human communication about when, where, how, and
              how important it is to adapt also often involves emotional information;
              however, today's computers largely ignore this information.  Affective
              computing has the potential to expand human-computer interaction by extending
              computing to include emotional communication together with appropriate means of
              handling affective information.  The proposed research aims to bring new tools
              of affective computing into the reach of educators, to begin to change
              computer-based learning from a style that ignores emotions to a style that can
              begin to respond appropriately to student emotions.  

The initial focus is
              on building a system that (1) helps students increase their awareness and
              mastery of the important role that emotions can play in learning and (2)
              facilitates the child's learning, by occasionally prompting with questions or
              feedback, and by watching and responding to the affective state of the
              child-watching for signs of frustration and boredom that may precede quitting,
              for signs of curiosity or interest that tend to indicate active exploration,
              and for signs of enjoyment and mastery, which might indicate a successful
              learning experience. Tools developed for the Learning Companion should also be
              useful for intelligent tutoring systems, and should help give insight into new
              theories of motivation and emotion in teaching; however, the Learning Companion
              is not a teacher or tutor that knows the answers, but a player on the side of
              the student.  The companion will be sensitive to the learning trajectory of
              each student, helping him or her learn, and in so doing, learn how to learn
              better.  At the same time, the Learning Companion will serve as an interactive
              system for helping researchers identify and better understand ways in which
              emotion is expressed, communicated, and handled in successful science, math,
              engineering, and technology learning experiences. 

