Title       : Mathematics for Future Secondary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0087892

Award Number: 0087892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74831              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Madden madden@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

In this proof-of-concept proposal, a strategy for
              improving university-level mathematics courses for future secondary math
              teachers is tested. There is increasing evidence that the mathematical training
              that secondary school teachers receive in U.S. colleges and universities often
              fails to impart a deep understanding of the structures that underlie
              high-school math. Cooperating teams in four Louisiana locations, consisting of
              college faculty, high-school teachers and college students, work under central
              support and direction to author and test curriculum materials in algebra,
              geometry, analysis, or statistics that address this need. Each lesson package
              concerns a single topic of limited scope, chosen for its mathematical interest
              and relevance to state and national standards and designed for use in
              university- level courses.

A unique feature of the lesson package is the
              inclusion of extensive examples of student work. The advantages of this are
              ensuring that the product is "in tune" with students' thinking, providing
              teachers with tools to better comprehend students' conceptual understanding,
              and providing a powerful instrument for assessment and evaluation that is built
              into the system.

The project also tests the organizational model under which
              the lesson packages are produced. A change in faculty culture is achieved by
              instituting a new form of pedagogical scholarship that is self-sustaining and
              capable of adapting to future needs. 



