Title       : Investigative Psychophysiology Laboratory Experiences in College and High School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0087906

Award Number: 0087906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard I. Thorsheim thorshm@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Biological (71) 
In this project, St. Olaf College is revising the
              cognitive neuroscience laboratory components of three psychophysiology courses
              and piloting an outreach program to area high schools. The project is
              developing a series of laboratory exercises that emphasize the quantitative
              rather than the qualitative aspects of psychophysiology. We are doing this by
              replacing the analog equipment currently employed in the psychophysiology
              courses with BioPac digital signal processing equipment and by adapting and
              implementing the work of faculty in other institutions to upgrade the relevant
              laboratory exercises for these courses. We have examined prior projects, some
              supported by NSF, in selecting the exercises to implement or adapt. New BioPac
              equipment can be employed effectively to allow students to measure their own
              physiological response data as dependent variables. Using this self-generated
              data appears to be more effective in teaching students about variability,
              potential sources of measurement error, and the cost of precision. The
              following psychology faculty are representative of those that have developed
              courses that use this approach and have influenced our selections: 
o Gwyneth
              Beagley at Alma College (MI)
o Wayne Briner at the University of Nebraska at
              Kearney
o Ellis Rolett at Dartmouth College
o Cole Barton at Davidson
              College
o Eric Wiertelak at Macalester College
o Richard Connett at Monroe
              Community College (NY)
o Randy Cornelius at Vassar College
This process of
              transforming the laboratory components of our psychophysiology courses is
              seeking to put more emphasis on investigative projects, to pique student
              interest and excitement in learning, to develop students' understanding of the
              interaction between mental processes and behavior, and to share the experiences
              of our undergraduate students with high schools students. The high school
              outreach component of our project is building on our Department's previous
              outreach effort with area high schools, which we call Psychological Science
              Day. This is a one-day workshop for 10 area high school psychology teachers and
              their students. The current project is expanding Science Day into a month-long
              collaboration between the high school students and the students in our
              Psychophysiology courses. The college students will introduce the high school
              students to investigative psychology during a visit to the St. Olaf campus,
              monitor the results of their work via the internet, and host them for
              presentations at the end of the month.



