Title       : Modern Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy for an Enhanced Chemistry Curriculum and
               Support of Local Two-Year College Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0087619

Award Number: 0087619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Valente valente@mc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Magers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. Cannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony B. Dribben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi College
	      
	      Clinton, MS  39058    601/924-5131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
 Mississippi College has striven to improve science education
              by curriculum development employing spectroscopy and biochemical subject matter
              for science and non-science undergraduate students. Extending these changes, we
              are implementing a significant upgrade of nuclear magnetic resonance
              instrumental capability with broad implications for the chemistry curriculum at
              Mississippi College and five local two-year community colleges, Hinds, Holmes,
              Copiah-Lincoln, Jones County, and Southwest Mississippi Community Colleges.
              Curricular changes range from foundational to specialized courses and improve
              student skills in stages through the higher three years of the degree program.
              These changes are made by adapting experiments from the educational and
              research literature into undergraduate courses. In this project, a first goal
              is foundational for the second undergraduate year: improving student
              understanding and practice of magnetic resonance in organic chemistry at
              Mississippi College, and developing and implementing an outreach to the five
              local two-year colleges for annual instructor training, ongoing materials
              development, support and visiting class practice in infrared and nuclear
              magnetic spectroscopy. A second goal is developmental: introducing students to
              more searching experiments which take advantage of the wide analytical range of
              the instrumentation and its specialized applications in biochemistry, organic
              and instrumental analysis, and chemical dynamics. Supportive internet resources
              are being developed for both of these goals. A third goal is investigational:
              improving undergraduate research and honors by providing students with modern
              spectroscopic means for their synthetic and experimental work. Facilities are
              available to colleagues at other local four-year institutions. Following the
              implementation period, the project will support a long-term improvement of
              basic student skills in organic chemistry locally, and more specialized
              activities by upper-division students. Each planned element and the off-campus
              outreach will be evaluated by the end of the first year with annual assessments
              thereafter. Both intramural and extramural programs are being assessed based on
              student and faculty evaluation of the methods and experiences. Affected
              two-year college programs, which presently lack instrumental support, should
              realize significant science student, faculty, and program improvements. Science
              students will be better prepared for higher division classes, transfer
              programs, and for graduate and professional studies. 


