Title       : Investigating the Possible Role of Magmatically-Derived Fluids in Faulting in
               the Long Valley Caldera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0087494

Award Number: 0087494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69929              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Zoback zoback@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR0087494 (PH #37x)

INVESTIGATING THE POSSIBLE ROLE OF MAGMATICALLY-DERIVED
              FLUIDS IN FAULTING IN THE LONG VALLEY CALDERA

Mark D. Zoback
Department of
              Geophysics
Stanford University

The goal of this study is to improve our
              understanding of the interaction of volcanic and tectonic processes by
              investigating seismic activity in the Long Valley caldera, Eastern California. 
              Specifically, we are studying the role of magmatically derived fluids in the
              mechanics of faulting in and near the caldera.  It is well known that high
              fluid pressures may trigger earthquakes by decreasing the normal stress across
              faults.  While scientists suspect that fluid pressures are high above magma
              chambers due to heating of ground water and exsolution of fluids from magma, a
              clear link between magmatically derived fluids and triggered seismicity remains
              elusive.  By mapping the stress field and quantifying volcanically influenced
              pore pressures associated with faulting in the Long Valley caldera we hope to
              better constrain the relationship between tectonic and volcanic activities at
              depth.
Fluids have been shown to influence a variety of faulting processes.
              Although earthquake triggering associated with pore fluid migration has been
              observed in cases of induced seismicity and has been hypothesized to occur
              along the San Andreas Fault, it has not been possible to quantify or map
              relative pore pressure changes in detail. Precise mapping of relative pore
              pressures associated with a spatially and temporally propagating system of
              earthquakes would help us understand how fluid pressures might be changing with
              time and diffusing through bedrock to trigger these events. This project is
              studying these processes in detail.

