Title       : Supramolecular Materials from Liquid Crystalline Phthalocyanines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0087587

Award Number: 0087587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal R. Armstrong nra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. O'Brien  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Prior NSF supported research has led to several effective methods to polymerize
              self-organized amphiphilic monomers in a variety of lyotropic mesophases
              including lamellar, bicontinuous cubic, and inverted hexagonal phases.  These
              studies provide the background for the proposed research into the formation of
              supramolecular materials from highly ordered columnar assemblies of
              octasubstituted phthalocyanines (Pc).  Strong pi-pi interactions betweeen
              ordered arrays of the prototype Pc 1, i.e. 2, 3, 9, 10, 16, 17, 23,
              24-octakis-((2-benzyloxy)ethoxy) phthlocyaninato Cu(II), control the phase and
              surface behavior of the Pc.  The well ordered discotic columnar unit cells of
              Pc's similar to 1 will be used to create one-dimensional rod-like polymers, as
              well as create free standing or surface bound self-assembled Pc aggregates of
              defined size on the nano scale by enhancing the self-assembly characteristics
              of octasubstituted Pc.  The self-assembled Pc aggregates may be composed of a
              single Pc or alternating pairs of Pc, in the same sense as alternating
              copolymers.  These goals will be pursued by the preparation and
              characterization of octasubstituted Pc that incorporate specific self-assembly
              moieties to facilitate the formation of columnar arrays of alternating pairs of
              Pc.  In addition unsymmetrical Pc will be prepared that are composed of three
              subunits similar to Pc1 with the fourth having an attached random coil
              oligomer.  The balance between the attractive N-N interactions and the
              repulsive coil-coil interactions is expected to control the aggregation of
              these disc-coil oligomers.  The synthesis and molecular characterization
              studies on these new nanomaterials will be complemented by collaborative
              analytical studies.
%%%
Supramolecular materials can be created by the design
              of molecular entities that self-assemble and/or self-organize into
              non-covalently associated ensembles on the nano to micro scale.  The organized
              nature of these materials offer several attractive features for applications in
              both biological and materials sciences, e.g. catalysis, separations, surface
              modification, therapeutics, diagnosis, signal transduction, among others.

