Title       : Three-Dimensional Hydrodynamic Modeling of Flow and Sediment Transport in
               Complex River Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0087842

Award Number: 0087842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Kitanidis kitanidis@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Street  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087842
Kitanidis


It is recognized that three-dimensional flow dynamics
              influence river channel morphology and the movement and distribution of
              sediment within the channel.  In channels with compound cross-section,
              pool-riffle sequences, and developed meander systems, the influence of
              three-dimensional velocity fields on secondary flow circulation has a profound
              effect on both the river hydrodynamics and the movement of sediment.  The goal
              of this project is to develop and validate a three-dimensional hydrodynamic and
              sediment transport model suitable for detailed field-scale studies to
              investigate the influence of complex three-dimensional flow structure during
              high flow events in:  (a) pool-riffle sequences, (b) compound channels, and (c)
              meandering compound channels.  This study will investigate the influence of
              these flow structures on secondary circulation, and the erosion, deposition,
              and transport of sediment.  The project utilizes an existing semi-implicit
              numerical model for non-hydrostatic free-surface flows on unstructured grids. 
              The model is based on the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations and
              utilizes a semi-implicit algorithm that is robust, stable, and very efficient. 
              The model will be coupled with a mobile bed model for suspended and bedload
              sediment transport.

A thorough understanding of the flow and sediment regime
              in complex channels is essential for the planning and development of successful
              stream restoration efforts.  One of the primary causes of failure in stream
              restoration is the placement of structures or the construction of channel
              designs that are not suitable for prevailing hydrologic and sedimentologic
              conditions.  Current models cannot accurately predict flow and sediment
              transport within these channel forms during high flows, which makes it
              difficult to evaluate potential stability.  The contributions of this work
              include:  advancing current understanding of stream stability, channel
              morphology, flood conveyance, sediment transport, and flow variability in
              complex river channels, demonstrating the influence of three-dimensional
              velocity fields on flow and sediment transport in complex channels;
              investigating the applicability of the velocity reversal hypothesis as a
              mechanism for understanding sediment transport in pool-riffle sequences during
              high flows; modeling the influence of secondary circulation in straight and
              sinuous compound channels to quantify the influence of floodplains on sediment
              movement and flood conveyance; and demonstrating the capacity of hydrodynamic
              modeling to improve the planning and design of river restoration projects. 

