Title       : Investigation of Nitric Oxide Kinetics in Diffusion Flames with Laser-Induced
               Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Detailed Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0087337

Award Number: 0087337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Volker Sick vsick@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5946,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this joint project involving the University of Michigan,
              Imperial College (London), and Sandia National Laboratory (Livermore) is to
              improve understanding and predictive capability of nitric oxide (NO) formation
              from the prompt (Fenimore) pathway favored in diffusion and fuel-rich flames. 
              Chemical species critical to the prompt mechanism are measured and compared to
              the results from detailed kinetic models.  Temperature and concentrations of
              NO, CH radical, and oxygen atoms are measured in a stable diffusion flame using
              nonintrusive laser-based diagnostics.  The flame studied is a methane/air
              diffusion flame stabilized on a Tsuji-type counterflow burner.  Species
              measurements are made with nanosecond and picosecond laser-induced fluorescence
              (LIF).  Temperatures are measured with coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy
              (CARS) and quenching is measured directly by resolving the temporal decay of
              the picosecond LIF signal.  Calibration is performed using Rayleigh scattering
              (CH, O-atom) or by measuring known amounts of dopant (NO).  Flame strain rates
              (air and fuel flows) are adjusted to provide various reaction conditions, and
              nitric oxide is added to the fuel to measure destruction of NO by reaction with
              hydrocarbons (reburn).

Reduction of pollutant emissions, especially nitrogen
              oxides, is a key issue in the design of energy conversion devices including
              automobile engines, gas turbines, and home heating furnaces.  Depending on
              flame conditions, formation of nitric oxide can proceed by two different
              mechanisms:  the thermal (Zeldovich) mechanism or the prompt (Fenimore)
              mechanism.  The thermal mechanism, which dominates in fuel-lean, premixed
              systems, is fairly well characterized.  However, the prompt mechanism is poorly
              understood.

