Title       : Late Quaternary History of the Walker River: The Tale of a River with a Split
               Personality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0087840

Award Number: 0087840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Adams kadams@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Late Quaternary history of the Walker River: The tale of a river with a split
              personality

Kenneth D. Adams
Desert Research Institute
Reno,
              Nevada

Abstract
The Walker River is one of five major streams that flow
              into the Lahontan basin of northwestern Nevada and adjacent northeastern
              California. The behavior of this river since the late Pleistocene is quite
              unusual because instead of flowing into Walker Lake as it does today, at times
              during the Holocene it diverted to flow into the Carson Sink. When this
              happened, Walker Lake became a relatively dry playa whereas the Carson Sink
              gained a significant new water source. When the river diverted back to Walker
              Lake, the playa was flooded and lakes in the Carson Sink presumably shrank in
              size. Paleoclimatic reconstructions based on the behavior and status of lakes
              in both basins must therefore consider the diversion history of the Walker
              River.
The project-PI will perform an integrated study of the behavior of the
              Walker River since the last highstand of Lake Lahontan and its effects on the
              paleohydrology of Walker Lake and the Carson Sink. This research is significant
              to a host of past, present, and future research efforts in the Great Basin.
              First, the results of this research will serve to test the hypothesis that
              rapid isostatic rebound after the last major lake cycle caused the Walker River
              to change its course. Second, fluctuations of lake levels in the Walker Lake
              basin may be a function of river diversion, not climatic fluctuations. Third,
              large short-lived lakes in the Carson Sink that displaced people, animals, and
              vegetation to the periphery of the Sink in the late Holocene may also be due to
              river diversion and not climatic fluctuations. Fourth, the results of this
              research will serve as revised input parameters for isostatic rebound modeling
              efforts. And fifth, the history and survival of the threatened Lahontan
              Cutthroat Trout will be placed into a new perspective that may assist recovery
              efforts.
The research is part of a longer-term effort to reconstruct the
              paleoclimatic and rebound history of the Lahontan region over the last 30 ka.
              Recognition that rapid isostatic rebound may have invoked large-scale
              geomorphic and hydrographic effects underlies the importance of refining the
              isostatic rebound model for the Lake Lahontan basin and documenting these
              effects on the paleoenvironmental history of the region. The results of the
              proposed research will lead to a more complete paleoclimatic record from the
              basin and will also document the interrelationships between climate change,
              deep Earth processes, and surface processes.

