Title       : Integration of Capillary Column Gas Chromatography into Project-Oriented
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0087736

Award Number: 0087736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victoria M. Bragin                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Drew sdrew@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Alberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry R. Mohrig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah S. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Hollingsworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Capillary column gas chromatography (GC) is integrated into
              several courses that offer multi-week, collaborative, project-oriented
              laboratory experiences, using experiments which are adapted from standard
              literature. The Chemistry Department currently offers many of these types of
              laboratory experiences to students, but feel the addition of several capillary
              column GC's would greatly enhance the range of projects that could be offered.
              The Department greatly values multi-week, collaborative, project-oriented
              laboratories because the skills students develop, such as working as a member
              of a team, designing experiments, and evaluating data, are central to being a
              scientist. In addition, offering multi-week projects, which closely parallel a
              true research experience, inspires more students to seek out undergraduate
              research experiences. Capillary column GC is a flexible, fast, and quantitative
              tool that can support many types of projects in introductory, environmental,
              and organic chemistry. The GC instruments have temperature programming
              capabilities and are equipped with two detectors, two columns, and an
              integrator for each instrument. The majority of the GC instruments have flame
              ionization detectors; however, two of the instruments are each equipped with an
              electron capture detector. The addition of two electron capture detectors
              allows two of the GC instruments to support project-oriented laboratories in
              environmental chemistry courses where the selective detection of halogenated
              and nitro-substituted compounds, a typical motif for many pesticides and
              herbicides, are crucial. The majority of the capillary column GC usage occurs
              in sophomore organic chemistry laboratories where there has been a shift in
              curricular focus to offering all project-oriented laboratory experiences. Some
              examples of projects to be offered include the examination of competitive
              reaction pathways in the dehydration reaction of an alcohol, a study of
              structure/reactivity relationships in the Diels-Alder reaction, and the
              examination of the enantioselective reduction of an acylnaphthalene derivative.
              Introductory and environmental chemistry courses at Carleton offer at least one
              multi-week, project oriented laboratory experience. During this period students
              usually pick from a menu of possible projects that a team can undertake. In
              introductory chemistry three projects take advantage of the new capillary
              column GC's. These projects include an examination of intermolecular forces in
              several liquids, the investigation of a simulated forensic arson sample, and
              the investigation of the volatility of fluorinated metal-acetylacetonate
              complexes. In environmental chemistry a project would call for a student group
              to examine the distribution of a herbicide in either soil or water in the
              immediate region around the campus. An additional project is also used to
              examine pesticides and herbicides in commercially grown fruits and
              vegetables.

