Title       : Experimental Design to Measure Effects of Assisting Teachers in Using Data on
               Enacted Curriculum to Improve Effectiveness of Instruction in Mathematics and
               Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0087562

Award Number: 0087562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1438462            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf K. Blank rolfb@ccsso.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda D. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Council Chief St Sch Off
	      One Massachusetts Ave., NW
	      Washington, DC  20001143    202/408-5505

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project will test the effects of an intervention to assist middle school
              teachers to learn to use rich, in-depth data to improve their teaching. 
              Information about their current instruction, curriculum practices, and student
              assessment will be gathered, summarized, and given to teachers in a training
              exercise.  Two forms of the intervention will be used:  one is based on
              "continuous improvement" in which data and formative evaluation are provided to
              teachers. The other intervention is "school-based collaboration and networking"
              aimed at sharing teaching ideas, models, and strategies for improvement.  
              

The project will apply an experimental design with treatment and control
              schools randomly selected from a pool of schools from the same districts. 
              Improvements in curriculum and teaching will be assessed with multiple
              measures, including teacher surveys, observation, interviews, and analysis of
              teacher assignments, student work, and student test results.  However, the true
              test of the effect of the interventions cannot occur until a 4th unfunded year.
               The project will rely on school collected assessments. 


