Title       : Geochemical Analysis across the Geology Curriculum and in Related Courses in
               Chemistry and Environmental Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0087860

Award Number: 0087860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy T. Allen tallen@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Stepenuck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
While qualitative field-based observation remains fundamental to
              the science of Geology, a more complete understanding of the earth system and
              its processes, as well as related environmental problems, requires a
              multi-disciplinary approach including the collection, interpretation, and
              application of quantitative geochemical data. Students in Geology and
              Environmental Studies are able to undertake major and trace element analyses
              of, and explore compositional relationships in, solid rock, mineral, sediment
              and soil samples by using an automated Wavelength Dispersive X-Ray Fluorescence
              Spectrometer with element mapping and spot analysis capabilities, along with
              associated sample preparation equipment. Adapting exemplary models from Albion
              College, Dickinson College, Furman University, and Middle Tennessee State
              University, and from the literature, we are incorporating inquiry-based
              exercises using these analytical techniques into courses in Physical Geology,
              Mineralogy, Petrology, Environmental Geology, Geochemistry, and Chemical
              Analysis of the Environment. In so doing, we are (1) increasing the involvement
              of our students in the process of modern scientific investigation, with
              progressive preparation for independent and student-faculty cooperative
              research through Independent/Directed Study and the Environmental Studies
              Senior Seminar; and (2) enhancing student understanding of fundamental
              relationships between chemical composition, mineralogy, rock-type, tectonic
              setting, and global biogeochemical cycling. An important component of our
              project is site visits by a team of experienced external evaluators, providing
              information exchange and assistance in formative and summative evaluation. 

