Title       : Chemistry and Bonding of Grain Boundary Carbon in Mantle Xenoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0087714

Award Number: 0087714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence A. J. Garvie lgarvie@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Garvie
EAR-0087714

Electrical conductivities from laboratory measurements
              and geophysical data are often at odds, since common crustal silicates are
              significantly more insulating than are crustal conductivities determined by
              geophysical models. It has been suggested that the electrical conductivity of
              these rocks is in part controlled by intergranular C. The nature of this C is
              poorly known. Electron optical, diffraction, and spectroscopic studies reveal
              heterogeneous materials, with chemical and structural variations at the
              nanometer scale. The origin of the intergranular C is also in dispute. The
              intergranular C contains a host of elements, most notably Cl. It is unknown
              whether any of these elements are associated with graphite intercalation
              compounds (GIC), separate discrete mineral inclusions, or as organic compounds.
              The proposed study will focus on the chemistry and mineralogy of grain-boundary
              C in mantle xenoliths from alkali basalts, kimberlites, and samples recovered
              from the German continental scientific drilling site (KTB). Particular
              attention will be directed towards determining the local chemical composition
              of the C, with the view of identifying the hosts of the associated elements. It
              is necessary to ascertain the presence of GICs in the intergranular C because
              of their significant physical and chemical properties. Understanding the
              structure-property relationships of intergranular C requires a knowledge of the
              microstructure, including a quantitative appreciation of chemical bonding and
              its spatial distribution. Structural information will be revealed by high
              resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM).  The proposal describes
              studies that rely on the high-energy resolution and brightness of a TEM
              equipped with a field-emission gun (FEG) electron source and the high
              sensitivity of the new Gatan 766 DigiPEELS spectrometer. This experimental
              setup provides nanometer-scale, trace element, analytical capabilities.
              Electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) with a TEM is an established
              spectroscopic technique that provides qualitative and quantitative chemical
              information. EELS is a highly sensitive microanalytical tool, and offers an
              advantage over energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) for analyzing light
              elements. 


