Title       : Integrating the Chemistry Systemic Initiatives and Teacher Professional
               Development in a Large General Chemistry Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0087967

Award Number: 0087967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher F. Bauer cfb@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
This project is building a learning community in a 700-person
              general chemistry course by melding key features of the NSF Chemistry Systemic
              Initiatives with existing computer-based laboratory facilities and with the
              unique UNH Preparing Future Faculty programs. The course is intended to help
              students grow intellectually and personally. We are hoping to demonstrate
              intellectual growth along three dimensions - conceptual understanding of
              chemistry, metacognitive ability, and motivation to learn. We are attempting to
              create an environment in which students feel "known," despite the large
              population, and in which helping each other learn is valued. This may lead to
              enhanced retention of students in the course, in science disciplines, and in
              college.

Student learning focuses on constructing, visualizing, and
              articulating an understanding of chemistry by means of inquiry-based activities
              that occur throughout the scope of student work (lecture, lab, study group,
              homework). Along with inquiry-based activities of our own design, we are
              integrating and adapting a number of ChemConnections modules (Berkeley/Beloit
              groups), e.g. "What's in a Star", "Design of Automobile Air Bag", and "Ozone
              Hole", as motivating contexts for learning chemistry. Our stance is one of
              constructing knowledge on an as-needed basis. At the same time, we are
              enhancing one of our traditional course goals - understanding the particulate
              nature of matter - by means of supportive text and media materials, e.g.
              Silberberg's text and new animations, and Joel Russell's split-screen multiple
              representations CD. Lastly, having students articulate and evaluate their
              understanding is a central pedagogic feature. This occurs through 8-person
              peer-led discussion groups (CUNY City College Peer-Led Team Teaching model),
              computer-mediated peer-reviewed writing (UCLA Calibrated Peer Review system),
              and the discussion associated with the Chem Connections modules.

Computers
              are being used for homework (4 years experience with Spain's ChemSkill
              Builder), laboratory data acquisition (Labworks computer stations for student
              pairs), and molecular animations, as well as for routine course information and
              communication (UNH implementation of Blackboard.com). 

We also are creating
              a Pedagogic Field Laboratory - a clinical setting whereby science Ph.D.
              students involved in the UNH Preparing Future Faculty degree programs and
              preservice secondary science teachers can observe, participate, and discuss the
              implementation process, and assess student and faculty responses. Activities in
              the PFL extend beyond this chemistry project, since there are a number of
              NSF-funded curriculum projects underway at UNH. The PFF programs are available
              to students and faculty off campus, especially at partner institutions (Howard
              Univ., St. Anselm College, Keene State College, UNH-Manchester). 


