Title       : An Experimental Study of the Breakdown of Dolomite in Mixed-Volatile Metamorphic
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0087553

Award Number: 0087553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore C. Labotka tlabotka@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Anovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Labotka
EAR-0087553

The compositions and abundances of minerals in
              metamorphosed limestone and dolomite rock are commonly used to determine
              properties of the metamorphic fluid. The important properties are the
              composition of the fluid, the fluid flux, and terrain-scale patterns of fluid
              flow. In metamorphic systems, the development of mineral assemblages depends on
              the relative values of several rate constants, such as hydraulic conductivity,
              thermal conductivity, diffusion and dispersivity, and reaction progress. In
              this study, we plan to determine the kinetics of reactions that affect the
              stability of dolomite in mixed-volatile environments. A common sequence of
              reactions in dolomitic rocks metamorphosed under H2O-rich conditions is
              dolomite = calcite + periclase + CO2, followed by periclase + H2O = brucite.
              Similar reactions occur during metamorphism of ultramafic rocks in
              mixed-volatile fluids. The dolomite system is ideal for the study of reaction
              kinetics because the assemblages occur in a variety of silica-poor rocks in
              contact and regional metamorphic terrains. Our planned set of experiments
              consists of three parts. First, we will conduct time-series experiments on
              powdered starting materials in hydrothermal vessels to provide upper limits on
              mineral and isotope reaction rates. Second, we will observe fast and
              unquenchable reactions in situ in the hydrothermal diamond-anvil cell with the
              aid of laser Raman spectroscopy. In the third part of experimental
              investigation we plan to use cylinders of dolomite rock as starting material to
              mimic more closely the natural reactions. In all experiments, we plan to use
              isotopically labeled fluid to determine the rates of not only the mineralogic
              reactions, but also the isotope-exchange reactions in the same experiments. We
              will compare the results of the experimental study, particularly of the rock
              core experiments, with observations of the contact-metamorphosed dolomite from
              Marble Canyon, Texas, which experienced both the periclase-forming reaction and
              the brucite-forming retrograde reaction.


