Title       : Mobile Backbone Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0087148

Award Number: 0087148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Izhak Rubin rubin@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Providing reliable multimedia communications in mobile multihop wireless
              networks is a formidable
challenge. Communication networks in which all users
              are potentially mobile and untethered to any fixed
wireline infrastructure
              arise in a variety of contexts. The mobile users of the system desire
              reliable
communications, including real-time voice and video, notwithstanding
              the lack of a fixed infrastructure. That
is, the disconnection probability
              should be low and certain quality of service (QoS) guarantees should
              be
provided: for many applications, the information exchanged should have low
              delay, low jitter and a low loss
rate.
     In a fully distributed wireless
              network, there is no fixed (wired) backbone that can be exploited
              to
centralize some of the network management and routing functions. In order
              to provide the desired functionality, the mobile terminals must be organized
              into a network that has some hierarchical organization or reliable structure
              that is maintained (at least to some degree) under varying network
              connectivities. This structure should, if possible, be maintained in a
              distributed fashion, without reliance on a centralized controller.
     Our
              approach to solving the ad hoc network problem is to use an embedded
              hierarchical structure, with
physically different networks at the various
              levels. Recently, we have proposed the employment of a mobile
backbone to
              support guaranteed QoS (as well as best effort) applications for mobile
              networks. Certain mobile
terminals are assigned to effectively serve as mobile
              base stations, and these selected users ("backbone nodes") together with their
              interconnecting communication links constitute the mobile backbone. The
              backbone network consists of a mesh topology with point-to-point links used to
              interconnect neighboring backbone nodes. The mobile backbone, which has a
              functionality analogous to a fixed backbone in a cellular network, is then
              exploited to make the routing, access control, scheduling and congestion
              control problems tractable. Such mobile backbone networks can also be exploited
              to supplement an employed ad hoc mobile network that lacks a transport
              backbone, and is thus not able to readily provide QoS guarantees to multimedia
              applications.
     This research proposes a new approach to synthesizing
              communication backbones for mobile wireless
networks. The backbone will
              satisfy user-specified accessibility and connectivity requirements and will
              support guaranteed QoS objectives. The mobile backbone construction algorithm
              will incorporate terminal positional information and a distance metric in order
              to discern geographical sections of the network with high concentrations of
              users. Pattern recognition based techniques will be developed and employed for
              the first time in the context of telecommunications networks in order to
              discern compact sections of the network, and to choose representative backbone
              nodes for these compact sections. This approach provides a new means of
              decomposing a global network into smaller simpler subnetworks, on each of which
              a backbone construction
algorithm can then be run.
     Once the network has
              been divided into subnetworks (termed itclustersln), a backbone is then
              constructed
for each separate cluster. These separate intra-cluster backbones
              are then linked together to form a composite global backbone network with the
              desired functionality.
     New graph-theoretic algorithms will be developed
              to synthesize the separate intra-cluster backbones.
These methodologies will
              incorporate deterministic and probabilistic relaxations of the backbones
              accessibility features. Investigations will also include preprocessing of the
              input graph that models the communications network and subgraph removal
              techniques to determine optimal topologies that can be exploited for backbone
              synthesis. Robust algorithms will be developed that ihlook aheadlp to possible
              future graph scenarios (based on terminal movement) and choose the best
              backbone for the ensemble.
     The global backbone construction algorithms
              will be simplified by decoupling the inter-cluster backbone
connectivity
              requirements from the intra-cluster connectivity requirements. A mobile
              backbone will be
designed with a single user-specified inter-cluster
              connectivity requirement, but may have different user-
specified intra-cluster
              connectivity requirements for each cluster. The inter-cluster backbone will
              be
constructed using graph-theoretic techniques wherein each cluster is
              treated as a single node a supernode.
The mobile backbone construction
              algorithms will be analyzed and evaluated to optimize methods of
backbone
              reconstitution under failures caused by nodal movement, environmental
              variations and loading
fluctuations. Extensive analyses and simulations will
              be performed to evaluate the performance of the
proposed backbone construction
              protocol under several scenarios that correspond to, e.g., different
              mobility
patterns, different network loads, and a multitude of multimedia
              applications.
     The mobile backbone networks to be investigated here are of
              significant importance in many application
scenarios. They have been targeted
              for the implementation of next generation wireless networks for military
unit
              operations, as well as for a multitude of commercial networks, which require
              rapid and reliable deployment in an area that lacks an existing fixed-backbone
              infrastructure. Included are civilian and government networks used for disaster
              relief purposes.
