Title       : Simulation of Rock Avalanches and Pyroclastic Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0087665

Award Number: 0087665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Sheridan mfs@geology.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus I. Bursik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Bruce Pitman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Sheridan
EAR-0087665

The risk of potential rock avalanches and pyroclastic
              flows is a problem that public safety
authorities around the world face
              several times a year (Tilling, 1989a). We propose to develop a 3-D computer
              code to simulate the mass and momentum flow from dangerous geologic avalanches,
              based on estimates of original volume of the starting materials and their
              properties and an accurate digital terrain model of the surface. The model will
              forecast lateral and longitudinal thickness variations in both the moving flow
              and the resulting deposits. This effort will greatly extend the forecasting
              products now provided by the successful Flow3D code of Sheridan (Kover, 1994;
              Sheridan and Kover, 1997). This project will contain several elements: 1. a
              mathematical model for dense grain flows with an air (avalanche) or hot gas
              (pyroclastic flow) matrix; 2. data constraint based on field studies of several
              recent avalanches in the Cascade Range and pyroclastic flows at Mount St.
              Helens and Colima, Mexico; 3. flume and inclined slope laboratory experiments
              to test the model at a small scales; and 4. simulation of scenarios of
              potential future events at the study sites. The simulation code will be
              developed in close concert with laboratory and field studies, providing
              fidelity of the computer modeling with experimental results. The basis of our
              simulations will be estimation of source volumes and runout data (deposit
              profile, thickness, etc.) of actual avalanches and flows and accurate DEMs of
              current topography. The models will provide velocity histories, flow paths,
              flow thickness, and planimetric areas of the simulations, all in three
              dimensions. The output display format will be suitable for interpretation by
              public safety officials as well as scientists. The results will be back-fitted
              to pyroclastic flow data from Unzen,
Soufriere Hills, Mt. St. Helens, and
              Volcano Colima and avalanche data from Cascade volcanoes. Based on our
              benchmarking, the code will allow us to forecast future local hazards at these
              and other sites including Pico de Orizaba, Mount Rainier, and Mount Adams. The
              resulting model should help authorities design mitigation plans for specific
              dangerous areas.

