Title       : Talking about Genetics: Using Representations and Language to Understand Complex
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0087811

Award Number: 0087811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609546             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie A. Bienkowski bienkowski@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Hurst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Kozma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the roles of representations and language in
              learning complex science through technology-based activities. Researchers will
              conduct a series of design and classroom studies in which students will use
              representations and language to support the learning of scientific inquiry and
              complex concepts in genetics.

This research will study how technology can
              support learning in three ways: (1) providing students with simulations in
              which they can conduct investigations of scientific phenomena, (2) showing
              multiple representations which students can use to understand the underlying
              entities and mechanisms that account for these phenomena, and (3) providing
              structure that scaffolds their explanation of these underlying entities and
              mechanisms. This technology support will come from integrating two
              independently developed software programs into an environment called GenTalk. 
              GenTalk will combine features of BioLogica simulations and
              ExplanationConstructor explanation support to generate an environment rich both
              in representations and in scaffolding for students' explanations and discourse
              about their investigations. 

Researchers will collaborate with the designers
              of these software packages and with high school biology teachers to implement a
              controlled classroom experiment and look at the impact of these software
              packages, separately and in combination, on the investigation practices,
              language use, and science understanding of a range of high school students.
              They will investigate questions such as: What representational features support
              student discourse? What rhetorical prompts and software supports increase
              student talk? How do representations and rhetorical prompts work together to
              influence student discourse?
Methods: This project is a two-year plan of
              research to investigate the relationship between representations and discourse
              in technology environments, and the resulting student understanding of
              scientific causal mechanisms in genetics.  The first year will be used for a
              design of the technology environment and curriculum for genetics up to and
              including the population level, and the second year will be for implementation
              of, and research on, the prototype in several classrooms.
Potential Impact:
              This project is a program of fundamental research on the cognitive and social
              processes of learning science that will have direct implications for the
              classroom use of technology in the service of curriculum reform and student
              achievement.

