Title       : Fluid and Engineering Mechanics Learning Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0087789

Award Number: 0087789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Cataldo catald@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vito A. Guido  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)

Cooper Union is creating a new learning environment
              in the interdisciplinary curricula of fluid mechanics and engineering
              mechanics. The new environment, based on the classroom-studio concept
              originally developed at Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute, seeks to better
              integrate the process of design education into engineering education. Further,
              in its most innovative aspect, the project involves using the studio-classroom,
              combined with a prototyping studio, to improve design education.

To that
              end, the Cooper Union is equipping two closely related Learning Laboratories,
              one for fluid mechanics and one for engineering mechanics. The Learning Labs
              add an interactive mode to the traditional classroom lecture format, adapting
              standard, proven bench-scale equipment used in typical engineering
              education
for fluid and engineering mechanics. The new facilities take full
              advantage of new educational technologies to create a dynamic, engaging
              learning and teaching environment especially suited to these basic
              subjects.

A third element, a Prototyping Studio to be supplied by Cooper
              Union, is adding the vital element of fabricating prototypes, which are to be
              conceived and iteratively tested, analyzed, and redesigned in the Learning
              Labs. In this way, analysis is more fully integrated into the design process,
              advancing design education; and practice is more closely juxtaposed with
              theory.

The Learning Labs are providing pedagogical tools to seamlessly
              integrate conceptualization, analysis, communication, teamwork, and
              fabrication. They are also promoting research in engineering education and
              serve as a model for a new teaching methodology in other disciplines as well.

