Title       : Revisioning General Psychology: Engaging Women in Scientific Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0087926

Award Number: 0087926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest G. Clary Gclary@stkate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Schmit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne Q. Floyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Thieman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda A. Szymanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of St Catherine
	      2004 Randolph Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051750    612/690-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73)
Like many introductory science courses,
              Introductory Psychology on our campus has been structured as a collection of
              findings that have been discovered through research in a variety of specialized
              areas in psychology. Often missing, however, is the sense that science and
              doing science is the "glue" that holds the various parts of the discipline of
              psychology together. This project is engaged in enriching the scientific
              experience of students enrolled in the Introductory Psychology course at the
              College of St. Catherine (St. Paul campus), a liberal arts college for women.
              In the revised course, our primary objective is to adapt materials already
              developed to present psychology as a science seeking answers to important
              questions that can be pursued with an array of strategies and methods. The
              methods we are imbedding into our course include group and single subject
              experimentation, correlation research, naturalistic observation, reviews of the
              research literature, and analysis of existing data sets available in archives.
              The course as modified now contains six laboratory experiences. Each of these
              is scheduled for two 1-hour sessions. They are providing our students with
              hands-on learning experiences using modern instrumentation (computer hardware
              and software, physiological recording equipment, data projectors, and video
              recording and playback equipment). Laboratory experiences are adapting
              materials such as computer simulations of operant conditioning. The course is
              integrating the lecture and laboratory portions of the course, using classic
              studies in psychology as the bridges between theory and practice. To this end,
              we are drawing on several classic studies in psychology described in R. Hock's
              "Forty Studies that Changed Psychology: Explorations into the History of
              Psychological Research" (Prentice-Hall, 3rd Edition, 1999). Research methods
              are being investigated by students in the areas of perception, learning and
              memory, developmental, social and personality, abnormal, and health psychology.
              In addition to the benefits of these improvements that are being enjoyed by the
              roughly 250 students who are enrolling in this revised course each year, we are
              also anticipating a strong ripple effect through the entire department and
              undergraduate curriculum. For example, each year a group of upper division
              psychology majors and minors are given the opportunity to be mentored and
              trained as laboratory instructors. Students taking advanced psychology
              laboratory courses are also profiting from the availability of enhanced
              instrumentation. Each member of the department is contributing their unique
              expertise to the planning of undergraduate laboratories. This collaborative
              effort is providing faculty development experiences to our small department.
              
The project is contributing to teacher preparation because all K-12 education
              majors must take introductory psychology. Students majoring in psychology or
              secondary education - social studies have the opportunity to engage in training
              to become laboratory instructors once they have completed introductory courses.
              The project is also serving to significantly improve the use of technology in
              our department and to foster collaborative faculty development. 


