Title       : Collaborative Research: Nonparametric Models for Incomplete Clustered Data with
               Applications to the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0087126

Award Number: 0087126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Handcock handcock@stat.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Clustered data are very common in social sciences research and other fields. 
              For example, in a study involving school children, school districts form
              clusters and schools form sub-clusters within each cluster.  In this context,
              researchers want to explain a certain variable of interest (the response
              variable) in terms of certain categorical variables (factors) while adjusting
              for the presence of other incidental variables (covariates) which might
              influence the response.  This project aims at developing statistical methods
              for analyzing such data.  Though the classical statistical methods accommodate
              the lack of independence that is inherent to data arising from cluster
              sampling, they are very often unsuitable for data arising from social science
              research.  This is because they require a set of restrictive assumptions (such
              as normality and homogeneity of the residuals, linearity, scale dependence)
              which are rarely satisfied in the social sciences.  In addition, data in social
              sciences research are often incomplete (censored or missing) in which case
              inference based on the classical statistical models cannot be implemented. 
              Alternative approaches developed to deal with these issues also rely on
              assumptions which may or may not be satisfied for any given application.  The
              research for this project will focus on the development of statistical models
              and methods that are free of restrictive assumptions.  Central components of
              the project is the application of these methods to questions regarding routine
              activities and deviant behavior, and to the question of whether there has been
              a secular rise in job instability among young adults over the past three
              decades using two cohorts from the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS). 
              Programs for formal hypothesis testing, graphical summaries of effects and
              exploratory data analysis plots, will be made available on the web for use by
              the social sciences community.

Correct statistical analysis is very
              important as it often forms the basis for policy and other decisions.  The
              nonparametric formulation in this project is especially apt for many kinds of
              social science data where we have weak theories about functional forms and weak
              measurement procedures (e.g., with attitudes) that produce ordinal or only
              somewhat stronger (but typically not interval) scales.  The violation of
              assumptions underlying a statistical approach can result in misuse of scarce
              data resources and ultimately misguided policy decisions.

