Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biological Distance and the African American
               Dentition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a0087400

Award Number: 0087400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4580               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Sciulli Sciulli.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Gene flow occurs whenever two human populations come in contact.  Thus,
              virtually all human populations are genetically dynamic, changing in their
              composition over time. The African-American population is the result of gene
              flow between two other identifiable biological groups: West Africans and
              American of European descent.  This project will utilize dental characteristics
              to trace genetic relationship among these three groups.  Characteristics of
              dental morphology, such as shovel-shaped incisors and Carabelli's trait, are
              useful for this purpose because they are highly heritable, do not remodel
              during life (although they can be lost to wear or pathology), and can be
              compared equally among samples from past and present populations.
        The
              results of this research will provide new knowledge about human microevolution
              in a biocultural setting.  By analyzing a variety of samples from each
              biological group, observations will be made on patterns of genetic change
              through time and space.  Additionally, by comparing the information from this
              study to other analyses of admixture in African Americans it will be possible
              to extend our knowledge of the history of the American population.  Finally,
              the product of this study will include tables of dental trait frequencies in
              each of the three groups.  This information is not currently available for
              African Americans and Americans of European descent.

