Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Probing the Folding Kinetics and Stability of
               Proteins with Theoretically Designed Energy Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0087974

Award Number: 0087974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery G. Saven saven@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Gai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0087974
Saven

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Jeffrey Saven of the University of Pennsylvania and
              Professor Shoji Takada of Kobe University in Japan.  The researchers will
              undertake research connected with probing the folding kinetics and stability of
              proteins with theoretically designed energy landscapes. Protein folding is a
              fundamental area of research in contemporary molecular science.  This project
              will synthesize recent advances in protein folding theory, protein simulation,
              and experimental probes of protein folding.  The goal of the project is to
              design and study proteins that fold to a predetermined structure.  The proteins
              will be designed according to different folding criteria so that folding
              kinetics may be included as an element of the design process.  

The project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S. researcher's expertise is in
              developing computational methods to address the properties of protein
              sequences.  Their Japanese collaborators have expertise in simulating the
              kinetics and stability of various realistic models of proteins, in the
              experimental study of protein structure and stability, in the synthesis of
              proteins using molecular biology methods, and in the characterization of
              protein structure and dynamics using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).  Results
              of this research should improve our understanding of the means of gene
              expression, the engineering of proteins for biotechnology, and those genetic
              diseases involving protein folding and misfolding.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of their research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

