Title       : Secure Virtually Isolated Networks to Avoid and Tolerate Denial of Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0087609

Award Number: 0087609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Mosse' mosse@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rami Melhem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The widespread need and ability to connect machines across the Internet, in
              a world where intelligent objects rather than documents are exchanged, has
              caused the network to be more vulnerable to intrusions and has facilitated
              break-ins of a variety of types. Most of the methods currently available to
              deal with network
vulnerability to abuse and attacks are either inadequate,
              inefficient oroverly restrictive. Compounding the
problem is the need to
              maintain an acceptable level of quality of service (QoS).
     The proposed
              research project considers a heterogeneous network environment where servers,
              which
provide different levels of QoS support to clients through a contract
              protocol, are prone to faults and denial
of service attacks. The research
              project assumes the existence of intrusion detection mechanisms, and aims
at
              investigating new and potentially revolutionary approaches for the development
              of scalable and efficient
service deployment strategies and network resource
              management schemes to maintain acceptable levels of
QoS and security, despite
              faults. Two types of faults, namely, benign malfunctions and malicious
              intrusions,
will be considered. The former can be caused by a faulty, yet
              legitimate client that accidentally loses control
over its behavior, while the
              latter occurs with the intent to cause damage, such asDenial of Service
              (DoS).
Both types of faults can severely affect the performance of the network
              and compromise the integrity and
security of its services.
    These faults
              can manifest themselves in the form of a protocol breach or a contract
              violation. The former
is exemplified by an authorized clients (impersonation
              may take place) who attempt to deliberately breach
the contract protocol and
              impact the behavior of the server to eventually cause its failure. Contract
              violation
occurs when a client attempts to acquire a level of service beyond
              what has been agreed upon in the service
contract. In order to protect the
              servers and the network, we propose two new techniques: fault avoidance,
based
              on the concept of replicated elusive servers, and fault tolerance, based on
              resource management schemes through the creation of a Virtually Isolated
              Network (VIN).
     The concept of replicated elusive servers espouses ideas
              such as roaming addresses and frequent frequency
changes in wireless networks.
              Replication is coordinated through group communication supported by
              an
underlying multicast mechanism. VINs, on the other hand, provide the basis
              to achieve both physical and
logical separation (in space and time) of the
              resources reserved for each service, client, or class of clients.
    
              Efficient management of network resources is achieved based on an integrative
              approach which considers
network performance, fault tolerance and security
              asintegral components of a multi-dimensional QoS space.
QoS support can then
              be perceived as a multi-layered optimization process which considers security,
              fault-
tolerance, resource allocation, communication protocol optimization and
              user level application management
as inhabitants of the same QoS spectrum and
              seeks to exploit tradeoffs in order to reach anoptimal operating
point. The
              techniques developed will be designed to handle multiple coordinated
              intrusions, clustered in
both space and time. A coordinated/clustered fault
              model will be developed and a study of its effect on the
developed techniques
              and algorithms will be conducted.
     The proposed research will build on a
              foundation of prior work developed by the PIs which have a
strong track record
              of success in a wide range of research topics related to fault-tolerance,
              operating system
development and resource management for QoS support in wired
              and wireless networks. It is anticipated
that through algorithms development
              and analysis, simulation and testbed implementations, the results of
this
              project will lead to a better understanding of how to provide efficient support
              to QoS performance,
fault-tolerance and securityin an integrated manner, both
              in wired and wireless environments. An equally
important contribution of this
              project will be the training of high quality students in a field where
              expertise
is scarce.
