Title       : Computed Tomography of Endocranial Morphology in Fossil Cetaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a0087698

Award Number: 0087698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori Marino lmarino@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Uhen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF 0087698

Computed Tomography of Endocranial Morphology in
              Fossil Cetacea

Lori Marino, Principal Investigator/Project Director
Mark D.
              Uhen, Co - Principal Investigator

The origin and evolutionary history of
              Cetacea (dolphins, whales, and porpoises) represents one of the most dramatic
              transformations in the fossil record.  Some of the most significant changes
              that occurred throughout cetacean evolution were in the relative size and
              organization of the brain.  Yet, relatively little is currently known, in any
              detailed systematic way, about brain evolution in cetaceans.  Skeletal fossils
              document the major evolutionary changes in cranial and post-cranial morphology
              that occurred.  The purpose of this project is to use Computed Tomography
              scanning technology to image and measure endocranial morphology of eighty-five
              fossil cetacean specimens, spanning the mid-Eocene to the present, from the
              Department of Paleobiology at The Smithsonian Institution.  Specifically, the
              objectives of this study are to: 1) measure and document endocranial volume and
              morphology, along with postcranial indicators of body mass, in individual
              fossil and modern cetacean specimens, 2) use these data to estimate
              encephalization level and changes in brain structure in fossil and modern taxa,
              3) reconstruct the sequence of changes in brain size and morphology in
              cetaceans within a phylogenetic context, and 4) test specific hypotheses about
              brain evolution in cetaceans.  This project will provide the first testable
              database on cetacean brain evolution.  In addition, these data also have the
              potential to inform broader comparative questions about mammalian brain
              evolution. 

