Title       : LTER Cross-site: Regional Variation in Direct and Indirect Influences of Animals
               on a Chihuahuan Desert Grasslands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0087289

Award Number: 0087289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra P. Peters debpeter@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Peters, Debra P
New Mexico State University
DEB  0087289

"Regional
              variation in direct and indirect influences of animals o a Chihuahuan Desert
              grasslands"

In Chihuahuan desert grasslands, the loss of grass to shrubs and
              the reclamation of grasslands from shrublands are important problems in
              community dynamics that emerge from several direct and indirect processes.  The
              PIs will investigate direct and indirect biotic influences on the persistence
              and recovery of Chihuahuan desert grass.  They propose an assessment of the
              effects of different animal taxa on the dominant grass species, black grama
              Bouteloua eriopoda.  The will: 1) determine the relative importance of
              different animal activities for several plant processes and 2) test the
              hypothesis that variation in local and regional patterns of grass establishment
              are related to variation in animal activities and abundances.  They will
              perform a series of exclusion experiments on seeds, seedlings, and adult plants
              inhabiting grass- and shrub-dominated habitats within two Chihuahuan desert
              LTER sites (the Sevilleta and Jornada and Big Bend National Park).  By
              comparing the effects of animal taxa where grasses are successful versus where
              they are not, tests of specific hypotheses by which animals influence
              vegetation will be performed.  Specifically, they will examine four
              hypothesized mechanisms: a) seed loss due to predation by ants and rodents, b)
              seed protection and increased germination in cache pits dug by rodents, c)
              mortality and diminished seed production due to herbivory by small mammals and
              grasshoppers on seedlings and adult plants, and d) the positive effects of
              nutrient enrichment and/or increased availability of water due to the nesting
              of scavenging ants under adult plants. These experiments will help us
              understand animal abundance and grass recruitment at broad scales.  The work
              will clarify the role of animals in generating and maintaining patterns and
              dynamics in desert grasslands.  It will also contribute to a multi-scale
              perspective on the importance of direct and indirect plant-animal
              interactions... a research area of ecological significance to many systems.

