Title       : Constraining the Architecture of Active Thrust Systems of the Central Nepalese
               Himalaya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a0087508

Award Number: 0087508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelin X. Whipple kxw@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kip V. Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whipple
0087508
Despite many recent advances in our understanding of the
              tectonic evolution of the Himalaya, perhaps the quintessential collisional
              orogen, some important controversies remain. One of these centers on the
              relationship between the dramatic topographic transition separating the high
              Himalayan peaks from their foothills and the major deformational structures
              that underlie it.  This controversy is fueled in part by the geographic
              near-coincidence of the trace of the Main Central Thrust (MCT) system with the
              topographic front.   Although the MCT has long been considered dormant by most
              Himalayan geologists, a number of observations require continued differential
              uplift and exhumation of the Higher Himalaya and suggest to some an active role
              of the MCT: (1) crystalline rocks in the hanging wall of the MCT have been the
              dominant source of sediment delivered to Bengal fan since at least 17Ma; (2)
              microseismicity clusters on a linear trend that coincides with both the
              topographic transition and the mapped trace of the MCT; (3) recent geodetic
              studies indicate rapid differential uplift of the Higher Himalaya; and (4) late
              Miocene-Pliocene 40Ar/39Ar cooling ages and Th-Pb monazite ages indicate recent
              deep exhumation and synkinematic metamorphism in MCT zone, respectively.  Three
              alternative models with fundamentally different tectonic implications have been
              advanced to explain the topographic transition: (1) erosional retreat following
              Miocene activity on the MCT; (2) fault-bend fold deformation above a
              crustal-scale ramp in the Himalayan Sole Thrust; and (3) recent (Pliocene) or
              active thrusting on the MCT.  Determining whether the foothills-Higher Himalaya
              transition is a transient erosional front, the topographic signature of a
              subsurface ramp, or the trace of an active fault system is critical if we are
              to understand how the Himalayan orogenic wedge has evolved over the
              Miocene-Recent interval.  Each model predicts distinctive spatial patterns and
              timing of uplift and exhumation that can be exploited to evaluate their
              relative merits.  This research project is testing these models through a
              multi-disciplinary study, combining structural mapping, tectonic geomorphology,
              and topical 40Ar/39Ar and (U-Th)/He geochronology to explore the structural and
              thermal evolution of the foothills-Higher Himalaya transition in the Burhi
              Gandaki and Trisuli drainages of central Nepal.  This combination of geomorphic
              and geochronologic approaches is designed to provide several independent
              measures of  late Miocene to recent uplift and exhumation patterns --
              independent of available geodetic and microseismic data currently used to
              constrain crustal architecture - and thus to help inform the next generation of
              evolutionary models for the Himalayan orogenic wedge.
