Title       : Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Influences on Geophysical Sigantures at
               Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (LNAPL) Impacted Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2001   
File        : a0087795

Award Number: 0087795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estella A. Atekwana   (Principal Investigator current)
              Silvia Rossbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087795
Atekwana
 
Introduction of pollutants in the soil environment such as
              Light Non-Aqueous Phase Liquids (LNAPLs) after the physical, chemical, and
              biological properties of the soil media.  Initially, the alteration of the soil
              properties is primarily physical as the LNAPL occupies pores of the resident
              soils.  With time, the LNAPL undergoes changes driven by microbial-mediated
              processes that alter soil properties.  Geophysical methods are able to detect
              freshly released LNAPLs in soils because their higher electrical resistivity
              readily distinguishes from background pore and groundwater.  Nevertheless, 
              many resistivity measurements of aged LNAPL spills reveal a decrease and not
              the expected increase.  Hence, the key hypothesis to be addressed in this study
              is that shifts in geoelectrical signatures from resistive in "fresh spills" to
              conductive in "aged" or biodegrading spills accompany biogeochemical
              modifications of LNAPL in the impacted media.  The work is driven by the need
              to gain a basic understanding of the dynamics that interrelate biological,
              chemical, geological, and hydrological processes in LNAPL-impacted soils and
              how these interrelations translate into measurable changes in the geoelectrical
              response.  The objective is to experimentally document important soil physical
              and chemical parameters that result from microbial degradation of LNAPL and
              their role in controlling the soil's geoelectrical properties.

Our
              experiments use sterilized laboratory columns filled with sands from a field
              site impacted with LNAPL.  Some of the columns are layered with LNAPL and
              inoculated with microbes from the field site.  Positive and negative control
              columns are maintained.  Geoelectrical measuremens are obtained using
              electrodes implanted in the columns.  The experiments are designed
              to:

Verify microbial LNAPL degradation by monitoring changes in microbial
              types, population and community structure, and changes in the presence of
              potential electron donors; and

Document changes in soil physical (grain)
              properties and in pore fluid geochemistry.
Integrating geophysics,
              geochemistry, and microbiology will:  (i) document how microbial degradation of
              LNAPLs and subsequent biogeochemical modifications of the impact media
              influence soil geoelectrical responses;  (ii) support development of
              geoelectrical models necessary to quantify these biogeochemical processes;  and
              (iii) provide a basis for extending laboratory geophysical degradation models
              to field sites contaminated with organic chemicals.

