Title       : Workshop on University Intellectual Property Policies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0087769

Award Number: 0087769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen K. Markham Stephen_Markham@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Proposal Number:	SES	00-87769

Principal Investigator:  Stephen
              Markham

This Small Grant project proposes to organize a day and a half
              workshop conference for presentation and discussion of intellectual property
              issues between universities and industry in the U.S., and their impact on
              industry funding of directed R&D. With the relative decline of federal funding
              for basic research, industry funding has become increasingly important, and
              numerous U.S. government initiatives have encouraged universities and
              industries to work more closely together for mutual benefit and then
              enhancement of national industrial innovation. The Bayh-Dole Act (1980) permits
              nonprofit organizations such as universities to retain title to, and to market
              the inventions they create using federal research funds, giving rise to
              increasing university interest in extracting value from such intellectual
              property. Yet traditional academic values of openness and academic freedom, as
              well as the potential conflicts of interest among and between industry,
              researchers and universities, suggest a need to reexamine university
              intellectual property policies and their impacts.
The workshop will include
              participants from academe, university administration, government, and industry.
              It will showcase practices that have proven to be efficient and effective, as
              well as identifying those that have proven problematical. The objectives of the
              workshop are:
1. To identify the intellectual property issues that are
              becoming barriers to industry funding of directed R&D at U.S. universities;
2.
              To understand the implications of these issues for universities, industry, and
              the national R&D enterprise; and
3. To develop ideas and recommendations to
              address the issues.
To accomplish the objectives, the workshop will convene
              presenters representing the viewpoints of researchers, universities, industry
              and national policy. Panel discussions and case studies will foster exchange of
              ideas and identification of insights.
The workshop will take place at North
              Carolina State University in conjunction with the semi-annual CIMS Corporate
              sponsors Meeting. (The Center for Innovation Management Studies is an
              NSF-sponsored institute that sponsors academic research and relationships
              between industry and researchers, disseminating research results to
              practitioners and industry as well as via traditional academic publication.)

