Title       : A Multifunctional Technology Classroom for the Teaching of Data-Intensive
               Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a0087680

Award Number: 0087680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Patch patch@unca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry L. Gale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lothar A. Dohse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy Sulock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia McClellan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Asheville
	      One University Heights
	      Asheville, NC  288048503    828/251-6470

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 
 
The objective of the proposal is to enhance the
              learning process for students in Introductory Statistics and Calculus Based
              Statistics by adapting and implementing several types of pedagogical methods
              including ActivStats developed by P. Velleman and applets on the internet
              developed at the University of South Carolina. To implement the project a
              32-student classroom was created which included an overhead projection unit and
              a smart board. The classroom enables multiple types of learning experiences and
              provides the technology for access to and analysis of real data. The smart
              board allows the instructor to edit any output coming from the projector as
              well as provide notes that are stored. The board also allows the instructor to
              retrieve notes as needed. Also, students work collaboratively and use real
              application. Hence, they become properly equipped for experiences beyond the
              classroom. Another important aspect of the project is the ability of the
              students to communicate their ideas. This is addressed by assigning and
              emphasizing writing assignments. 

Using more active learning approaches with
              real data from many disciplines enables statistics students to better
              understand concepts and be able to apply them to their fields of study and
              personal lives. Also, from the writing assignments students gain technical
              writing experiences and skills.

The proposal directly addresses the themes
              of enhanced student learning, faculty development and integration of technology
              into education.


