Title       : Spontaneous Detachment and Retardation of Bacteria: Physical and Chemical
               Controls on these Processes and Their Impact on Bacterial Transport in
               Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0087522

Award Number: 0087522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299617             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Johnson wjohnson@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087522
W.  Johnson

The long-term transport of low concentrations of
              bacteria in groundwater is important to understand the purpose of protecting
              groundwater resources, and for interpreting the wide-ranging distribution of
              bacteria that is observed in the subsurface.  In contrast, the bulk of the
              existing body of bacterial transport knowledge focuses upon the short-term
              transport of high concentrations of bacteria, and correspondingly on the rate
              of bacterial attachment to sediment.  However, for long-term transport
              behavior, other aspects of bacterial transport become important, such as the
              observed slow rate of detachment from sediment that occurs in the absence of
              any physical or chemical perturbations (spontaneous detachment), and the
              observed retardation of low concentrations of bacteria in sediment.  The impact
              of spontaneous detachment and retardation on the distance over which  bacteria
              may be transported in groundwater is unknown.  The work proposed herein will
              serve to determine the mechanisms governing spontaneous detachment and
              retardation of bacteria during transport, and will determine their potential
              impact on the long-term transport of low concentrations of bacteria in
              groundwater.

Laboratory experiments will be performed using repacked
              sediment columns to examine changes in kinetic constants that describe
              bacterial breakthrough, retardation, and extended tailing (spontaneous
              detachment) with variations in the potential energy profile describing
              interaction forces between the bacteria and the sediment grain.  It is expected
              that variation in the kinetic constants will illuminate differences in the
              mechanisms of attachment that control retardation, as opposed to the mechanisms
              of attachment that control steady state breakthrough.

Column experiments and
              direct visual analyses in parallel plate chambers will examine the hypothesis
              that spontaneous detachment of bacteria and other colloids from sediment that
              is observed during elution may be caused by hydrodynamic shear operating at the
              surface of the sediment grains.  The variation in kinetic constants with pore
              water velocity for equivalent experiments performed with different colloid
              sizes will indicate whether hydrodynamic shear is important in spontaneous
              detachment (as indicated by preferential detachment of larger-sized colloids
              relative to smaller-sized colloids).  Experiments will also examine whether
              spontaneous detachment in response to hydrodynamic shear at the grain surface
              involves an "erosion" effect that is corollary to the shadow effect. 
              Experiments will also examine the hypothesis that the observed decrease in
              probability of detachment with increased bacterial residence time on a grain
              surface is not necessarily related to bacterial metabolic
              activity.

Concentration of bacteria on the sediment following long and short
              elution times will be examined in order to observe potential differences in the
              centers of mass of the attached populations, and to further constrain numerical
              models.  Potential impacts of spontaneous detachment and retardation to
              bacterial transport over long time periods under different physical and
              chemical conditions will be simulated with a one-dimensional model using
              experimentally determined kinetic constants.

