Title       : Switching and Routing for All Wireless Multi-Beam Ad-Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0087765

Award Number: 0087765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Y. Hui jhui@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The use of multi-beam antenna arrays for transmission and reception allows
              wireless units to send and
receive tens of beams in different directions and
              using multiple frequency bands. If we deploy a large number
of such multi-beam
              wireless units over a large area, we obtain a highly connected and high
              capacity wireless
network. We call this the All Wireless Network (AWN).
    
              Analogous to Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) in All Optical
              Networks (AON), we
propose an analogous Frequency Division (FD) and Space
              Division (SD) technique for All Wireless
Networks (AWN). Unlike point-to-point
              connectivity of an AON, we argue that massively parallel number of
beams with
              flexibly assigned direction and frequency from wireless multi-beam units can
              provide unlimited
connectivity and bandwidth. We rely on spatial parallelism
              to achieve an extremely high network throughput.
     An AWN can be arranged
              as a spatially distributed multi-stage circuit switch or a fully connected
              ring,
allowing multi-rate and multi-cast capability of a parallel and
              spatially distributed switch fabric. A single
multi-beam wireless unit can
              receive from multiple beams to achieve a Gigabit per second throughput for
              an
application. The wireless unit can also serve as relay nodes to switch
              incoming beams of given direction and
frequency through a switch fabric onto
              outgoing beams of different direction and frequency. This is analogous
to all
              optical switching for DWDM in an AON, except we have an added dimension of free
              and continuous
spatial connectivity, rather than fiber-to-fiber
              connectivity.
     We shall devise switching and routing theory and techniques
              for SD/FD circuit switching over AWN,
taking into account co-channel and
              adjacent channel interference and various fading factors. We formulate
metric
              for routing that accounts for power consumption, distance covered, and
              externality induced to other
routes. We study social optimality versus
              individual optimality for such routing techniques.
     Using the OPNET
              software package, we shall implement a simulation of the AWN. The
              transmitted
radiation pattern is modeled for each wireless multi-beam unit. We
              distribute many such units over an area,
either randomly or using various
              wireless interconnection network topologies. Propagation barriers are
              also
modeled. The graphical simulation provides estimation of power and
              interference level. Various power control
and routing protocols will be tested
              using the simulation software.
     Theoretical and simulation results will be
              used to design an Internet Circuit (IC) Router. Routing and
switching
              algorithms will be made distributed with a multiple -path connection set-up
              using a link state routing table, or using source initiated connection
              requests. We plan to implement a simple IC Router for the
internetworking of
              wireless multi-beam units for concept demonstration.
     We believe that the
              proposed AWN architecture shall be low cost, high performance, and highly
              flexible
for traffic pattern and link/node impairments. The high throughput of
              the AWN will allow high quality
multimedia applications to be delivered
              on-demand entirely by wireless communications.
