Title       : Eocene Floras of the Northern Hemisphere: Paleoclimate and Implications for
               Large Scale Floristic Interchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0087780

Award Number: 0087780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Manchester steven@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eocene floras of the Northern Hemisphere: paleoclimate and implications for
              large scale floristic interchange

Stephen
              Manchester
EAR-0087780

Abstract

Detailed first-hand comparisons will be
              made between selected early and middle Eocene floras of mid-latitude North
              America, Europe and Asia through collaboration with colleagues in Germany and
              China as a means of assessing phytogeographic patterns during a time when the
              climate was warmer than today, and there was potential for high-latitude
              floristic exchange between continents.  PI will compare megafossil floras
              preserved in the sediments of early and middle Eocene lakes from North America
              (West Branch Creek and Green River floras, western US), western Europe (Messel
              and Eckfeld, Germany), and Eastern Asia (Fushun and Huadian, China).  The ages
              of each these assemblages are established through correlations of associated
              mammal faunas and/or radiometrically dated volcanic ashes.  Paleoclimate of
              each of the sites will be compared based on foliar physiognomic analyses to
              give approximations of mean annual temperature and precipitation.  Intra- and
              intercontinental floristic comparisons will be made to determine the relative
              proportion of shared vs. endemic taxa between each pair of continents in the
              early and middle Eocene.  The resulting observations will: 1) provide
              approximations of the mean annual temperature and precipitation of these widely
              separated lake basins, 2) indicate the relative importance of different routes
              of intercontinental dispersal in the early and middle Eocene, and 3) facilitate
              comparison of dispersal patterns in plants with those observed in mammals
              during the early Tertiary.

