Title       : Routing, Wavelength Assignment, Dimensioning and Performance of Optical Networks
               with Multicast Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0087746

Award Number: 0087746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed Kamal kamal@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arun K. Somani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Optical communication networks employing wavelength division multiplexing
              can support several
communication sessions using a limited number of
              wavelength channels. The employment ofwave-
length reuse in different parts of
              the network contributes to the increase in the number of sessions
that can be
              supported. As such, these networks can provide a means to serve those
              applica-
tions which individually or collectively require large amounts of
              bandwidth. An important class
of services with such property is the class of
              multicast, or multipoint traffic, which requires the
delivery of data from the
              source to a group of destinations. Although a few studies have
              addressed
packet-switched multicast services in broadcast-and-select optical
              networks, the topics of routing,
wavelength assignment, dimensioning, and
              performance of circuit-switched multicast services in
wavelength routing
              optical networks have received little attention.
     This project deals with
              multicast services in optical networks, with and without
              wavelength
converters. Such applications can be served using wavelength
              routing networks. The project has
several objectives. First, we would like to
              develop multicast tree construction algorithms for optical
networks which take
              into account the optical network constraints into account, such as
              thepower
budget, wavelength collisions and wavelength continuity, aswell as
              the cost and type of splitters and
wavelength converters. Optimal network
              provisioning and dimensioning under multicast service,
given the traffic
              demands and cost constraints, is another objective. We also plan to investigate
              the
possibility of formulating a joint problem for the optimal provisioning,
              and the optimal wavelength
converter and splitter placement. It is also
              planned that routing, and wavelength selection algo-
rithms will be developed
              for multicast services in optical networks. It is also planned to study
              the
effect of these algorithms on the dimensioning and performance of the
              network. All this requires
construction of accurate analytical models for the
              evaluation of call blocking probabilities under
different routing and
              wavelength selection algorithms. As the efficient support of multicast
              traffic
requires the branching of the traffic at several points in the
              network, these models are expected to
be very involved, especially that
              several standard independence assumptions cannot be used in this
case. In
              addition to general performance models, bounds on performance will be
              established, which
will provide a guide to the provisioning and dimensioning
              of networks for multicast service. Such
bounds will be established through the
              identification of extreme network topologies which serve to
provide these
              bounds.
     The results of this work are expected to advance the
              understanding of the behavior of optical
networks under futuristic, yet more
              involved, traffic conditions. At the same time, these results
will contribute
              to the design and dimensioning of such networks.
