Title       : Constraints on the Crystallization of Degassing Magmas: An Experimental Study of
               Crystal Nucleation and Growth Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0087463

Award Number: 0087463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia E. Hammer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hammer
EAR-0087463

The styles of volcanic eruptions are determined in large
              part by the ability of volatile components to exsolve and physically separate
              from the melt when the ascending magma reaches shallow levels. Study of the
              interrelationships between magma supply rate to the conduit from deep-seated
              reservoirs, syn-eruptive degassing, and magma discharge rate at the vent is
              critical to our understanding of controls on eruptive style.  Degassing causes
              H2O-saturated silicate melts to crystallize, and the results of this process
              may be exploited by volcanologists for greater understanding of magmatic
              degassing history.   In order to interpret pressure-time paths using the
              groundmass crystal textures of natural volcanic products, we need to understand
              the kinetics of crystal nucleation and growth under such circumstances, and
              that is the focus of this proposal. We propose to focus on the intriguing
              aspects of crystallization kinetics in a multicomponent system of geologic and
              volcanological significance.  We will study nucleation in synthetic and natural
              glasses to isolate the effects of different factors (such as seeds of the
              crystallizing phase and minor amounts of nonstoichiometric oxides) on
              heterogeneous nucleation in natural melts.  The relative importance of surface
              energy and melt viscosity for nucleation rate will be examined using
              composition as a variable in rapid decompression experiments.  The goal of this
              project is to quantify feldspar nucleation and growth kinetics due to
              compositional (rather than thermal) supersaturation, compare the results to
              available theories, and develop models of crystal texture development over a
              range of pressure-time paths relevant to volcanic processes.


