Title       : SGER:Surface Molecular Imprinting of Synthetic Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0087053

Award Number: 0087053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49877              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georges Belfort belfog@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0087053
Georges Belfort
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
SGER: Surface
              Molecular Imprinting of Synthetic Membranes 
ABSTRACT

	The goal of this
              one-year "Small Grant for Exploratory Research" (SGER) is to evaluate two
              promising methods of molecular imprinting to produce selective
              molecular-recognition membranes.  The expected advantages of the new methods
              are lower cost, an increased number of accessible imprint sites, significantly
              faster binding with improved mass transfer rates and reduced tailing, and
              applicability in aqueous environments.  With two photooxidation approaches -
              surface template and emulsion polymerization - the approach is to prepare,
              characterize, and test molecular-imprinted synthetic polymeric membranes. 
              First, for surface template polymerization, molecular-imprinted poly(ether
              sulfone) (PES) membranes are produced using Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's
              patented photooxidation process.  Since PES is intrinsically photoactive, a
              photoinitiator is not required, thus reducing the cost, duration and complexity
              of the process significantly.  PES is also one of the most widely used polymers
              for membranes and is amenable to surface modification in aqueous environments. 
              Second, for emulsion polymerization, after casting of water-in-oil emulsions as
              a thin film onto flat surfaces and onto microporous synthetic membranes, the
              oil phase is polymerized around the imprint and functional molecules using UV
              radiation.  Finally, in both cases, the water and templates are removed by
              microwave heating, which opens up pores and leaves imprinted cavities in a
              two-dimensional film. 

	The nature and significance of the potential impact
              of this work, should it succeed, can be summarized as follows. In traditional
              affinity-separation methods the active functionality must be synthesized and
              then attached to a support matrix.  Fabricating the functionalized surface in
              situ can eliminate a number of processing steps.  Both surface-template and
              emulsion polymerization as applied here have the potential to be simple,
              scalable, and inexpensive.  Also, the resulting thin membranes could
              effectively compete with more common adsorption affinity methods to accomplish
              difficult separations.

