Title       : Functional Tissue Engineering Conference, September 15 - 17, 2000, Tampa,
               Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0087165

Award Number: 0087165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Mooney mooneyd@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farshid Guilak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087165
Mooney
Tissue engineering is an exciting new discipline that uses
              implanted cells, scaffolds, and inductive molecules to repair or replace
              injured or diseased tissues and organs.  Tremendous progress in biological and
              biomaterials aspects of this field have been accomplished to date, and several
              engineered tissues are now being used clinically.  However, tissue engineers
              face major challenges in repairing or replacing tissues that serve a
              predominantly biomechanical function.  To meet this challenge, the United
              States National Committee on Biomechanics adopted a new paradigm called
              "Functional Tissue Engineering" to emphasize the importance of biomechanical
              considerations in the design and development of cell and matrix-based implants
              for soft and hard tissue repair.  The committee now seeks to address these
              important issues by holding a Functional Tissue Engineering Conference.   A
              select group of biomedical engineers, biologists, and clinicians have been
              contacted and have agreed to participate in this conference.  The goals of the
              conference will be (1) to increase awareness among tissue engineers about the
              importance of restoring "function" when engineering cardiovascular,
              orthopaedic, and dental constructs, (2) to identify the critical structural and
              mechanical requirements needed for each construct, (3) to provide a source for
              tissue engineers of functional criteria in the design, manufacture, and
              optimization of tissue engineered constructs, and (4) to develop a teaching and
              reference text for students and investigators in the field of tissue
              engineering.  Parallel proposals are also being submitted to the National
              Institutes of Health, the Whitaker Foundation, and selected tissue engineering
              companies to cosponsor and co-fund this meeting.  This conference will set the
              tone for both research and training in tissue engineering for the next decade
              and will serve as the paradigm for academic/industrial interactions in this
              field.  The conference will also lead to a synergy between biomaterials and
              biomechanics issues in the next generation of biologic devices. 


