Title       : Pilot Study to Establish the Nature and Impact of Effective Undergraduate
               Research Experiences on Learning, Attitude, and Career Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0087611

Award Number: 0087611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $651885             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Lopatto lopatto@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Seymour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A three-year research project is proposed whose overall goals are
              to:
Clarify the nature of authentic undergraduate research experiences-and
              their variations-in a sample of science disciplines from the viewpoints of
              participating and non-participating undergraduates (both as seniors and one
              year from graduation), from faculty, and from their institutions;

Identify
              and categorize the essential elements of "good" undergraduate research
              experiences, the learning gains (cognitive, behavioral, affective, social, and
              professional) that they produce over time; the conditions and processes by
              which, these occur; and their relative significance in the achievement of
              outcomes valued by students and faculty;

Identify variations in
              undergraduate research participation, experiences, and outcomes, and the
              factors that shape them, for women and men; and for white students and students
              of color. 

Hypothesize and test linkages between aspects of undergraduate
              research experiences and desired outcomes in the shorter and longer term.
              

The research design controls for variations in undergraduate research
              models, institutional contexts, and academic disciplines by limiting the
              inquiry to one common type of program (mentored summer research for entering
              seniors requiring a senior thesis, and/or presentation and publication of
              scholarly work) in a sample of institutions of similar type, with a limited
              range of science disciplines.  Investigation will begin with entering seniors
              in summer, 2000 programs in four liberal arts colleges with a strong history of
              engagement in undergraduate research. Methods of sampling and inquiry allow for
              discovery of variations in the experiences and outcomes reported by female and
              male participants, by students of color compared with white students, and by
              female participants in single-sex versus mixed-sex research contexts.  Samples
              will also include two comparison groups of non-participants who either chose
              not to participate in research programs as undergraduates, or who applied, and
              were not selected.  

A comparative ethnographic exploration of faculty goals
              and pedagogical methods, and student accounts of their experiences and benefits
              over time, will ground the development and testing of instruments to assess the
              impact of undergraduate research opportunities on the education and
              post-graduate lives of undergraduates.  Interview and survey data from the
              student cohorts will be compared with those from faculty in order to establish,
              compare, and rank what each group perceives as the benefits of the research
              experience, and what factors influence their achievement. Interviews with
              students who do, and do not, participate in undergraduate research, with
              faculty research mentors, and with engaged senior faculty and administrators
              will be conducted in real time.  Alumni who do, and do not, participate in
              undergraduate research will be interviewed one year after graduation to discern
              longer-term effects.  

Pilot study findings will also provide a research
              base for the design of comparable, cross-program evaluation strategies for
              common models of undergraduate research.  Findings and instruments will be
              disseminated for use by colleagues interested in the development of evaluation
              strategies for undergraduate research projects through a workshop,
              presentations targeted to relevant audiences, selected web-sites, and published
              work. 


