Title       : Teaching Introductory Combinatorics by Guided Group Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2000  
File        : a0087466

Award Number: 0087466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Bogart k.p.bogart@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

This project is producing materials for teaching a
              first undergraduate course in combinatorics where a large number of students
              learn most of the material covered. The materials are based on a sequence of
              problems designed to lead students to understand the processes of combinatorial
              mathematics, abstract these processes to general principles, and apply the
              general principles. While there is some textual material to provide
              definitions, explain common themes, and help students reflect on what they
              learn, the vast majority of the intellectual content is in the problems
              themselves. An Advisory Board is advising on the selection of topics,
              critiquing the materials developed, testing or arranging for a test of the
              materials at their own institutions, and helping introduce the materials to the
              community at large.

The materials developed are being published as a slim
              book by a commercial publisher, with supplementary material on the publisher's
              website. There is also an instructor's version of the book that contains
              complete solutions to the problems as well as protocols for using the
              materials. The protocols include ways of using group work to enhance students'
              experiences with the materials. Group activities include making sure that the
              solutions proposed are believable and understandable, assisting students in
              deciding whether their rewrites of selected problems for resubmission are
              responsive to instructor comments, and giving group members feedback on
              problems the instructor chooses only to "spot check."

The project concludes
              with a workshop designed to provide a base of instructors who are both eager
              and well-equipped to use the materials in their own institutions.

