Title       : Isotopic Records in Post-Glacial Lake Sediments: Implications for Biota and
               Landscape Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0087364

Award Number: 0087364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88159              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Lini alini@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Lake sediments provide a temporal record of surface and lacustrine processes
              influenced by environmental and climatic changes. Since environmental changes
              affect the biological communities in and around lakes, evidence of local and
              regional environmental histories can be found in the chemical composition of
              organic material preserved in their sediments. The extreme climatic changes
              associated with glacial-interglacial transitions had profound ecological
              impacts, which are recorded in lake sediments. The objectives of this project
              are to understand how and at what rates lacustrine ecosystems were established
              in newly created post-glacial lakes, and to investigate the relationship
              between lake ecosystem and watershed evolution. In order to meet these
              objectives, sediment cores spanning the whole late Pleistocene-Holocene time
              interval will be collected from post-glacial lakes in New England. Analyses
              that will be performed to characterize the sedimentary organic matter include:
              carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes, organic carbon and nitrogen content, C/N
              ratios, and hydrogen and oxygen indices. Samples of present-day watershed and
              lake plants will also be collected for each of the cored lakes. This modern
              dataset will provide a base for the interpretation of the sedimentary records.
              The proposed study has significant potential impacts. If, as hypothesized,
              geochemical records such as those provided by carbon isotopes reflect the
              individualistic response of the developing lake systems to the local geology,
              hydrology, and biota, these factors must be considered before attempting
              correlation of environmental climate proxies on a local, regional, and global
              scale. Results will also provide constraints on how much time is needed for
              lake ecosystems to recover from extreme natural or anthropogenic
              disturbances.


