Title       : ROLE Proposal: Study and Development of Distractor-Driven Multiple-Choice Tests
               Aligned to the National Science Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a0087779

Award Number: 0087779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Sadler psadler@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  With a growing national facus on the measurement of learning outcomes in
              science classrooms, states and cities relying increasingly upon assessment
              methods developed prior to recent advances in cognitive scinece.  While
              alternative and authentic assessments have gained a foothold in school reform,
              they are considerably more expensive and complex to utilize than traditional
              standardized tests that rely upon multiple-choice items.  Rather than comdemn
              such simple item forms, the project plans to develop and study diagnostic
              assessment instrument that reflect advances in understanding conceptualchange
              in learner, yet are simple to administer and score.  The prject will drawon the
              rich research literature documenting alternative conceptions and construct test
              items that allow choices between the scientifically correct answer to a problem
              and the most prevalent alternative conceptions.  Earlier work shows that the
              psychometric profiles of such items depart significantly from those constructed
              and used by the makers of standardized tests, and that more research is needed
              before relucant test-makers will adopt items with profiles that depart from
              their non-cognitive models.  Such a study is imperative for the development of
              standarzed tests that accurately measure progress toward achievement of swtate
              and national science standards.  In addition, analytical methods will be
              developed and employed to reveal the underlying prerequisite structure of such
              tests, shedding light on the proper sequence of ideas in K-12 instruction. 
              Results will be publicized through academic publications and papers. A public
              domain database of diagnostic items will be made available for test developers
              and educators. 
