Title       : An Upper-Division Materials Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0087960

Award Number: 0087960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brandon Brown brownb@usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The roles of advanced materials in both American society and the
              economy have grown rapidly over the last quarter century. This project is
              developing a Materials Physics curriculum to educate students in the principles
              and practices relevant to high-technology materials by adapting experiments
              from the educational and research literature. The program prepares
              undergraduates for careers in semiconductor and other advanced materials
              industries. The curriculum adds computer programming, chemistry, industrial
              internships, and new advanced materials courses. As the backbone of the
              Materials Physics curriculum, this project enables the university to offer a
              new set of upper-division laboratories. The instrumentation for the new
              laboratory sequence includes a vapor-deposition module, a photolithography
              module, electronics for conductivity measurements, an absorption spectrometer,
              a nitrogen laser, and a dye laser. The laboratories form a holistic series of
              modular experiments to develop familiarity with techniques relevant to
              materials processing and characterization. These include a coherent
              top-to-bottom sequence: creation of thin-films; Atomic Force Microscope imaging
              of the films; subsequent patterning of the films via industrial techniques used
              to pattern silicon in microchips; and concluding conductivity measurements of
              the films over a range of temperatures. In addition, students collect a series
              of emission and absorption measurements from promising laser materials.
              Computer interfacing plays a major role in several of the new experiments.
              After completing these experiments in their junior years, Materials Physics
              majors are ready for summer internships in local industry.

