Title       : The Role of Gaussian Curvature in Harmonic Analysis and Related Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0087339

Award Number: 0087339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Iosevich iosevich@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
The author proposes to study a set of problems in harmonic analysis
              and
related areas where the Gaussian curvature, the determinant of
              the
differential of the Gauss map taking the point on a hypersurface to
              the
unit normal at that point, plays an important role. More
              specifically,
the author proposes to study the following three basic
              problems:
regularity of averages over surfaces, distribution of lattice points
              in
convex domains, and the existence of orthogonal exponential bases
              for
domains in Euclidean space. In the context of averages over surfaces,
              we
propose to find a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for
              the
Lebesgue space boundedness of these averages in terms of natural
              and
easily computable geometric criteria. In the context of lattice points
in
              convex domains, we propose to compute a sharp rate of growth for
              the
discrepancy between the volume of a dilated convex body and the number
of
              lattice points trapped inside, again in terms of natural geometric
properties
              of the boundary. In the context of orthogonal exponential
bases, we propose to
              make progress towards the proof of the Fuglede
Conjecture, which says that a
              domain has orthogonal exponential basis if
and only if it is possible to tile
              Euclidean space with disjoint
translates of this domain. Combinatorial and
              number theoretic methods
are expected to play an important role.

The study
              of the maximal averaging operators and other similar operators
in harmonic
              analysis is partially motivated by the following interesting
question: How
              close can we come to recovering a set of data from the
various kinds of
              averages of that data? The question is of potential
practical value since
              scientists are often called upon to make
predictions based on average
              information. For example, meteorologists
make predictions about the rainfall
              in a particular location based on
the average rainfall in years past in nearby
              towns.
Seismologists make earthquake predictions based on the pattern of
              shocks
in the surrounding area. The tradeoff involved in the study of
              these
phenomena is, roughly speaking, the following. If the data is
              very
precise, then it can, generally speaking, be recovered from any kind
              of
a reasonable average. If the data is less precise, then we have to
              make
sure that the averaging process compensates for the deficiencies of
              the
data. The main thrust of this project is to study the
              averaging
phenomenon when the data is given by a certain kind of a
              mathematical
function, and the average is taken over a curved surface. The
              study of
the distribution of lattice points in convex domains and the
              associated
discrepancy function is motivated by the desire to approximate
              discrete
information, for example integer points in the plane, by more
              easily
computable continuous information, in this case the area. Finally,
              the
study of orthogonal exponential bases is motivated by an
              important
practical problem of approximating functions by trigonometric
              functions.
These types of approximations have numerous applications in
              physics,
engineering, and many other areas of science and
              technology.





