Title       : ChemMatCARS: A National Chemistry and Materials Synchrotron Research Facility at
               the Advanced Photon Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0087817

Award Number: 0087817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4363186            (Estimated)
Investigator: P. James Viccaro viccaro@cars.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Chu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Coppens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Schlossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program in the Chemistry
              Division, the Division of Materials Research and the Office of Basic Energy
              Sciences at the Department of Energy provide continuing support to P. James
              Viccaro and Stuart Rice of the University of Chicago, Benjamin Chu of
              SUNY-Stony Brook, Philip Coppens of SUNY-Buffalo and Mark Schlossman of the
              University of Illinois in Chicago for their research efforts utilizing the
              ChemMatCARS beamline at the Argonne National Lab Advanced Photon Source.  The
              PIs will complete development and initiate the operations phase at the three
              stations:  chemical crystallography in station 15-1D-B; surface scattering in
              station 15-1D-C; and small angle- wide angle X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXD) in
              15-1D-D.  Examples of some of the surface studies include studies of
              amphiphiles and biological macromolecules at the water-vapor interface; liquid
              metal interfaces; superflid helium surfaces; polymer surfaces-static structure;
              dynamics at interfaces; and liquid-liquid interfaces.  Chemical crystallography
              studies include the mapping of charge densities with synchrotron radiation;
              resonance diffraction studies; and the study of transient species.  The
              SAXS/WAXD studies will focus on fiber and filament processing; polymer and
              fiber stretching; and protein folding and kinetics of complexation.   

This
              award will provide maintenance, operation, selected upgrades and continued
              development of this unique resource as a national user facility for the
              chemical and materials science community.  Presently, the user community
              includes more than forty principal investigators.  By the end of the third year
              of operations, at least forty-five percent of the total beamtime will be
              available to the community at large.  In addition, this facility provides
              partial funding of postdoctoral positions and travel support for first time
              users and graduate students who require an extended stay at the facility.  
