Title       : Efficient Integration and QoS Management of Video over Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0087761

Award Number: 0087761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu-chi Feng wuchi@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Urbashi Mitra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   We are currently witnessing an incredible transformation in the way we
              access information and
computing power. With small handheld devices such as
              personal digital assistants, cellular phones,
and palmtop computers, users are
              taking their computers with them more often than not. Fur-
thermore, with the
              developments in wireless technologies, users are beginning to slowly move
              away
from their dependence on wired access to their information. While this
              trend is building significant
momentum, the types of information that are
              accessed through these devices is still severely lim-
ited by the wireless
              media. Given the bottle-necks associated with today's power-limited
              portable
devices, the limitation due to channel conditions has not yet been
              felt by the user; however the
strain on the underlying wireless network will
              only get worse.
     The goal of the proposed research is the construction of
              high performance algorithms for tetherless
access which consider overall
              system goals through joint optimization across multiple layers. The
objective
              will be to solve problems which connect the physical layer to the application
              layer. In the
past, a classical approach to wireless communication system
              design was undertaken { a modular
approach loosely based on the Open Systems
              Interconnection reference stack model. For wired
communication networks, such
              a separation of activities led to functioning systems offering
              solid
performance. However, the deleterious effects of the wireless
              communications channel force the
investigation of all possible methods to
              improve performance. Thus, to provide the desired fidelity
and to transport
              high-data rate information over the wireless medium, joint optimization
              across
multiple communication layers will be necessary. To focus the research,
              wireless transport of video
via Direct Sequence Code-Division Multiple-Access
              (DS-CDMA) will be considered.
     In this project, we propose the research
              and development of video streaming algorithms that are
more suited for
              wireless transmission using DS-CDMA as an access methodology. There are
              several
reasons why this project is necessary. First, current research
              onmulti-rate detection and estimation
algorithms at the physical layer are not
              tailored for specific application layer data. Second, many of
the video
              transmission schemes over wireless networks have assumed fixed bit-error rates
              that are
introduced by the wireless transmission. In CDMA systems, the
              bit-error rate is highly dependent
on the channel and the number of active
              users, both of these processes are time-varying; however,
this variability in
              bit-error rates has not been fully addressed at the application layer. Third,
              the
elasticity ofvideo can be exploited to design efficient algorithms which
              can take advantage of the
shape of video streams as well as time-varying
              channel conditions to offer desired quality-of-service.
     This research
              project has three principle goals:

Investigation of efficient multi-rate
              detection and estimation algorithms for wireless physical
media
              transmission.

Investigation of video streaming techniques for wireless
              networks that use underlying network
condition feedback to dynamically adjust
              the forward error correction used to protect the
video data.

Investigation
              of the integration of physical layer media characteristics and higher-level
              video
applications to provide the highest quality-of- service to applications.
