Title       : A Research-Based Organic Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum Employing Combinatorial
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0087862

Award Number: 0087862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Newton newton@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry J. Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) 
This project uses an innovative approach to laboratory
              instruction in organic chemistry to replace the previous "cookbook" curriculum.
              We are adapting the research-based design of Kharas, DePaul University (J.
              Chem. Educ. 1997, 74, 661) and extending the program to a full year of original
              research on a class of novel luminescent metalloles. In our program, each
              student prepares and characterize a unique target molecule. We are
              incorporating the principles of combinatorial chemistry into the curriculum
              and, for the first time, are introducing students to experimental
              organometallic chemistry. The combinatorial technology promises to
              revolutionize the fields of organic synthesis, drug discovery, and material
              sciences. The pedagogical shift from the present discovery-based instruction to
              the innovative research orientation makes our students collaborators in
              research, as they employ advanced laboratory techniques, working in an
              atmosphere of genuine scientific inquiry. This approach strengthens our
              institution's goal of challenging the creativity of students, and helps the
              students gain independence and self-confidence. We are convinced our research
              approach linked to the new combinatorial technology is applicable to other
              scientific disciplines, including biology, environmental sciences, and material
              sciences. We intend our approach to serve as a model for other institutions. In
              our one-year pilot program, students demonstrated a greater understanding and
              appreciation for the nature of scientific research, improved their laboratory
              skills, and evidenced enthusiasm for the approach. They also learned to design
              and optimize their experiments. Based on the results of the pilot program, we
              have refined the curriculum to concentrate on six units, each of which focuses
              on a specific reaction. During the pilot program, students said they had
              developed competence in several important characterization techniques. But they
              said they fared less well in their abilities to perform NMR spectroscopy or
              carry out inert atmosphere transfers. To address these two critically important
              techniques, we are incorporating the use of a multinuclear FT-NMR spectrometer
              and three glove boxes. Following careful evaluation of the project, the results
              will be disseminated at workshops and through presentations at national
              meetings as well as by publications in the chemical literature, with students
              as co-authors.


