Title       : High-Resolution Chronostratigraphic Constraints on the Biogeography of New
               Tetrapod Assemblages from Triassic Paleoequatorial Rift Basins of Southeastern
               North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0087634

Award Number: 0087634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Olsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis V. Kent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter LeTourneau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a high-resolution chronologic,
              stratigraphic, and paleogeographic framework for the southernmost exposed
              Triassic rift basins in eastern North America, specifically the Deep River and
              Dan River basins and to a lesser extent, the Richmond, and Taylorsville basins.
              These basins comprise the only outcropping continental sequences constrained to
              have been in the equatorial zone of Triassic Pangea. The development of a
              precise spatiotemporal framework is prompted by the exciting discovery of
              unexpectedly rich, seemingly endemic tetrapod assemblages from these basins
              that suggest new interpretations of the pattern of Late Triassic faunal
              evolution. These faunules contain surprisingly large numbers of synapsids
              (dicynodonts, traversodonts, and advanced cynodonts) that differentiate these
              paleoequatorial assemblages from coeval ones of the more northern Triassic
              rifts, as well as those from the classic Chinle Group of the American
              Southwest. In addition, elements of these faunules provide conflicting
              biostratigraphic information requiring independent mechanisms for assessing
              their age and correlation. We propose to use paleomagnetic and
              cyclostratigraphic means to place these new and previously discovered
              assemblages into a tightly constrained paleogeographic and temporal framework
              correlated to the well-defined Newark Basin time scale developed through
              previous NSF-funded work. We anticipate that this project will have major
              implications for the rates and taxonomic and geographic patterns of Triassic
              terrestrial faunal change, as well as the character and consequences of the
              Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction.


