Title       : Reinventing Introductory Geology Courses for Majors and Non-Majors Using Peer
               Instruction and Other Inquiry-Based Learning Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0087894

Award Number: 0087894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127983             (Estimated)
Investigator: David McConnell dam6@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Steer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katharine Owens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) 
The Department of Geology at the University of Akron is adapting
              and assessing an inquiry-based teaching model for introductory geology courses
              in a large classroom setting. This project is an outgrowth of NSF-sponsored
              workshops on Inquiry-Based and Cooperative Learning through FIRST (Faculty
              Institutes Reforming Science Teaching) and departmental discussions resulting
              from the small-scale application of inquiry-based learning methods in the PI's
              courses. We are developing an approach based on peer instruction techniques
              described in Eric Mazur, "Peer Instruction: A User's Manual," (Prentice Hall,
              1997). This method of peer instruction has been a widespread success in
              improving learning and raising standard test scores for physics students in a
              variety of institutions. One lecture theater (180 student capacity) at the
              University of Akron has been fitted with a classroom communication system (CCS)
              technology sold by EduCue that was designed to support this peer instruction
              technique. [See www.EduCue.com.] This technology, and the necessary training in
              its use, is being made available for faculty in other departments.
              
Approximately 2800 students per year enroll in an introductory geology course
              at the University of Akron, over a third (950) are education majors. As we
              shift to peer instruction, our goals are to improve science literacy among
              non-majors taking a science elective, and to model inquiry-based learning
              methods for education majors taking courses to satisfy state licensure
              standards. We are taking steps to ensure that this method of learning results
              in improved student learning of specific geological concepts by carefully
              assessing the retention of key concepts among geology students. A series of
              inquiry-based learning modules will be developed for a variety of introductory
              courses aimed at both major and non-major student populations. Conceptual
              questions addressed to students (ConcepTests) are being used in conjunction
              with a variety of other proven classroom assessment techniques to generate
              daily formative evaluations. These evaluations are being used to judge the
              effectiveness of our teaching and learning strategy. The overall evaluation we
              are employing includes comparisons of test results, written reports, student
              interviews, responses to pre- and post-class attitudinal surveys, and a
              longitudinal study of geology and education majors. This assessment is being
              guided by faculty from the College of Education's Department of Curricular and
              Instructional Studies. As part of this project we are also offering seminars
              and faculty development workshops to other science faculty at the University of
              Akron, and seminars, workshops, and presentations at regional and national
              meetings to in-service teachers and geology faculty at other institutions. In
              addition, all learning materials created for this project will be made
              available to other faculty through departmental websites and textbook
              publishers (McGraw-Hill).



