Title       : Interannual Variability in the Antarctic-Ross Sea (IVARS): Nutrients and
               Seasonal Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0087401

Award Number: 0087401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $561296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walker O. Smith wos@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During the past few decades of oceanographic research, it has been recognized
              that significant variations in biogeochemical processes occur among years. 
              Interannual variations in the Southern Ocean are known to occur in ice extent
              and concentration, in the composition of herbivore communities, and in bird and
              marine mammal distributions and reproductive success. However, little is known
              about the interannual variations in production of phytoplankton or the role
              that these variations play in the food web.  This project will collect time
              series data on the seasonal production of phytoplankton in the southern Ross
              Sea, Antarctica.  Furthermore, it will assess the interannual variations of the
              production of the two major functional groups of the system, diatoms and
              Phaeocystis Antarctica, a colonial haptophyte.  The Ross Sea provides a unique
              setting for this type of investigation for a number of reasons. For example, a
              de facto time-series has already been initiated in the Ross Sea through the
              concentration of a number of programs in the past ten years. It also is well
              known that the species diversity is reduced relative to other systems and its
              seasonal production is as great as anywhere in the Antarctic. Most importantly,
              seasonal production of both the total phytoplankton community (as well as its
              two functional groups) can be estimated from late summer nutrient profiles. 
              The	 project will involve short cruises on the US Coast Guard ice breakers in
              the southern Ross Sea that will allow the collection of water column nutrient
              and particulate after data at specific locations in the late summer of each of
              five  years.   Additionally, two moorings with in situ nitrate analyzers moored
              at fifteen will be deployed, thus collecting for the first time in the in the
              Antarctic a time-series of euphotic zone nutrient concentrations over the
              entire growing season.  All nutrient data will be used to calculate seasonal
              production for each year in the southern Ross Sea and compared to previously
              collected information, thereby providing an assessment of interannual
              variations in net community production. Particulate matter data will allow us
              to estimate the amount of export from the surface layer by late summer, and
              therefore calculate the interannual variability of this ecosystem process. 
              	Interannual variations of seasonal production (and of the major taxa of
              producers) are a potentially significant feature in the growth and survival of
              higher trophic levels within the food web of the Ross Sea. They are also
              important in order to understand the natural variability in biogeochemical
              processes of the region. Because polar regions such as the Ross Sea are
              predicted to be impacted by future climate change, biological changes are also
              anticipated.  Placing these changes in the context of natural variability is an
              essential element of understanding and predicting such alterations. This
              research thus seeks to quantify the natural variability of an Antarctic coastal
              system, and ultimately understand its causes and impacts on food webs and
              biogeochemical cycles of the Ross Sea.

 
