Title       : 'QOS Enhancement with Partial State'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0087372

Award Number: 0087372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270152             (Estimated)
Investigator: A.L. Narasimha Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Considerable work has been done in devising mechanisms for providing
              service guarantees within a network.  These schemes can be broadly classified
              into two categories, schemes that require maintaining state for each flow and
              schemes that do not require maintaining state for each flow withing the
              network.  Integrated services architecture and differentiated services
              architecture and differentiated services architecture are prime examples of
              such approaches.  Both the approaches have their advantages and proponents. 
              This proposal aims to investigate approaches that fall in between two extremes,
              where a network switch may be able to maintain state for a fixed number of
              flows (possibly less than the number of flows it serves).  This proposal looks
              at the services that can be provided by a limited amount of state.
     The
              proposal plans to pursue the general direction of investigating new approaches
              for providing QOS with a limited amount of state.  Our initial work has
              identified the following guiding principles:
*The provided service needs to be
              flexible i.e., should be able to work with any amount of state (relative to the
              number of flows).  
*The provided service needs to be scalable i.e., increased
              amount of state should improve QOS.
*The provided service needs to be additive
              i.e., as more network components employ it, QOS should be improved.
The
              proposal plans to investigate mechanisms that can provide the following
              QOS:
*Identify and limit the resource consumptions of non-responsive
              flows.
*Provide fair sharing of bandwidth.
*Provide bandwidth allocations to
              different flows.
     As a first step, we propose to employ Sampling and
              Caching in addition to queue and buffer management techniques at a router to
              enhance the QoS.  The proposed mechanism uses caching to deal with the limited
              amount of state and uses sampling to select flows for which individual state is
              maintained.  Our preliminary results show that sampling and caching can be
              effectively used for containing non-responsive flows and fair sharing of
              bandwidth.
     The proposal plancs to study the effectiveness and feasibility
              of employing partial state in currently defined architectures such as IntServ
              and DiffServ.  The proposal also plans to study if partial state  can be used
              to provide delay and jitter service.
     Besides studying mechanisms, the
              proposal also plans to do both trace-driven and statistical analysis of
              usefulness of partial state.  Available network traces will be used to study
              the impact of state on the amount of work to be done at a network element and
              the QOS impact of such mechanisms.  We also plan to analyze partial state with
              well understood models of network traffic to see if we can make qualitative
              conclusions about the impact of partial state.
  


