Title       : Calcium, Reactive Oxygen Species, and Pollen Tube Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0087517

Award Number: 0087517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0087517
Robinson

The study of tip growth in general and pollen tube growth
              in particular has been an area of considerable progress in recent years and
              more and more sophisticated techniques have been brought to bear on the
              problem.   One important conclusion that has emerged is that the pollen tube
              tip is a highly dynamic structure.  Elongation is not steady, but oscillatory,
              and a number of important physiological variables are also oscillatory,
              including cytosolic Ca2+, cytosolic pH, net Ca2+ influx, net H+ influx, and net
              K+ influx.  The phase relationships of these variables with respect to growth
              oscillations are complex, and it is not at all clear how the oscillations are
              established and maintained, and what are the feedback mechanisms that connect
              the variables.
It is proposed to directly detect vesicle secretion and
              determine its timing relative to elongation.  Attempts to use electrical
              methods for measuring secretion have proved fruitless, so   optical methods are
              now employed.   By these means, accurate measurements of the timing of vesicle
              secretion will be made.

A substantial fraction of the Ca2+ that is required
              for the oscillations in cytosolic Ca2+ must come from intracellular stores, and
              the most likely sources are the secretory vesicles themselves.  It is proposed
              to isolate the vesicles and directly determine their ability to take up and
              release Ca2+.  The physiological controls of these events will also be
              determined.
In order to characterize putative Ca2+ channels in pollen tubes,
              whole cell clamping of pollen grain protoplasts will be done.   

The working
              model posits the existence of turgor pressure oscillations, which appear to
              underlie the growth oscillations.  Ultra-high resolution optical measurement by
              computer vision will be used to determine if the diameter of pollen tubes
              oscillates due to turgor oscillations.  If so, we will determine the phase of
              these oscillations with respect to other variables.

Finally,  the production
              of ROS at the growing tip will be directly observed, using a luminescent probe,
              pholasin, which increases its light emission by several orders of magnitude in
              the presence of ROS.



