Title       : Duration of Mineralization in Young Porphyry Systems through Rhenium-Osmium
               (Re-Os) Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a0087483

Award Number: 0087483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly J. Stein hstein@cnr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stein
EAR-0087483

This project addresses one of the fundamental
              underpinnings needed to understand geologic processes that produce
              copper-molybdenum deposits associated with magmatism at shallow levels in the
              earth's crust.  This underpinning is the timing and duration of the
              mineralization process within the broader context of the magmatism and the
              tectonic and geologic evolution of a terrane.  It has been said:  "No Dates, No
              Rates!"  Using the now established Re-Os (rhenium-osmium) method of dating, the
              only method that directly dates the sulfide ore minerals themselves, this study
              addresses the time span needed to form so-called porphyry copper-molybdenum
              deposits.  Do they form over tens of millions of years (or more), or do they
              form in a few hundred thousand years (or less)?  Previous attempts at dating
              the time of ore deposition were limited by techniques that addressed presumably
              ore-associated minerals and/or techniques that do not retain the age of
              mineralization.  For example, one dating technique involves the use of Ar
              (argon), a gas in its natural state, and although Ar may be found and measured
              in rocks and minerals, this is not a comfortable site for the element.  In
              contrast, both Re and Os are sulfide-loving, and are naturally concentrated in
              metallic ore minerals.  The results from this Re-Os study will be compared with
              age results derived from other methods of dating.   This study will focus on
              dating mineralization associated with two young magmatic systems that host
              giant deposits of molybdenum and copper, the classic Henderson molybdenum
              deposit in Colorado and the Los Pelambres copper-molybdenum deposit in Chile.

