Title       : Diffusion, Closure Temperatures and Accessory Mineral Petrogenesis in a
               High-Temperature Aureole: Refining the Integration of P-T and t
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0087564

Award Number: 0087564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119303             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Connelly connelly@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Connelly/Carlson
EAR-0087564

Mineral assemblages in rocks exposed in
              continental collisional belts (orogens) commonly preserve important information
              about the high temperatures and pressures they experienced on their respective
              excursions into the deep crust.  Understanding crustal dynamics of these belts
              requires integration of temperature (T) and pressure (P) and ages (t) to derive
              P-T-t paths for different parts of an orogen. However, P-T-t paths are not
              easily defined since independent estimates of P, T and t are based on isotopic
              and chemical distributions that are dependent on reactions or diffusion that
              stop at different temperatures. This may leave pressure estimates without
              corresponding temperature estimates and vice versa, thus precluding definition
              of real points on the actual P-T path.  Estimates of the timing of metamorphism
              are based on minerals that form in poorly understood reactions and may be reset
              at temperatures that do not coincide with either P or T estimates. Improved
              P-T-t paths require refined calibrations of the first-order processes that
              control elemental and isotopic distributions that are used to define, P, T and
              t in mineral systems. We will examine elemental and isotopic variations in
              minerals around a high-temperature (+1000 degrees C) igneous complex of the
              Nain Plutonic Complex (Labrador, Canada), where pressures were constant and
              temperatures varied systematically. This work will facilitate calibration of
              elemental diffusion and relevant mineral reactions as a function of
              temperature, mineralogy and textural relationships. In turn, this will
              contribute to our ability to construct more accurate P-T-t paths and thus
              refine our understanding of the crustal dynamics in collisional orogens. 

