Title       : Collaborative Research: Hybrid Population-Average and Individual-Specific Models
               for Clustered Longitudinal Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0087179

Award Number: 0087179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23526              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Handcock handcock@stat.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project with Scott (0088061) will develop a class of
              longitudinal data models appropriate for modeling clustering and heterogeneous
              patterns in such data.  This work extends the modeling paradigm of Banfield and
              Raftery (1993), in which clusters are identified via an explicit statistical
              model.  The extension will incorporate a parsimonious class of models developed
              by Scott and Hancock (1998) to identify population-level patterns in
              individual-specific differences.  The study will develop algorithms to estimate
              the models, and will incorporate the approach of Bensmail et al. (1997) to
              establish a Bayesian model formulation.  Inference to assess the validity of
              the models will be developed, as will information criterion, and Bayes factor
              approaches.  A further outcome of this work will be an extension of the lme
              software in Splus to incorporate these new methods (Pinheiro and Bates 1995). 
              An important part of the project will be the development of a case study of
              long-term trends in wage inequality.  This will include comparisons of two
              important economic periods and will contrast the findings under the new models
              to results from more traditional mixed effects models.  In addition, the
              implications of the findings for wage inequality and labor market segmentation
              will be explored and published in an applied journal to provide a bridge for
              subject matter researchers to this methodology.

In much of social,
              behavioral and biostatistical research, the goal is to understand the structure
              of the heterogeneity in a population, and in so doing yield insight into social
              phenomena.  In longitudinal studies subjects can become increasingly
              differentiated over time, and the identification of natural groupings, or
              clusters, in the subjects has important consequences.  They may yield evidence
              suggesting the presence of several distinct phenomena--that is, different
              social processes could exist for different subjects.  The accurate
              identification of these clusters depends on the specification of the structure
              within a subject's responses.  Methods that describe this aspect of an
              individual's profile have been sparse and often hard to interpret
              substantively.  This research will extend the statistical models for clustered
              longitudinal data developed in Banfield and Raftery (1993) to include a new,
              parsimonious, and interpretable representation of individual behavior.  This
              extension represents a hybrid population-average and individual-specific
              approach to modeling the heterogeneity in individual profiles.
