Title       : The PascGalois Project: Visualizing Abstract Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a0087644

Award Number: 0087644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Bardzell mjbardzell@ssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Shannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salisbury University
	      1101 Camden Avenue
	      Salisbury, MD  21801    410/548-5395

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

The PascGalois Project is developing materials
              that use computing technology to enhance the teaching of abstract algebra which
              has traditionally been one of the most difficult and least visual subjects in
              the undergraduate mathematics curriculum. These materials provide an
              interesting class of objects and computer generated representations that allow
              students to "see" numerous algebraic concepts. This project has its origin in a
              simple exercise with Pascal's triangle. The interest in this construction lies
              in the fact that Pascal's triangle mod n is the group multiplication for the
              cyclic group Z . This construction is being generalized using other finite
              groups. Like Pascal's triangle mod n, PascGalois triangles can have
              self-similar properties. Many of these properties can be described using
              subgroups, quotients, and automorphisms of the group G. The project is
              developing software to create these images and higher dimensional
              generalizations (e.g. automata, similar to Conway's Game of Life) on demand so
              that students can investigate these patterns and their relationships to group
              structure. 

 The primary objectives of the project are: to develop
              laboratory exercises that provide a visual component for the junior/senior
              level Abstract Algebra courses; to develop students' visual and intuitive
              understanding of difficult concepts; to model effective use of technology for
              prospective mathematics teachers and thus better prepare them to implement the
              National Council of Teachers of Mathematics standards; to stimulate interest in
              abstract algebra and encourage graduate study in mathematics, and to increase
              participation in undergraduate research in mathematics by providing a source of
              interesting and accessible research projects. 


