Title       : Beginning Science Teachers in Action: Investigating Mis/Connections Between
               Preservice Content and Classroom Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0087560

Award Number: 0087560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie A. Bianchini jbianchi@education.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) proposal to conduct
              research on how beginning teachers of secondary school science practice the
              teaching of science.  The investigator, an assistant professor in the school of
              education at UCSB who teaches science education classes, proposes that her own
              teaching practices be an object of investigation.  The project would study the
              experiences of students in the science education program at the University of
              California, Santa Barbara who had taken her course in science education to see
              how they translate the course materials into teaching practices.  One intent of
              this project is to provide rich textual descriptions of science instruction. 
              It will use a "design experiment" methodology and thereby provide a valuable
              example, and evaluation, of that method as an way to intervene in science
              teacher education.  

This proposal was submitted as a SGER because the
              exploratory nature of conducting research on teaching by studying the teaching
              of one's self, as a means of scientific discovery, generates some negative
              reaction by reviewers.   However, the research method proposed here is also
              accepted and adopted by other researchers as a ground-breaking way of
              investigating difficult subjects such as the relationship between teaching and
              learning.  It follows a method used by Maggie Lampert at the University of
              Michigan to study herself prepare mathematics classroom and her research has
              been widely cited as a model of research into good teaching practices.  Such
              methods have not been employed at the college level of teaching however, and
              this project offers the possibility of new insight into how to improve teaching
              of young new teachers.  
