Title       : Beryllium in Antarctic Ultrahigh-Temperature Granulite-Facies Rocks and its Role
               in Partial Melting of the Lower Continental Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a0087235

Award Number: 0087235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98111              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward S. Grew esgrew@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087235
Grew

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the
              role of beryllium in lower crustal partial melting events. The formation of
              granitic liquids by partial melting deep in the Earth's crust is one of the
              major topics of research in igneous and metamorphic petrology today. One aspect
              of this sphere of research is the beginning of the process, specifically, the
              geochemical interaction between melts and source rocks before the melt has left
              the source area. One example of anatexis in metamorphic rocks affected by
              conditions found deep in the Earth's crust is pegmatite in the Archean
              ultrahigh temperature granulite-facies Napier Complex of Enderby Land, East
              Antarctica. Peak conditions for this granulite-facies metamorphism are
              estimated to have reached nearly 1100 Degrees Celsius and 11 kilobar, that is,
              conditions in the Earth's lower crust in Archean time. The proposed research is
              a study of the Napier Complex pegmatites with an emphasis on the minerals and
              geochemistry of beryllium. This element, which is estimated to constitute 3 ppm
              of the Earth's upper crust, is very rarely found in any significant
              concentrations in metamorphic rocks subjected to conditions of the Earth's
              lower crust. Structural, geochronological, and mineralogical studies will be
              carried out to test the hypothesis that the beryllium pegmatites resulted from
              anatexis of their metapelitic host rocks during the ultrahigh-temperature
              metamorphic event in the late Archean. Host rocks will be analyzed for major
              and trace elements. Minerals will be analyzed by the electron microprobe for
              major constituents including fluorine and by the ion microprobe for lithium,
              beryllium and boron. The analytical data will be used to determine how
              beryllium and other trace constituents were extracted from host rocks under
              ultrahigh-temperature conditions and subsequently concentrated in the granitic
              melt, eventually to crystallize out in a pegmatite as beryllian sapphirine and
              khmaralite, minerals not found in pegmatites elsewhere. Mineral compositions
              and assemblages will be used to determine the evolution and conditions of
              crystallization and recrystallization of the pegmatites and their host rocks
              during metamorphic episodes following the ultrahigh-temperature event. Monazite
              will be analyzed for lead, thorium and uranium to date the ages of these
              events. Because fluorine is instrumental in mobilizing beryllium, an
              undergraduate student will study the magnesium fluorphosphate wagnerite in the
              pegmatites in order to estimate fluorine activity in the melt as part of a
              senior project. The results of the present project will provide important
              insights on the melting process in general and on the geochemical behavior of
              beryllium in particular under the high temperatures and low water activities
              characteristic of the Earth's lower crust.

