Title       : GIS Instruction and Application: Extending a Multidisciplinary Technology across
               a Liberal Arts Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0087870

Award Number: 0087870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93974              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ritter jritter@wittenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              TImothy Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olga L. Medvedkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wittenberg University
	      PO BOX 720
	      Springfield, OH  455010720    513/327-6231

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

The objective of the proposal is to incorporate
              Geographic Information Systems (GIS) into undergraduate biology, geography, and
              geology courses. The project is an adaptation of curricular revisions made at
              Richard Stockton College in their Environmental Studies Curriculum. Learning
              with GIS enables students to engage in the processes and methods of inquiry, to
              think rigorously, rationally, and creatively about the acquired knowledge, and
              to communicate effectively. GIS have traditionally been used to analyze spatial
              data and problems in field-oriented disciplines like biology, environmental
              studies, geography, and geology, but it can also be used to study problems in
              economics, political science, sociology, and urban studies and modeled as a
              teaching aid in education. The project modifies a core set of inquiry-based
              courses in biology, geography, and geology in order to infuse GIS methodology
              in the natural and social sciences and to serve as multiple entry points into
              an advanced geography course in GIS theory and application. Faculties teaching
              these lead courses specialize in appropriate areas of GIS theory and
              application so that they may serve as mentors to interested faculty across
              campus. The implementation will take two tracks. First, a centralized learning
              laboratory with sufficient computer hardware and peripheral equipment is
              created so students are able to take full advantage of campus GIS technology.
              Also, lead faculty are trained in the use of ESRI 's ArcView and ArcInfo
              relative to their needs and discipline specialties. An important outcome of the
              project is that the use of GIS extends across the curriculum by providing
              mentoring opportunities to a self-selected group of faculty that have
              identified a need and interest in incorporating GIS into their coursework.
