Title       : Alien Stingers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0087951

Award Number: 0087951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1448261            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Boyle pboyle@wcs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Gwynne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wildlife Conservation Soc
	      2300 Southern Boulevard
	      Bronx, NY  104601099    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The New York Aquarium, a subsidiary of the Wildlife Conservation Society, is
              developing Alien Stingers, a 4000 square foot, permanent exhibit featuring
              Cnidarians, jellyfish and their relatives.  This exhibit will showcase species
              such as the purple stripe, umbrella and lion's mane jellies.  Other animals to
              be presented include colorful sea anemones and live corals.  Visitors will
              learn about Cnidaria and their habitats, ecological roles, adaptations and
              relationships with other ocean life. Endangered species, human impact on
              habitats and various conservation efforts will also be highlighted.  The
              exhibit design will create a sense of wonder and mystery using dramatic
              lighting, music and unique displays.  Moveable 3D models, interactive graphics
              and specially designed cylindrical tanks will result in an exhibit experience
              that stimulates curiosity and invites learning. 

The project has a
              comprehensive, multi-level evaluation plan structured around two exhibit
              openings.  The first round of evaluation will look at the impact of
              two-dimensional graphics and prototype interactives.  A second opening is
              planned which will add complex prototype interactives that are designed to
              present more intricate messages.  Both layers of evaluation will be used to
              shape the permanent exhibit graphics and promote self-directed learning.  A
              website with a live jelly-cam supports this exhibit, along with a host of
              educational programs and materials for various audiences.  A family handbook,
              children's activity guides, visitor guides and a children's book on jellyfish
              are among the supplemental materials planned.  It is anticipated that over
              815,000 visitors will view Alien Stingers on an annual basis.


