Title       : Routing and Multicast Algorithms for LEO Satellite Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0087762

Award Number: 0087762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian F. Akyildiz ian@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite systems provide global coverage with short
              round trip delays.  With these properties they will play a crucial role in the
              global Internet to support real-time and non-real-time applications.  Routing
              and multicasting in LEO satellite systems are the key issues to support these
              services.      Non-real-time applications are characterized by relaxed delay
              bounds.  They are also insensitive to the variations in delay.  Thus,
              datagram-based routing schemes can be used to support this type of traffic. 
              the Semi-Centralized Datagram Routing Protocol (SC-DRP) is proposed to support
              connectionless routing in LEO satellite networks.  The SC-DRP aims to foward
              the packets in the LEO satellite network on minimum delay paths.  SC-DRP
              utilized LEO and MEO/GEO satellites to calculate routing tables,  which will
              increase the reliability and delay performance of datagram traffic in satellite
              networks, where the data traffic is carried in the LEO satellite network.  The
              Datagram Multicast Protocol (DMP) is proposed to support connectionless
              multicasting.  DMP is based on the SC-DRP and creates shortest path trees.     
                                                                     Real-time applications
              impose strict delay bounds and are sensitive to delay varations.  Thus,
              real-time traffic can be supported by connection-oriented routing schemes.  The
              changing connectivity pattern of satellites affects the estbalished paths in
              LEO satellite networks.  Thus, determining stable paths is very important.  The
              Delay-Coupled Probabilistic Routing Protocol (DC-PRP) is proposed for
              connection-oriented routing in LEO satellite networks.  DC-PRP computes paths
              conforming to the delay and delay jitter bounds of the connections.  The
              Connection-Oriented Multicast Protocol (LEOCOM) is proposed for the
              connection-oriented multicasting, which creates delay-constrained multicast
              trees.  The multicast tree length is optimized using a greedy search algorithm.
