Title       : LTER Cross-Site: Nutrient Uptake at the Ecosystem Scale - Testing Model
               Assumptions by Cross-Site Comparisons with Nutrient Budgets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0087263

Award Number: 0087263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth D. Yanai rdyanai@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087263
Yanai
Understanding the factors controlling nutrient uptake is
              essential to the advancement of ecosystem science and to the sound formation of
              environmental policy. Unfortunately, ecosystem nutrient uptake cannot be
              measured directly, in contrast to ecosystem inputs, outputs, and various
              aboveground fluxes. There are basically two approaches to estimating nutrient
              uptake. Uptake can be calculated by mass balance based on certain ecosystem
              fluxes: litterfall, root turnover, foliar leaching, and biomass increment.
              Alternatively, uptake can be calculated using nutrient uptake models, which
              depend on knowing root surface area, root uptake kinetics and the simulated
              concentration of the soil solution at the root surface. The potential of
              nutrient uptake models to provide accurate prediction has been confirmed by
              their success with field crops, but has yet to be demonstrated successfully in
              forest ecosystems. 
	The purpose of the LTER Cross-site research project is to
              identify the most important gaps in our current understanding of nutrient
              uptake processes in forests at the ecosystem scale. The approach involves the
              parameterization of a nutrient uptake model and comparison of the results to
              ecosystem budgets of nutrient uptake across a variety of forest ecosystem
              types. The strength of the cross-site comparison is that different processes
              are likely to be important at different sites. 
This study will address three
              main issues. The first issue is the comparison of budgeted with simulated
              uptake will reveal the circumstances under which various model assumptions
              fail. Second, analysis of parameterized models will identify which parameters
              are most important to specify accurately. Finally, new data will be provided on
              uptake kinetics across a range of non-agricultural species and conditions. Both
              errors in parameter values and errors in model assumptions must be identified
              and corrected before uptake models can make useful predictions. Overall, this
              study will be the first to provide detailed mechanistic measurements of uptake
              kinetics on a variety of tree species in a different forest ecosystems 

