Title       : 2001 Gordon Research Conference on the Geochemistry of Ore-Forming Metal
               Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0087477

Award Number: 0087477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean S. Cline   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cline & Storm
EAR-0087477

This Gordon Research Conference is one of the
              premier conferences that addresses the geochemistry of metallic ore deposits. 
              The meeting serves as an international forum for researchers with differing
              levels of experience from academia, government, and industry to discuss issues
              concerning the chemistry of metal transportation and deposition in the natural
              environment.  The theme that we have selected for the next conference is "The
              formation, modification and preservation of ore deposits."  We have selected
              this theme to focus on process, rather than metal or ore-deposit type, and to
              highlight the linkages among the numerous factors involved in ore formation,
              deposit environment, and the resultant economic processing of ore.  We have
              endeavored to make this meeting interdisciplinary by inviting speakers who are
              experts in a variety of fields including low-temperature geochemistry,
              biogeochemistry, climate change, tectonics, structure, geochronology, and
              numerical modeling.  Each of these disciplines can bring insight and
              information to the understanding of how metals are transported and accumulated
              in and at Earth's crust.  Funding of this proposal will provide partial support
              for junior level scientists including students, post-doctorate fellows, and
              assistant professors to attend the meeting, and will provide them with a unique
              opportunity to meet and interact with recognized experts in a friendly and
              informal environment.  The attendance of junior-level scientists at this
              meeting is important because they bring new and innovative ideas to the
              science, and because they are responsible for future research in this field. 
              Attendance at the conference will provide them with the opportunity to learn
              from and interact with more senior scientists, and to begin collaborative
              projects with other researchers.  These experiences will undoubtedly have a
              positive impact on their future productivity. 

Convenors:  Jean Cline, Jeff
              Hedenquist, and John Thompson
August 19-24, 2001, Proctor Academy, New
              Hampshire


