Title       : Technology & Model-Based Conceptual Assessment: Research in Students'
               Applications of Models in Physics & Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0087788

Award Number: 0087788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $979723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Zollman dzollman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To improve the communication between students and teachers, particularly in
              large classes, many universities have begun using technology-based response
              systems.  These systems enable an instructor to pose questions and see, within
              a few minutes, the students' responses to those questions. Another similar
              approach is to assign homework that is submitted, graded and returned quickly
              via the World Wide Web.  Both of these technology-based systems offer
              instructors the opportunity to record each student's responses in a database. 
              Thus, the instructor can track students' understanding much more completely
              than with traditional homework and quizzes and can use the resulting data to
              investigate more deeply how students understand the scientific and mathematical
              concepts.  In addition to seeing the present level of each students
              understanding the instructor can learn how the students change their thinking
              by making comparisons of responses throughout the learning process.  A present,
              the analyses of these responses generally tell instructors when the students
              are obtaining the right answers.  However, for students who are not answering
              correctly, the present systems do little more than indicate that the student is
              not applying the scientific theories and models correctly.  Still missing is an
              analysis tool that is based on contemporary educational research and can
              provide robust quantitative information on the students' difficulties with the
              underlying scientific models and theories, and can track how the students'
              understandings of these models change during instruction. 
These tools must go
              beyond correct answer analysis and analyze students' incorrect answers by
              incorporating theories of learning into the systems.  This project will begin
              with a model for students' conceptual learning processes and with existing work
              on assessing students' conceptual understanding in physics and mathematics. 
              Then, research will be conducted on students' applications of scientific models
              and mathematical concepts, on how the students' thinking and applications
              change during instruction, and methods to present the results of these
              assessments to teaching faculty who are using in-class, real-time response or
              on-line homework systems.  
By constructing sets of questions in which
              incorrect answers provide insights into the scientific and mathematical models
              that students are applying, the project's results will lead to a deeper
              understanding of students' abilities to learn physics and mathematics and the
              contexts in which that learning occurs most effectively.  The analysis will
              also provide insight into students' abilities to transfer knowledge between
              physics and mathematics courses. 
The major objectives of the project are to
              measure, with real-time feedback, students' understanding of fundamental
              concepts and the application of those concepts, trace changes in those
              understandings and applications during instruction, investigate how students'
              conceptual understanding depends on the context in which a new concept is
              studied, create analysis tools that can be used effectively in many educational
              environments, provide information about the transfer of knowledge between
              physics and mathematics, and investigate how students and instructors interact
              with this teaching environment.
The result of reaching these goals will be a
              system that will have a large impact on the teaching of science and
              mathematics.  The impact will be particularly great in large enrollment classes
              where instructors are often very detached from their students because,
              frequently, such information becomes available only after students take an
              exam.  Of particular importance for the instructors is knowledge of when
              students have begun to change their thinking but still sometimes revert to
              pre-instructional applications of scientific or mathematical concepts-- a
              mixture of understanding and a lack of understanding. Such situations are
              recognized to be an important intermediate step in the learning process.  By
              knowing the extent of this mixture the instructors can plan the next step in
              the learning process based on the students' present physical or mathematical
              understanding and the contexts which aid fundamental change in students'
              thinking.  Thus, the project will provide both information and tools to help
              science and mathematics instructors learn about the present knowledge of their
              students and how to use that present knowledge constructively to improve the
              students' scientific and mathematical thinking skills.

