Title       : WEB Accessible Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Undergraduate Instruction
               at a Consortium of Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a0087210

Award Number: 0087210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen D. Hunter adhunter@cc.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura H. Strauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Jircitano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward P. Zovinka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/941-2377

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Recent improvements in diffraction hardware, theory, and
              software, and in computers have made diffraction methods increasingly routine
              for scientists, engineers, and professionals in many disciplines. It has also
              made them increasingly accessible to novices such as undergraduates. Experience
              at a variety of institutions has shown that these methods can be effectively
              integrated into the undergraduate curriculum in a wide variety of disciplines,
              including: biochemistry, biology, chemistry, geology, physics, materials
              science, engineering, and science teacher education. One of the biggest
              impediments to integrating diffraction more widely into undergraduate
              coursework is the lack of hands on access to appropriate diffractometers. This
              project is adapting and implementing several existing collaborative models from
              regional Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), and research
              instrumentation networks. A WEB-accessible diffraction facility that emphasizes
              single crystal methods but with some powder capabilities has been established
              at this instituion. It is dedicated to undergraduate instruction in both formal
              courses and undergraduate research. The facility is fully accessible over the
              WEB so that participating PUI faculty and their students are able to both
              observe and control the diffraction instruments remotely as well as access
              databases located at the institution. Structure solution software for use at
              each home site is provided as are faculty training and curriculum
              implementation help for the twenty two participating PUIs. Because of the
              operation over a distance model proposed for instrument access, this facility
              is particularly useful to faculty and students in geographically remote
              regions, to those from less well funded institutions, or to those whose
              disabilities make travel problematic. 

