Title       : Understanding and Teaching Spatial Competence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0087516

Award Number: 0087516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1598931            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janellen Huttenlocher hutt@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dedre Gentner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nora S. Newcombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Spatial competence is  a fundamental aspect of intelligence, 
important to
              successful functioning.  A high level of spatial skill 
is critical to the
              achievement of a technologically sophisticated 
work force for the
              twenty-first century.  Spatial intelligence plays 
a major role in effective
              education in mathematics, science and 
engineering.  The interdisciplinary
              research we will carry out 
focuses on understanding of spatial intelligence
              and establishing 
methods for maximizing the development of spatial skills. 
              We will 
study spatial competence at different levels of analysis.  At the
              
biological level, we will will investigate the neurological 
foundations for
              spatial growth.  We will examine the growth and 
organization of neural
              connections in areas of the brain that 
underlie the processing of spatial
              information. At the behavioral 
level, we will investigate the mechanisms that
              are involved in the 
mental representation of the spatial aspects of the
              world.  We also 
will study the ways in which children come to understand
              spatial 
symbols such as maps and models. We will study how acquisition of
              
these symbol systems affects the development of spatial intelligence. 
This
              work will include computational modelling of spatial 
intelligence. Finally,
              at the level of educational application, we 
will investigate the educational
              input responsible for the 
differential gains in spatial skill levels children
              achieve in 
school.  We plan to identify specific teacher practices that are
              
associated with high gains in student achievement.  Our research team 
has
              expertise in a variety of relevant fields, including neural 
science,
              cognitive psychology, developmental psychology,computer 
science, education,
              and statistics.  This research team has worked 
together for the past three
              years on research that has identified 
core elements of spatial functioning. 
              Our goal now is to further our 
understanding of how the development of
              spatial competence can be 
enhanced .M		
