Title       : Theoretical Models of the Solar Chromosphere, Transition Region and Wind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0087184

Award Number: 0087184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zdzislaw E. Musielak zmusielak@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will determine which heating mechanisms dominate in different
              regions of the solar atmosphere. The main effort is to construct novel
              theoretical models that will describe the entire solar atmosphere. Observations
              show that the solar atmosphere can be divided into three main regions:
              chromosphere, transition region and corona. In each of these regions the
              temperature increases with height and reaches its maximum in the corona, where
              both X-ray emission and the solar wind originate. One of the most important,
              and still unsolved, problems in solar physics is to identify the basic physical
              processes that are responsible for this heating. There are at least two general
              classes of models of this heating. In the first class, the solar atmosphere is
              heated by hydrodynamic (mainly acoustic) or magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) waves,
              and it is assumed that these waves are generated by turbulent motions in the
              solar convection zone. In the second class, dissipation of currents generated
              by photospheric motions of solar magnetic fields is the primary source of
              energy for the heating. Despite the vast amount of solar data collected during
              numerous ground observations and space missions, and significant theoretical
              efforts, it is still unclear how different regions of the solar atmosphere
              actually are heated. The investigators will take a novel approach to this
              problem by constructing theoretical models that describe the entire solar
              atmosphere. By comparing these models with observations, they will determine
              which heating mechanisms dominate in different regions of the solar atmosphere.
              Their work will be important in ongoing efforts to understand the principal
              energy sources for the solar atmosphere and the basic physical processes
              responsible for creating the heliosphere.

