Title       : LTER Cross-site: Collaborative Research: DIRT: A Cross-continental, Experimental
               Study of Forest Soil Organic Matter and Nitrogen Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0087010

Award Number: 0087010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Bowden rbowden@alleg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087010
Bowden
Numerous studies of decomposition have focused on short-term,
              transient effects of organic matter breakdown. Much has been learned from these
              studies about the roles of litter nutrient content and carbon quality in
              controlling the cycling of nutrients through the litter layer to soil organic
              matter (SOM). However, far less is known about the fate of plant litter and its
              role in determining SOM content and nutrient cycling over time scales ranging
              from decades to centuries. To address this gap, long-term experimental studies
              of controls on soil organic matter formation, or DIRT (Detritus Input and
              Removal Treatments), have been established independently at forested sites in
              three US LTERs and one international LTER site. DIRT plot treatments consist of
              long-term above- and below ground litter doubling and removal. While the
              fundamental experimental design of these installations is similar, there are
              few measurements in common and each site is instrumented quite differently. The
              purpose of this LTER cross-site research project is to bring these four sites
              into a general experimental and measurement uniformity, and to test models and
              hypotheses made at individual sites over this network. The LTER program serves
              as an ideal host for the emerging cross-site DIRT network both because it
              serves as a focal point for many investigators and because of its focus on
              long-term studies.
	The central goal of the DIRT project is to assess how
              rates and sources of plant litter inputs control accumulation and dynamics of
              organic matter and nutrients in forest soils over decadal time scales. This
              cross-site comparison will address three specific goals: (1) to examine effects
              of forest floor biomass, organic matter inputs, sources, and chemistry on net N
              retention and the ratio of inorganic to organic N losses in leachate; (2) to
              examine the effects of forest floor chemistry on gross N mineralization,
              immobilization, and nitrification rates; and (3) to evaluate the generality of
              models of sources of C to soil respiration.

