Title       : CRCD: Curriculum Development and Infrastructure for an Advanced Systems
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0087945

Award Number: 0087945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499997             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Kurose kurose@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aura Ganz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lixin Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C.Mani Krishna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krithi Ramamritham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1709      CISE EDUCAT RES & CURRIC DEVEL
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 9218,9299,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              087945
Kurose, Jame F.
University of Massachusetts

CRCD:  Curriculum
              Development and Infrastructure for an Advanced Systems Laboratory

This
              project involves collaboration between two institutions, the University of
              Massachusetts and Smith College.  The project integrates current research
              results and cutting-edge practices in systems, specifically in the fields of
              operating systems, distributed systems, real-time systems, multimedia systems,
              and networking. The project incorporates educational modules that are
              research-driven, laboratory-based, hands-on, experiment-oriented, for both
              undergraduate and graduate students, in computing curricula. The new course and
              curriculum project modules are part of a pool of laboratory projects that are
              integrated into existing courses and serve as the foundations for two new
              courses.  In addition to funding for module development, this project supports
              a multi-site Advanced Systems Laboratory (including 75 networked PCs and a half
              dozen routers - one server and PC cluster at Smith College and the remaining
              servers and PCs at University of Massachusetts) to serve approximately 400
              students per year. The role of the laboratory is to permit students to use
              hands-on modules to implement, instrument, and experiment with hardware and
              software that integrate recent research results in the core areas of
              networking, distributed systems, operating systems, multimedia and real-time
              systems.  A standard template guides module development that includes
              guidelines for module format and module resource (e.g., tools) requirements.
              The PIs are supported in this effort by the University of Massachusetts Video
              Instructional Program staff who have expertise in video-based education.

