Title       : Collaborative Research: Antarctic Cretaceous-Cenozoic Climate, Glaciation, and
               Tectonics: Site surveys for drilling from the edge of the Ross Ice Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0087392

Award Number: 0087392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis R. Bartek bartek@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Luyendyk et.al.:  OPP 0088143
Bartek:  OPP 0087392
Diebold: OPP
              0087983

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program
              of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative research program in
              marine geology and geophysics in the southern central and eastern Ross Sea. The
              project will conduct sites surveys for drilling from the Ross Ice Shelf into
              the seafloor beneath it. Many of the outstanding problems concerning the
              evolution of the East and West Antarctic Ice Sheets, Antarctic climate, global
              sea level, and the tectonic history of the West Antarctic Rift System can be
              addressed by drilling into the seafloor of the Ross Sea. Climate data for
              Cretaceous and Early Cenozoic time are lacking for this sector of Antarctica.
              Climate questions include: Was there any ice in Late Cretaceous time? What was
              the Antarctic climate during the Paleocene-Eocene global warming? When was the
              Cenozoic onset of Antarctic glaciation, when did glaciers reach the coast and
              when did they advance out onto the margin? Was the Ross Sea shelf non-marine in
              Late Cretaceous time; when did it become marine? Tectonic questions include:
              What was the timing of the Cretaceous extension in the Ross Sea rift; where was
              it located? What is the basement composition and structure? Where are the time
              and space limits of the effects of Adare Trough spreading? Another drilling
              objective is to sample and date the sedimentary section bounding the mapped
              RSU6 unconformity in the Eastern Basin and Central Trough to resolve questions
              about its age and regional extent. Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP) Leg 28
              completed sampling at four drill sites in the early 1970's but had low recovery
              and did not sample the Early Cenozoic. Other drilling has been restricted to
              the McMurdo Sound area of the western Ross Sea and results can be correlated
              into the Victoria Land Basin but not eastward across basement highs. Further,
              Early Cenozoic and Cretaceous rocks have not been sampled. A new opportunity is
              developing to drill from the Ross Ice Shelf. This is a successor program to the
              Cape Roberts Drilling Project. One overriding difficulty is the need for site
              surveys at drilling locations under the ice shelf. This project will overcome
              this impediment by conducting marine geophysical drill site surveys at the
              front of the Ross Ice Shelf in the Central Trough and Eastern Basin. The
              surveys will be conducted a kilometer or two north of the ice shelf front where
              recent calving events have resulted in a southerly position of the ice shelf
              edge. In several years the northward advance of the ice shelf will override the
              surveyed locations and drilling could be accomplished. Systems to be used
              include swath bathymetry, gravity, magnetics, chirp sonar, high resolution
              seismic profiling, and 48 fold seismics. Cores will be collected to obtain
              samples for geotechnical properties, to study sub-ice shelf modern sedimentary
              processes, and at locations where deeper section is exposed.

This survey
              will include long profiles and detailed grids over potential drill sites.
              Survey lines will be tied to existing geophysical profiles and DSDP 270. A
              recent event that makes this plan timely is the calving of giant iceberg B-15
              (in March, 2000) and others from the ice front in the eastern Ross Sea. This
              new calving event and one in 1987 have exposed 16,000 square kilometers of
              seafloor that had been covered by ice shelf for decades and is not explored.
              Newly exposed territory can now be mapped by modern geophysical methods. This
              project will map geological structure and stratigraphy below unconformity RSU6
              farther south and east, study the place of Roosevelt Island in the Ross Sea
              rifting history, and determine subsidence history during Late Cenozoic time
              (post RSU6) in the far south and east. Finally the project will observe present
              day sedimentary processes beneath the ice shelf in the newly exposed areas.


