Title       : Developmental Biology Courseware that Integrates Multimedia Technology into the
               Laboratory and Classroom Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a0087657

Award Number: 0087657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary S. Tyler mtyler@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) It is paramount to the learning of science that
              students participate in science as active learners and researchers. The use of
              multimedia technology to facilitate this goal offers an inexpensive way of
              making materials available to a large number of students and encourages
              students to be independent learners. This project is developing multimedia
              courseware that makes a wealth of resources available to undergraduate college
              students who are exploring the field of developmental biology. This field has
              gained tremendous importance recently because of its relevance to our daily
              lives through techniques such as cloning, genetic engineering, assisted
              reproductive techniques, and our realization of environmental impacts on
              development. It is important that college students gain an understanding of
              this field and that educational materials be available that make it both
              exciting and accessible. The multimedia courseware this project is developing
              consists of an interactive CD-ROM that interfaces with an interactive Web site.
              This CD-ROM/Web hybrid instructs students on techniques and the biology of
              organisms used in this field. The courseware is called Vade Mecum, Latin for
              "go with me," which was a term used in the past to designate a manual or
              handbook, and is used here to refer to the portability of this courseware,
              aiding its usefulness as the student uses it to explore developmental biology.
              One of the strengths of Vade Mecum is that it is fully integrated with a
              laboratory manual and coordinated with a major textbook in the field. This
              creates a unified package that facilitates both teaching and learning. Vade
              Mecum uses QuickTime movies, QuickTime Virtual Reality modules, an extensive
              gallery of labeled photographs, interactive learning sequences, puzzles,
              questions, and Web links to communicate to students how to create their own
              investigative tools, how to work with various model organisms, and how to
              understand the complex life cycles and development of these organisms. Web
              modules allow and encourage students to post their own work and discussions in
              the "Virtual Poster Session" and "Virtual Round Table" sections. By showing
              students the methods for low-cost experiments, how to construct their own tools
              out of common, inexpensive materials, how to adapt an inexpensive microscope to
              have it perform as an expensive instrument, and by keeping the cost of the Vade
              Mecum CD to a minimum and making the Vade Mecum Web Site available to all, this
              course material will be useful to learning at all institutions regardless of
              their financial status.

