Title       : Mobile Agent-Based Active Monitoring of Computer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0087514

Award Number: 0087514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Tripathi tripathi@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The mobile agent technology offers many novel capabilities for building future
              generation systems for monitoring and management of large networks.  The goal
              of this research is to investigate and build a system infrastructure using
              mobile agents for active monitoring of large distributed systems.  Mobile
              agents would be used to perform remote information filtering and control
              functions, and such distributed and mobile agents could be securely modified to
              change their monitoring policies and functions.  If needed, new agents could be
              installed at a node to perform functions different from the existing ones.  The
              system would also support use of agent groups for cooperative distributed
              monitoring and collaborative filtering of monitored information.

The
              proposed infrastructure would provide a set of basic agent types for event
              monitoring, subscription, and information correlation and filtering.  This
              infrastructure would support experimentation's with different schemes for
              monitoring, dissemination, and processing of event data.  We would develop
              monitoring functions for different operating system platforms, such as Sun OS,
              Linux, and Windows NT.  We propose to experiment with intrusion detection
              techniques using this infrastructure.  We plan to use logic programming
              techniques for performing search and correlation operations on event data.  The
              event notification data would be stored in logic databases using Prolog. 
              Mobile agents would be used for performing filtering and correlation functions
              on data stored in such databases at different nodes.

Security and robustness
              of  operations would be an important design requirement for this
              infrastructure.  This system infrastructure would include mechanisms to monitor
              its own components and perform recovery actions on detecting any failures.  We
              would also develop a security architecture for mobile agents to execute in
              separate protection domains and at different security levels to minimize the
              impact of any corrupted or compromised agents.

The proposed system would be
              deployed in the research and instructional computing labs at the University of
              Minnesota to evaluate the effectiveness of its mechanisms.  This system would
              be implemented using the Ajanta agent programming system.  For this purpose,
              the capabilities of the Ajanta system would be enhanced to support secure agent
              groups and debugging facilities for large-scale agent based programs.  This
              monitoring infrastructure would be made available to the community for research
              and education activities.

