Title       : Dynamic Scaffolding to Improve Learning and Transfer of Hidden Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0087632

Award Number: 0087632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $662463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha C. Lovett lovett@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian W. Junker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel B. Greenhouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Koedinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Failure to learn hidden skills is a persistent obstacle to students in science,
              math, and engineering domains. Hidden skills, which include problem
              categorization, feature detection, and planning, are critical to solving
              problems in a domain but do not have any immediate, external product for
              students to see. Unfortunately, it is unclear how best to identify and teach
              these difficult-to-learn skills. Instructional scaffolding is a popular and
              effective technique for providing targeted support and guidance while students
              learn to solve problems in a new domain. Scaffolding has great potential for
              improving hidden-skill learning. However, the reasons it works and how best to
              implement it are largely unknown.

The proposed research will explain the
              effectiveness of instructional scaffolding in terms of hidden skill learning.
              Several hypotheses about the relationship between scaffolding and hidden skills
              will be tested, and new scaffolding designs will be evaluated. This will lead
              to a systematic approach to teaching hidden skills that improves students'
              learning and transfer. The four specific aims of this project are:
(1) Develop
              a systematic, efficient method for identifying hidden skills. While methods
              currently exist for analyzing domain-specific knowledge, these methods are not
              robust for identifying hidden skills, and they tend to be difficult and slow.
              This project will develop and test an automated method that combines logistic
              regression models and heuristic search algorithms to infer where hidden skills
              lie.
(2) Develop a theoretical explanation for why scaffolding works. Although
              instructional scaffolds often lead to better learning, there has been little
              theoretical progress in explaining when and how scaffolding works. A sequence
              of experiments will be conducted to test three hypotheses that offer
              increasingly concrete levels of explanation for how scaffolding benefits
              learning and transfer. 
(3) Develop practical guidelines for the design of
              effective instructional scaffolding. Three critical questions for scaffolding
              design will be examined: What level of scaffolding support is sufficient to
              achieve its main benefit? When and how should scaffolding support be built and
              faded? And how can human instructors (i.e., TA's) best complement a
              computerized scaffolded learning environment? 
(4) Develop novel applications
              of our results on scaffolding hidden skills. There are at least two novel
              applications of this work, beyond the scope of learning theory and
              instructional design. First, the scaffolding designs from Specific Aim 3 will
              be used to develop new on-line assessments of students' understanding. Second,
              the results from Specific Aim 1 will be used to develop tools that train
              instructors to "see" the hidden skills in complex problems and thus better
              anticipate students' learning difficulties.

