Title       : LTER Cross-Site: Contrasts of Global Change and Ecotonal Shifts: Buffering
               Effects of Mycorrhizae and Nurse Plants and Increased Sensitivity due to
               Herbivores and Mistletoe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0087017

Award Number: 0087017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Gehring Catherine.Gehring@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Whitham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce M. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087017
Gehring
	Global change models predict an increase in the frequency of
              intense drought in the continental interior of the US, and recent field studies
              have shown that semiarid ecosystems can be highly sensitive to this type of
              abiotic stress. For example, in the 1950's a severe drought in New Mexico
              resulted in high tree mortality that shifted ecotones by 2 kilometers in less
              than five years. Rapid, sustained ecotonal shifts depend on to processes: high
              rates of mortality of one or more of the dominant plant species in the
              ecosystem, and lack of recruitment of the dominant plant species following the
              mortality event. This LTER cross-site research will test the hypothesis that
              the probability that an ecotonal shift will occur depends on the degree of
              abiotic stress, and on the relative effects of positive and negative biotic
              associations on the dominant plant species. Positive associations, such as
              mycorrhizal associations and nurse plants, could buffer communities from major
              ecotonal shifts while negative associations with herbivores and parasites could
              increase sensitivity to global change. This study will focus on pinyon pine
              growing at the southern edge of their distribution in New Mexico and Arizona.
              Pinyon is an ideal candidate for global change studies because it is a dominant
              member of the third largest vegetation type in North America. Both
              paleoecological and recent studies show that pinyon is highly sensitive to
              environmental change. Much is known about the interactions among pinyon pine
              and its associated community, including is co-dominant tree associate and the
              bacteria, fungi, invertebrates and vertebrates that live in close association.
              This knowledge of broader interactions will allow a more accurate prediction of
              the effects of pinyon mortality on other members of the community and on
              ecosystem processes. 

