Title       : Enhancing The Sensitivity of Quadrupole Mass Spectrometers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0087041

Award Number: 0087041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislaw Legowski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bogdan M. Wilamowski  (Principal Investigator former)
              David A. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The primary goal of this project is to enhance the resolution and
              sensitivity of
mass spectrometers by two or three orders of magnitude. A
              secondary goal is to reduce power consumption. Combined, these goals will lead
              to the development of a portable
mass spectrometer with greater sensitivity
              than current, large mass spectrometers. This
will allow the quantitative
              analysis of low concentration compounds with little or no
sample preparation.
              This mass spectrometer could be widely used for environmental
assessment and
              for many other applications.

Three innovations will accomplish these goals.
              The first is the use of a cascading
DC/RF and RF-only quadrupole mass filter.
              This new filter will give excellent mass
resolution. It is also much less
              sensitive to mechanical tolerances, so small filters can be
built, and this
              leads to a large reduction in electrical power requirements.

The second
              innovation is the use of an integrated Faraday cup/VLSI amplifier
detector.
              Unconventional CMOS design leads to a single stage dc current gains
              of
100,000,000. Using extremely low biasing currents, differential and narrow
              frequency
ban operation will result also in significant improvement of the
              signal to noise ratio. This
detector will detect ion currents 1,000 times
              smaller than the conventional electron
multiplier detectors, and the
              performance of the VLSI detector should be much more
stable.

The third
              innovation is the addition of AC modulation to the detector circuitry.
This
              eliminates noise due to DC drift, thereby greatly improving the signal-to-noise
              ratio.
Results of this research may give the University of Wyoming a
              competitive edge
for obtaining additional funding for future research. Several
              government agencies may be
interested in expanding our results. Results of the
              proposed research may also generate a
significant interest in the private
              sector. Several branches of our economy may be
interested in portable mass
              spectrometers including the pharmaceutical industry, the
environmental
              remediation industry, the semiconductor industry, the petroleum industry,
and
              the mining industry.

