Title       : A Field Study on GPR for Non-Invasive Measurement of Soil Moisture and a
               Preliminary Investigation of GPR-Remote Sensing Imagery Correlations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0087802

Award Number: 0087802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Rubin rubin@arimor.ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087802
Rubin

Information on soil moisture is vital in several areas of
              scientific research.  In hydrology and meteorology, the near-surface soil
              moisture content is needed for accurately estimating the exchange of heat and
              vapor fluxes between the surface and the atmosphere, which is a crucial
              component of global circulation models.  Frequent monitoring of soil moisture
              over large regions could significantly improve our ability to predict soil
              erosion and mass movement.  Shallow soil moisture content is extremely
              important in determining the migration of contaminants from the ground
              surface.

Soil moisture is highly variable in both space and time.  Current
              instruments for measuring soil moisture, such as neutron probe or time domain
              reflectometry (TDR), offer reasonable solutions in terms of efforts and
              accuracy for measurement at a fixed location.  These methods, however, become
              practically useless for collecting data over large areas since they require
              drilling and sample only small volumes of soil.  Additionally, one cannot
              discount the effects of drilling on the data.  Currently, no technique is
              available to accurately provide soil water content measurements over the
              spatial and temporal scales necessary for estimating, monitoring and modeling
              moisture movement in the vadose zone.

The focus of the project is to
              investigate the potential of Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) as a tool for
              large-scale monitoring of shallow subsurface soil moisture (down to depths of
              2-3 meters).  The work includes a series of experiments to determine optimal
              GPR data acquisition parameters, simple interpretation methods, effects of soil
              texture and moisture variability on the GPR response, and criteria for
              assessing accuracy and reliability.  The experiments will be conducted both
              under controlled conditions at a constructed test site, at outcrops, and at a
              naturally heterogeneous field site in Napa Valley, CA.  The work will be used
              to evaluate GPR technology and interpretation methods for various soil types
              and saturations.  The controlled experiments will address (1) the sensitivity
              of GPR to variations in saturation and to variations (vertical and lateral) in
              soil types; (2) the effect of erosional surfaces and boundaries between soil
              horizons on the GPR response; (3) sensitivity to clay; and (4) optimal data
              acquisition and interpretation techniques.  The field experiments will test the
              method under natural conditions at a geologically heterogeneous site at
              different times of year.

The multidisciplinary team from U.C. Berkeley and
              Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) is well poised to make significant
              progress in developing methods that would enable more accurate and extensive
              estimates of soil water content for use in global circulation models, drought
              management, vadose zone contaminant transport and geotechnical problems.

