Title       : Collaborative Research: Chemical Weathering in Taylor Valley Streams: Sources,
               Mechanisms and Global Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0087915

Award Number: 0087915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227112             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Berry Lyons lyons.142@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen A. Nezat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0087915
Lyons

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative research
              program to study low temperature chemical and physical weathering processes in
              the Dry Valleys region of Antarctica. Chemical weathering is thought to affect
              global climate by consuming carbon dioxide (CO2) during processes such as
              silicate hydrolysis. This CO2 "buffer" can create climate change by controlling
              the atmospheric concentration of this important greenhouse gas. Because the
              principle controls on chemical weathering rates have been argued to be
              temperature and moisture, enhanced chemical weathering is thought to occur in
              warmer climates. The geochemistry of a number of ephemeral streams in Taylor
              Valley, Antarctica (~78 degrees) has been analyzed. These streams flow for 4 to
              10 weeks per year and are associated with dry-based glaciers. Solutes produced
              from chemical weathering such as major cations, minor elements (e.g., rubidium,
              cesium, lithium, strontium, and barium), bicarbonate and dissolved reactive
              silica, as well as isotopes (87Sr/86Sr) indicate that chemical weathering does
              occur in these polar desert streams. Although the mechanism/process of
              weathering is unknown, it is hypothesized that either the high coincidence of
              freezing/thawing cycles and/or the unusual hydrologic behavior of the hyporheic
              zone in these streams are responsible for the high chemical weathering rates
              that have been computed. In this proposal, the plan is to build upon the
              initial work of the McMurdo Dry Valleys Long Term Ecological Research
              (MCM-LTER) team and others by better establishing weathering rates and
              weathering mechanisms by elucidating the role of physical weathering via
              cryogenic processes on chemical weathering. The suspended matter in streams
              from the Lake Bonney basin in Taylor Valley, and the Onyx Valley in Wright
              Valley will be analyzed for their bulk chemistry and compared to rock types in
              the valleys to establish what materials are being weathered. Emphasis will be
              placed on the utilization of uranium series geochemistry to better ascertain
              solute sources. The laboratory experiments will be done to establish the role
              of microfracturing via freeze-thaw cycles on chemical weathering. Major rock
              types occurring in Taylor and Wright Valleys will be used for these
              experiments. All of the data will be used to draw analogies to historic
              weathering regimes on Earth during colder, drier climatic regimes.
