Title       : RUI: Analysis of an Early-Middle Devonian Ecosystem: Trout Valley Formation,
               Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0087433

Award Number: 0087433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gastaldo ragastal@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              RUI: Analysis of an Early-Middle Devonian Ecosystem: Trout Brook,
              Maine

Robert Gastaldo and Robert E. Nelson

Ear-0087433

The Trout
              Valley Formation, Maine, preserves one of the few terrestrial ecosystems of the
              Early to Middle Devonian (Emsian-Eifelian) age.  It has been used as the prima
              facie model of early terrestrial community structure in which a mosaic of
              opportunist plants populated the landscape.  It is thought that these plants
              were clonal mainly because sexual reproduction in these plants is thought to be
              relatively rare (based upon the ration between vegetative and
              sporangium-bearing plants).  Within this vegetational mosaic, interactions
              between plants and animals was restricted to detritus feeding, as deduced from
              animal morphologies, coprolite distribution, and the nature of plant damage. 
              
The interpretation of this landscape is based upon scant published field
              data, of which the environmental context and depositional setting has been
              interpreted previously as a brackish delta setting.  There appears to be little
              evidence to support this environmental context, and there are no taphonomic
              data to support the ecological reconstruction.  The proposed research will be
              conducted by undergraduate majors in Geology as senior independent projects
              that include both field and laboratory studies.  Undergraduates will test four
              hypotheses focusing on: (1) the stratigraphic sequence of the Trout Valley
              Formation: (2) the taphonomic signature of plant fossil assemblages; (3) the
              associated terrestrial macroinvertebrates and early ecosystem structure; and
              (4) the plant-animal interactions that may be recorded in these assemblages. 
              Students will develop an environmental framework in which the fossil
              assemblages can be placed for a more accurate understanding of their genesis;
              constrain the plant and animal taphonomic signatures of the assemblages within
              the outcrop belt from which a more realistic paleoenvironmental reconstruction
              can be produced; and investigate the evolutionary level of plant-animal
              interactions recorded in the Early-Middle Devonian. 


