Title       : Detailed Chemical Kinetic Modeling of the Homogeneous Chemical Nucleation of
               Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0087315

Award Number: 0087315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Swihart swihart@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title:			Detailed Chemical Kinetic Modeling of
              the
				Homogeneous Chemical Nucleation of nanoparticles
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-0087315
Principal Investigator:		Mark
              Swihart
Institution:			SUNY Buffalo

The objective of this proposal is to
              construct mechanistic models of chemical reactions for use in the prediction of
              cluster formation leading to the production of particle nuclei.  The major
              challenge is constructing mechanistic models is the extreme complexity created
              by accounting for all possible reactions, products, and reactive intermediates.
               Automatic generation of reaction mechanisms will be used to deal with the
              complexity.  A system will be developed to convert a set of reactants and rules
              by which they react into a detailed chemical mechanisms with rate parameters. 
              The PIs plan to focus on silicon deposition because this system is of
              importance in the microelectronics industry and because some experimental data
              on this system are available for comparison with simulations.  This approach
              will be employed to predict silicon nanoparticle contaminant formation, which
              is a leading cause of yield loss, in semiconductor processing.  This project
              will be a collaboration between the PI and co-PI (Linda Broadbelt) at
              Northwestern University.  This work could lead to a more general predictive
              description of a particle formation.  Model validation will be performed with
              limited data available in the literature.  This work may be useful in
              predicting the effects for changing operating conditions on particle formation
              and contamination with the potential to increase yields of semiconductor
              materials.




                                                          
