Title       : LTER Cross-site: Collaborative Research: Effects of Different-sized Grazers on
               Nitrogen Cycling across a Grassland Productivity Gradient.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0087206

Award Number: 0087206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes M. Knops jknops2@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087206
Knops
Herbivorous mammals can have profound effects on the
              sustainability and productivity of grasslands through their effects on nutrient
              cycling. Recent studies suggest that herbivores can accelerate the cycling of
              nitrogen by returning mineral nitrogen in urine and feces to the soil and
              favoring more nutrient-rich and decomposable plants. Alternatively, they can
              slow down nutrient cycling by modifying the species composition of plant
              communities, reducing litter quality, and slowing decomposition. However, an
              important question remains: what controls which of these effects herbivores
              will have?
	This LTER cross-site research project addresses six major
              hypotheses about what controls mammalian herbivore effects on nitrogen cycling
              in temperate grasslands. These hypotheses suggest that herbivore effects may
              vary in response to productivity, the prevalence of legumes in the plant
              community, and the susceptibility of soil to compaction. In addition, the
              density of different sized herbivores and their migratory versus seasonal use
              of grasslands may influence nitrogen cycling. Hypotheses will be tested by
              measuring herbivore impacts on nitrogen cycling within an existing cross-site
              study of the effects of different sized herbivores on grassland biodiversity
              and ecosystem function. These sites encompass a wide range of productivity,
              legume abundance, soil types, and patterns of seasonal use by herbivores. 
	By
              comparing particular pairs of sites to test specific hypotheses and examining
              broad patterns in herbivore effects across all sites, this study will provide
              unique insights that are not possible with studies at a single site. The
              research will allow understanding of how different herbivore species affect the
              sustainable production of grasslands at sites with different productivity,
              plant species composition and soil types. Such information is critical to
              evaluating the role of mammalian herbivores, including domestic livestock, in
              the sustainable use and conservation of grasslands. 

