Title       : LTER Cross-Site: Models as Tools for Synthesis of the Effects of Hurricanes on
               Temperate and Tropical Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0087214

Award Number: 0087214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Canham ccanham@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ned Fetcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce L. Haines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas V. Brokaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0087214
Canham
	Hurricanes represent the dominant natural disturbance in both
              temperate forests of northeastern North America and the tropical forests of the
              Caribbean islands. A series of devastating hurricanes in the Caribbean in the
              past two decades has stimulated an enormous amount of research on the effects
              of wind disturbance on tropical forests. One of the most consistent lessons has
              been that the responses of tropical forests can be astonishingly swift, with
              recovery occurring on time scales of years or less. This suggests that
              hurricanes represent far less of a perturbation to tropical forests than to
              temperate forests. Despite the extensive body of literature generated in the
              wake of these storms, the relative importance of hurricanes for the structure
              and dynamics of tropical versus temperate forests is open to debate. 
	The
              most general objective of the proposed LTER cross-site research is to follow up
              on a project initiated under SGER funding to develop a SORTIE model for forest
              dynamics following hurricane disturbance in the Caribbean, and to use the
              resulting model from that funding to address a broad suite of hypotheses on the
              effects of hurricane disturbance regimes on species diversity, community
              dynamics, and ecosystem structure in temperate and tropical forests. Given the
              likelihood that climate change will alter future patterns of hurricane
              frequency and intensity, this research is not as interested in documenting the
              effects of past storms as exploring the consequences of a broad range of
              variation in future storm severity and frequency. This research will take
              advantage of the wealth of empirical research on the ecological effects of
              hurricanes at two LTER sites. As in previous research with SORTIE, the basic
              approach will be to tightly link field studies and new methods of data analysis
              with model development. The proposed model will have five basic sub-models.
              Each of the five sub-models will be tightly linked to new empirical research or
              new analyses of existing LTER datasets to provide the necessary parameter
              values. 
Besides providing an integrated platform for comparison of
              disturbance dynamics in temperate versus tropical forests, experience suggests
              that the new model will play a significant role in guiding new empirical
              research at each of these sites.

