Title       : Development of the Undergraduate Physical Chemistry Laboratory: Laser-Based
               System for Spectroscopic and Kinetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0087145

Award Number: 0087145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Victoria M. Bragin                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kazushige Yokoyama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12) Insufficient instrumentation currently limits curriculum
              diversity in the Physical Chemistry Laboratory conducted at this institution.
              With a survey indicating that many students are not motivated to study physical
              chemistry, the challenge has been to develop course content which encourages
              these students. This project consists of setting up a new physical chemistry
              curriculum based
on a wavelength tunable nanosecond pulse laser system. The
              objectives are: (1) to expose students to interdisciplinary topics which
              integrate the fields of biology, physics, and chemistry, and (2) to include
              topics on fast kinetics and electronic relaxation. Topics will include the
              inversion rate of sucrose catalyzed by enzyme, conformational transition of
              polypeptides or diblock co-polymer, the effect of a quencher on the electronic
              relaxation of an aromatic compound, solvent response to fast heat flow, and
              photolysis of benzophenone. These topics demonstrate how physical chemistry
              concepts are applied to biological systems and introduce the concept of real
              time probing of a chemical event. Core instrument of this project is a Nd:YAG
              pumped Optical Parametric Oscillator (OPO) based laser spectrometer system.
              Included in this OPO-based system are monochromator, photomultiplier tube
              detector, digital storage oscilloscope, and a CCD camera. The proposed system
              enables introduction of previously unstudied experimental methods: optical
              rotation, scattering experiment, fluorescence lifetime measurement, thermal
              lens calorimetry, and laser-flash photolysis. Planned laboratory experiments
              are adaptations from the Journal of Physical Chemistry and the program at
              Harvey Mudd College which was supported by earlier NSF funding. The evaluation
              will be provided by an off-campus advisory committee.
