Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Diversity Partitioning during a Marine Biotic Invasion:
               Middle and Late Ordovician, Cincinnati Arch and Nashville Dome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0087084

Award Number: 0087084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Patzkowsky brachio@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Although ecologists and paleoecologists have long sought to
              understand what controls biotic diversity, modern biological crises such as
              widespread extinction and the introduction of exotic species have made this
              search for understanding increasingly urgent.  Modern ecological studies are
              well suited for describing and predicting the short-term ecological
              interactions and changes that occur during biotic invasions, that is, the
              large-scale introduction of exotic species to a region.  However,
              paleontological studies are much better suited for documenting the long-term
              impacts of such episodes as well as identifying the rules by which ecosystems
              are constructed or dismantled. 
Most previous studies of fossil biotic
              invasions have come from relatively young deposits from the Cenozoic Era (from
              65 million years old to the present).  Study of much older biotic invasions is
              needed to determine whether the outcome of these younger biotic invasions is
              typical of biotic invasions throughout geologic history.  Conservation
              strategies will depend on whether a few simple rules for the long-term effects
              of biotic invasions exist or whether the long-term effects of any given
              invasion are idiosyncratic and less likely to be predictable.
PIs propose to
              document how a marine ecosystem responded to a Late Ordovician (454 to 444
              million years ago) biotic invasion that affected shallow marine communities in
              the region stretching from Cincinnati, Ohio to Nashville, Tennessee. 
              Specifically, they will determine for this 10 million-year window of time how
              diversity changed within individual ecological communities (alpha diversity),
              how the distinctiveness of ecological communities changed (beta diversity), and
              how the diversity changed over this entire geographic region (gamma diversity).
              Because each of these measures of diversity is linked to specific ecological
              predictions regarding the importance of incumbency of species, vacant
              ecological niches, and ecological interactions between species, our study will
              be able not only to document changes in diversity partitioning, but will
              identify the ecological roots of those changes.  Their research will build on
              their previous studies in the Nashville region and will use advanced
              sequence-stratigraphic frameworks to reconstruct environmental conditions and
              to establish the temporal sequence of events within the region.  PIs expect
              that the methods they will develop for studying biotic invasions may be useful
              for studying biotic crises in other parts of the geological record.


