Title       : Completion of Case Studies for the "Learning through Technology (LT2)" Web site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0087150

Award Number: 0087150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Millar simillar@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Mathieu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre R. Bayard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) College-level science, mathematics, engineering, and
              technology (SMET) faculty are increasingly expected to educate all students to
              be scientifically literate, to develop the ranks of future scientists,
              engineers, and technicians, and to prepare K-12 teachers who are fully prepared
              to teach science and mathematics. They are expected to achieve these goals in
              the context of a national reform movement in undergraduate SMET education,
              while also making appropriate and (at times) transformative use of new
              computer-based learning technologies. Faculty typically find only a few
              professional development resources to assist them in meeting these daunting
              expectations. This project is working to meet these needs by constructing a
              complete, web-based professional development site. This site will give faculty
              access to 9 case studies covering a variety of SMET disciplines of effective
              "Learning Through Technology" (LT2). These cases are focused on certain types
              of learning technologies that seem particularly promising in SMET disciplines.
              All are computer based, connected to well-established teaching methods, and
              enable some of the following learning activities: visualization, simulation,
              data analysis, interpersonal interaction, software-based feedback, locating
              pertinent information, and improved student "creativity." The case studies
              combined with other elements of the site will provide important information to
              faculty seeking to learn more about computer-based learning applications and
              how to implement these effectively. The project is building on an earlier
              discovery that the implementation of this technology matters at least as much
              as the technology itself. The web-site is designed to emulate "hallway
              conversations" that characterize how many faculty share crucial information
              about new technical developments. This resource is being designed to ease the
              way for faculty to learn how to use instructional technology to improve student
              learning. This resource also teaches faculty about technology pitfalls to avoid
              and provides them access to a series of vignettes that provides more breadth
              and depth while demonstrating how their faculty peers are integrating
              instructional technology into their courses. It is anticipated that this will
              raise the rate of adaptation and implementation of exemplary materials and
              practices using instructional technology.
