Title       : Integrating Atomic Force Microscopy into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a0087833

Award Number: 0087833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63829              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Lehmpuhl lehmpuhl@uscolo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Colorado
	      2200 Bonforte Blvd
	      Pueblo, CO  810014901    719/549-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
In order that students achieve a better understanding of the
              atomic nature of matter and to provide technologically advanced yet
              increasingly ubiquitous instrumentation for undergraduate laboratories and
              research, we are integrating atomic force microscopy (AFM) into three facets of
              the chemistry curriculum. In many academic and industrial settings AFM is
              becoming a routine tool. With its unique capability for "seeing" atoms and its
              ability to image under ambient conditions and in liquids, AFM provides a
              technologically advanced solution to many problems facing undergraduate
              chemistry students. The project adapts several experiments from the literature
              into various levels of the curriculum in order to enhance the study of atomic
              and molecular structure. At the freshman level, AFM instrumentation is being
              demonstrated in the laboratory while images are presented and discussed in the
              classroom to provide a "proof" of the existence of atoms and to give students a
              sense of atomic size. This basic foundation in AFM paves the way for hands-on
              laboratory experiences for upper division chemistry, biochemistry and some
              biology majors. Mica, silica or graphite are being imaged along with an
              "exotic" sample in the instrumental analysis laboratory. As an exciting new use
              for AFM, an experiment suitable for incorporation into the biochemistry
              laboratory is being developed. Finally, an AFM provides the instrumentation
              needed to support three diverse research projects guided by three professors.
              Undergraduate students are investigating atmospheric particulate matter of
              environmental concern, modified silica surfaces for use in chromatographic
              stationary phases, and environmental factors affecting cell surface
              glycopeptides in the Penicillium mold.
