Title       : Creation of an Interdisciplinary Earth Materials Testing Laboratory to Enhance
               Undergraduate Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0087476

Award Number: 0087476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28022              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Lemke klemke@uwsp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Ozsvath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Hefferan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Stevens Pt
	      2100 Main Street
	      Stevens Point, WI  54481    715/346-2632

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40)

This project is enhancing scientific literacy
              through the acquisition of laboratory equipment to create a modern Earth
              Materials Testing Laboratory. The development of hands-on, inquiry based
              laboratory activities allows students the opportunity to explore, test and
              analyze various behaviors and characteristics of earth materials. The project
              emphasizes experience in field sampling and laboratory experimentation with
              actual earth materials. This Earth Materials Testing Laboratory accommodates
              eight lower and upper level science courses, impacting approximately 500
              students per semester. This includes students enrolled in classes that satisfy
              the University's science general degree requirement, education majors
              (elementary, middle and secondary), students obtaining minors in geography,
              geology, earth science and natural science, and students obtaining majors in
              geography and natural science. Laboratory activities focus on five themes
              related to earth materials testing. These themes include (1) material sampling
              and description, (2) analysis of grain size distribution; (3) measurement of
              sediment properties; (4) illustration and testing of material responses to
              environmental stresses; and (5) illustration and testing of fluvial processes.
              These themes allow students to develop an inherent understanding of the
              processes by which earth materials impact their lives through simulation of
              mass wasting, hydrologic flow, sediment transport and the response of earth
              materials to stress. These five themes cut across the earth science curriculum
              and allow students to appreciate the interrelationships between courses in a
              curriculum. By participating in scientific inquiry, students are gaining a
              deeper appreciation for the scientific method. These earth science exercises
              are being augmented using digital video posted to the Internet which allows
              students to compare and contrast their experimental results. Materials are
              being adapted from projects at Oklahoma State University, the University of
              South Carolina, Southeast Missouri State University, and the University of
              Alberta as well as those described in the Journal of Geoscience Education and
              other journals in the field.

