Title       : LCE: Reliability-Based Simulation for Performance-Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0087032

Award Number: 0087032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439024             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeru Igusa tigusa@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Q. Naiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Ellingwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Engineering Sciences for Modeling and Simulation-Based Life-Cycle
              Engineering (LCE) grant provides funding for the development of advanced
              computational tools to forecast the response of complex structural systems to
              extreme natural phenomena hazards, to analyze uncertainties, and to manage
              risk.   Time-dependent structural reliability methods will be developed to 
              provide the interfaces between models of the uncertain environment, physical
              models of the structural system, and its performance requirements.  Databases
              and other information from experiment or field data, model simulation, and
              expert opinion will be incorporated using a computational Bayes framework. 
              Highly efficient techniques for evaluating structural performance under
              uncertainty using sharpened methods for determining inclusion-exclusion bounds,
              will be investigated.  The methods will be demonstrated using a testbed problem
              of significant current interest:  fragility modeling of building structural
              systems subjected to severe earthquake stochastic ground motions.

If
              successful, the decision tools developed in this research will provide a living
              picture of a complex civil infrastructure facility during its service life of
              50 to 100 years, which could be used as a basis for the new performance-based
              design paradigm and for managing facility risk due to extreme natural hazards. 
               In recent post-disaster assessments of  building performance  during
              earthquakes and hurricanes, it has been found that current design practices do
              not prevent non-life-threatening forms of structural damage and functional
              disruptions that may lead to direct economic and opportunity costs that
              approach or exceed the cost of the structure.  The public is demanding
              engineering solutions with more predictable and controlled performance, greater
              durability, and lower life-cycle costs.   A demonstration of advanced
              decision-theoretic technologies on an appropriate civil infrastructure testbed
              problem would accelerate improvements and enhance competition in building
              technologies and in structural design, minimize the need for prototype testing,
              and lower the risk of death, injury and property damage from natural hazards.

