Title       : An Interdisciplinary Collaboration on Performance Aspects of a High Performance
               Wireless Research and Education Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0087344

Award Number: 0087344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2300230            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Werner Braun hwb@nlanr.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Vernon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1087,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   An unresolved and underdeveloped area for the evolving Internet is the
              issue of ubiquity. Rural areas
across the nation are affected by the lack of
              network access; solutions are either prohibitively expensive,
or many years
              away from implementation. The research and education communities have
              immediate
connection needs, for researchers working in remote areas (in the
              field, in observatories, and with
autonomous telemetry sensors) and for remote
              educational facilities, at reasonable performance levels to
the Internet.
   
               The goal of this project is to create a substantial and robust wireless
              backbone network for bidirectional
traffic flows by expanding upon a prototype
              connection recently installed by the Measurement and Network
Analysis Group of
              the National Laboratory for Applied Network Research (NLANR) and the San
              Diego
Supercomputer Center (SDSC), the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
              (SIO), as well as the School of
Engineering and its Center for Wireless
              Communications (CWC).
     This proposal is a collaboration between network
              researchers and disciplinary researchers in geophysics,
and other fields.
              Multiple different users with different impacts will help to define and
              understand
requirements, as well as appropriate parameters for the
              implementation of a high performance wireless
networking environment, with
              high performance extending beyond raw speed and including aspects
              of
predictability, as well as spacial and temporal availability. The project
              is heavily leveraged with the existing
network measurement and analysis
              activity of NLANR, as well as the seismic measurement and analysis
activities
              at SIO.
     The immediate impact of providing services to researchers and
              telemetry stations in the field and a delivery mechanism for distance education
              in disadvantaged areas (in San Diego County) is clear. This network will have
              the technological capability to accommodate a high volume of data (for both
              communications and telemetry), thus increasing the scope and area of many
              projects currently limited by these constraints. The wireless network's primary
              function as an applied test bed to address distance access issues over
              a
relatively large rural area in general, and to assess performance
              characteristics of such a network will result in long-term developments and
              advances in the area of Internet technology.
     The impact of this Internet
              Technologies project will be substantial and wide-spread. Benefits to
              the
research and education communities - and ultimately, the public - include
              improved functional capabilities
(across a variety of disciplines),
              facilitated collaborations between institutions, better and more
              reliable
network access, and a prototype which can be emulated throughout
              rural areas in the U.S.
