Title       : Radar Backscatter Characteristics Using Numerical Simulation of the Medium and
               Scattering Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0240829

Award Number: 0240829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Franke pfranke@colorado-research.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Fritts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Werne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Franke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              State-of-the-art numerical techniques will be used in this project to simulate
              the radar backscatter from the middle atmosphere thereby providing a direct
              coupling between the dynamics in the radar volume and parameters computed from
              the radar signal (e.g. velocities, momentum fluxes, and energy dissipation
              rates). For the first time a direct numerical simulation (DNS) of evolving
              turbulence structures with sufficient resolution to resolve the Bragg scale
              features and a DNS of the Maxwell equations are integrated to study this
              problem. A fluid simulation will provide volumes containing turbulent
              structures formed during the evolution of a Kelvin-Helmholtz instability or
              breaking gravity waves. This numerical tool is a high resolution simulation
              capable of resolving the full turbulence spectrum, allowing the radar Bragg
              scale to be specified within the inertial range of turbulence thereby
              permitting the computation of all turbulence and radar backscatter quantities.
              These structures will be integrated into a Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD)
              implementation of the Maxwell equations which provides an accurate calculation
              of the scattering from the complex structures generated by the fluid code. The
              integration of these two simulations creates a unique capability to aid in the
              investigation of the scattering mechanism for different types of radar systems
              and how these processes affect the results derived from the radar signals with
              few underlying assumptions.
