Title       : Classical Concepts in Quantum Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0240328

Award Number: 0240328
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alisa Bokulich abokulic@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The rapidly growing body of scientific literature in fields such as
              semi-classical mechanics, mesoscopic physics, and quantum chaos is raising new
              questions about the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics. Far
              from being obsolete, the concepts of classical mechanics are playing a central
              role in discovering new phenomena and coming to a deeper understanding of
              quantum theory. Despite these important developments there still does not exist
              a book in the history and philosophy of science literature devoted to an
              examination of the relationship between these two theories. The objective of
              this research is to produce such a book. This project begins with the
              realization that the traditional frameworks for understanding intertheoretic
              relations are inadequate. The complex and subtle relationship between classical
              and quantum mechanics is not captured by the well-known models of reductionism,
              pluralism, nor the classical limit. In searching for a new framework, Bokulich
              turns to the history of physics, examining how the founders of quantum theory
              viewed the relationship of that theory to classical mechanics. Her work will
              provide an important contribution to the history of physics literature by
              showing how Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and Paul Dirac, all members of the
              so-called Copenhagen interpretation, each had a distinctive philosophy of the
              relationship between classical and quantum mechanics. Of these three views she
              proposes that Dirac's philosophy of intertheoretic relations provides the best
              framework for understanding recent developments in quantization and
              semiclassical mechanics. Building on this historical work, Bokulich considers
              how recent developments in are a continuation of Dirac's program to make
              precise the similarities between the mathematical structures of classical and
              quantum mechanics. Her investigation will provide a new and important testing
              ground for the philosophical view known as structural realism. To further build
              her case, Bokulich next turns to an examination of semiclassical theory and its
              application in the field of quantum chaos. She focuses her investigation on a
              particular area of experimental research in which classical orbits are being
              used not only to investigate, but to explain causally, quantum phenomena. These
              experiments raise pressing philosophical questions about the epistemological
              status of classical concepts in quantum theory. These two case studies,
              quantization and quantum chaos, provide examples of scientific discoveries that
              come only through a careful study of the relationship between classical and
              quantum mechanics. Bokulich contends that these two case studies will also shed
              new light on the traditional philosophical problems of reductionism and
              realism. As an interdisciplinary work that integrates historical,
              philosophical, and scientific perspectives, Bokulich's book will help further
              the fruitful dialogue between researchers in these diverse fields.
