Title       : Quantile Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0240781

Award Number: 0240781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Koenker Rkoenker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project extends the domain of applicability of quantile regressions to
              three important and fast growing areas of economic research---survival
              analysis, models with endogeneity, and portfolio theory.  Besides theoretical
              extensions, the research project will also areas continue working on problems
              broadly relating to quantile regression and its applications.  This research
              project relies on the penalty method.  Quantile regression, as introduced in
              Koenker and Bassett (1978), is gradually evolving into a comprehensive approach
              to the statistical analysis of linear and nonlinear response models.  It is
              capable of greatly expanding the flexibility of both parametric and
              non-parametric statistical methods. Research is proposed on a broad range of
              problems related to quantile regression. Panel, or longitudinal, data analysis
              is still predominately the province of Gaussian random effects models, however
              there is often a strong motivation in applications for estimating conditional
              quantile models. Exploiting the close relationship between random effects
              estimation and penalty methods research is proposed on a L1 approach for
              quantile regression random effects estimation. 

Considerable progress has
              been made on inference in quantile regression over the course of the PI's
              current (2000-02) grant. The objective of the 1999 proposal was to extend the
              theoretical developments in Koenker and Machado (1999) for inference based on
              the quantile regression, extending the results to composite null hypotheses
              involving unknown nuisance parameters. Koenker and Xiao (2002) describes a
              general approach to such problems based on an ingenious suggestion by Khmaladze
              (1981). The classical Doob-Meyer decomposition is employed to transform a
              parametric version of the quantile regression process, rendering it
              asymptotically distribution free. In related work on survival analysis, Koenker
              and Geling (2001) and Koenker and Bilias (2001) attention is focused on more
              general hypotheses about covariate effects on the scale and tail behavior of
              the response, motivated by the Lehmann (1974) quantile treatment effect.
              Related software has been made available on the web. 

Although there is
              already quite an extensive literature on quantile regression methods for
              time-series, most of the attention has focused on iid error, pure location
              shift model. In collaboration with Zhijie Xiao, work will be done on more
              general specifications, focusing initially on a class of models that exhibit
              some features of persistent "unit-root" behavior, while also exhibiting a
              sporadic form of mean reversion. These models pose serious technical
              challenges, but offer considerable potential for broadening the scope of
              applied time series analysis. The results of this research could have enormous
              impact on time series and panel data analyses.

