Title       : Structure and Function of Membrane Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0240447

Award Number: 0240447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasanthi Jayaraman vasanthi.jayaraman@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-5847

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              					Lay Summary

Communication between nerve cells serves as the basis of all
              brain activity. One of the fundamental steps involved in signal transmission
              between the nerve cells, is the conversion of a chemical signal liberated at
              the end of one nerve cell, into an electrical signal at the second nerve cell.
              This step is mediated by a class of membrane bound proteins known as
              neurotransmitter receptors. An important member of this family is the glutamate
              receptor, which is the focus of this study. These receptors bind to the
              chemical signaling molecule glutamate (ligand) and generate an electrical
              signal through the formation of transmembrane ion channels. Dr. Jayaraman's
              laboratory has used vibrational spectroscopy to identify specific interactions
              between the glutamate receptor protein and ligands such as glutamate. Since,
              the vibrations of these chemical moieties are controlled by their atomic-level
              environment, probing these by infrared light has provided insight into the
              interaction between the protein and the ligand. Dr. Jayaraman will investigate
              the identified ligand:protein interactions in a time-resolved manner. For these
              investigations glutamate will be photolytically released in the microsecond
              timescale using caged glutamate and the kinetic evolution of the vibrational
              spectral signatures of the ligand and protein will be investigated as the
              protein evolves from the unligated to the ligated states. These high-resolution
              structural and kinetic studies are required for a basic understanding of
              interactions that control protein-ligand recognition and will eventually allow
              the design of drugs that can alter the behavior of glutamate receptors. Such
              drugs may be useful in the treatment of traumatic head injury, and memory
              problems.

