Title       : 4d and 5d Transition Metal Oxides: A New Frontier of Materials with Exotic
               Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0240813

Award Number: 0240813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Cao cao@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award supports a systematic effort to elucidate
              underlying physics of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides. These systems are
              a new class of materials characterized by strong coupling between different
              degrees of freedom and the coexistence of different kinds of ordering. Recent
              discoveries show a glimpse of intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron
              based ruthenates (Sr,Ca)(n+1)Ru(n)O(3n+1) and 5d-electron based iridates
              Sr(n+1)Ir(n)O(3n+1), and provide strong motivation for a thorough
              investigation. These layered materials exhibit an astonishing
              dimensionality-dependence of physical properties and a wide array of exotic
              phenomena including coexistence of fermion-quasiparticle and nonmetallic
              characteristics, inter-plane tunneling magnetoresistance, colossal
              magnetoresistance (CMR), drastically different anisotropies of the CMR and
              magnetization, p-wave superconductivity, metamagnetism, "diamagnetism" in an
              insulating state, etc. These phenomena reflect new physics, and it is this new
              physics that needs to be thoroughly studied. The planned program includes
              single crystal growth (both flux and floating zone methods) and experimental
              studies of thermal, electronic, magnetic and structural properties of these
              materials as a function of temperature, chemical doping, magnetic field and
              pressure. Graduate students involved in the research will receive rigorous
              training with an emphasis on materials developments, synthesis, and
              characterizations. This type of training in our graduate education is
              particularly needed nowadays as the lack of scientists who specialize in both
              developing new materials and growing single crystals has already hindered
              advancements in condensed matter physics in the US. 

This individual
              investigator award supports a systematic effort to elucidate underlying physics
              of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides, which are by and large an uncharted
              territory rich with novel physical phenomena that cannot be explained through
              our conventional understanding.  Recent discoveries show a glimpse of
              intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron based ruthenates and 5d-electron
              based iridates, and provide strong motivation for a thorough investigation.
              These layered materials exhibit an astonishing dimensionality-dependence of
              physical properties and a wide array of exotic phenomena including novel
              superconductivity and the coexistence of different kinds of ordering, which are
              conventionally expected to exclude each other, etc. These phenomena largely
              defy conventional wisdom and reflect new physics, and it is this new physics
              that needs to be thoroughly studied. The planned program includes materials
              synthesis and experimental studies of thermal, electronic, magnetic and
              structural properties of this class of materials as a function of temperature,
              chemical substitution, magnetic field and pressure. Graduate students involved
              in the research will receive rigorous training with an emphasis on materials
              developments, synthesis, and characterizations. This type of training in our
              graduate education is particularly needed nowadays as the lack of scientists
              who specialize in both developing new materials and growing single crystals has
              already hindered advancements in condensed matter physics in the United States.
              

