Title       : Recreating the Rhone: Nature, Technology, and the State in France Since 1945
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0240260

Award Number: 0240260
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara B. Pritchard sbpritch@history.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While recent approaches within the history of technology have largely focused on
              technological artifacts and systems as cultural or political objects, this
              project examines the history of post-World War II industrialization with
              particular attention to how these objects manifest evolving relationships
              between humans, nature, and technology. In particular, it traces the
              development of France's Rhone River since 1945 by examining the history of
              river management technologies. Of central interest is how these technologies
              embodied, constituted, and prescribed shifting interactions between users of
              the Rhone, different uses, and the river itself. Such a historical ecological
              view of technology allows scholars to explore the recent history of
              industrialization not only in terms of technical change or shifts in the
              organization of work and production, but also as a fundamental transformation
              in the way modern societies interact with the natural environment.
              Complementing earlier approaches in science and technology studies that have
              centered on the idea of systems or networks, this project focuses on the
              interrelated processes of technological development, environmental management,
              and state building in France since World War II. Analyzing the technological
              artifacts built on the Rhone since 1945 illuminates larger transitions within
              not only river management technologies, but also the relationship between
              humans, nature, technology, and the state in contemporary France. Over the
              second half of the twentieth century, the Rhone was a literal site for debates
              between French engineers, bureaucrats, writers, and citizens over the proper
              balance of industry and agriculture; hydroelectric and nuclear energy; urban
              and rural spaces; development and environmental preservation; and if the Rhone
              should serve regional, national, or international interests. These groups also
              considered the proper role of the state in pursuing these different, and often
              competing, objectives. At its core, then, the development of the Rhone
              manifests conflicts over the ideal environmental and technological basis of the
              nation and national identity. This case study will, therefore, be of interest
              to historians of technology, scholars in technology studies, and environmental
              historians while its methodological and theoretical contributions also speak to
              the broader community of science and technology studies.  This proposal will
              permit travel to France for two months during the summer of 2003 to conduct
              essential new research in relevant archival collections in France, including
              Paris, Lyon, and Nimes as well as municipal and departmental archives in
              southeastern France. Documents in these collections will help to analyze and
              develop such themes as shifting political, economic, and institutional
              objectives for the Rhone; technical designs of specific projects; conflicts
              between different groups within the state, between state agencies and users,
              and among users; and responses by local communities to these projects. This new
              research will lead to a book, published articles, conference presentations, and
              invited talks. 

