Title       : Channel Switching in Fluvio-Deltaic Systems Draining Land Ice; Clyde River,
               Baffin-Island as a Type-Location
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0240823

Award Number: 0240823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61823              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina Overeem irina.overeem@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
OPP-0240823
Overeem

Models of sediment supply to the Arctic
              coastal zones predict pronounced increase of sediment influx as a result of a
              warming climate.  Yet estimates are still uncertain, because: 1) the numerical
              climate-sedimentary models do not model rare high-energy events; 2) lateral
              changes in the fluvial transporting system, i.e., higher discharges due to
              climatic warming inducing channel switches and increased floodplain
              sedimentation, have previously not been modeled.  It is expected that these
              model limitations have the most important implications for drainage basins with
              relatively gentle topography, for example, rivers draining a hinterland
              land-ice cap.  This project proposes to advance the climate-driven hydrological
              model, HydroTrend, to incorporate low-frequency high-magnitude events, such as
              glacial lake outbursts. Simulated high-resolution discharge and sediment load
              series, which is output from HydroTrend, can directly be fed into our
              three-dimensional sedimentary model, SedFlux3D.  Previous theoretical
              experiments show that increased sediment supply is a dominant factor in causing
              channel switches and of significant importance for progradation rates of
              fluvio-deltaic systems into the offshore.   These two concepts will be tested
              against field data of Clyde River, East Baffin Island, which drains the Barnes
              Ice Cap.   Regional hydrological and meteorological data from weather stations
              in combination with aerial photograph and satellite image interpretation yields
              the required input for HydroTrend.  Field measurements of grain size trends,
              floodplain sedimentation, and channel dimensions of the Clyde River will be
              compared with output of SedFlux3D.

Intellectual merit and broader impact. 
              The response of Arctic river systems to climate change is a largely unknown
              component of climate change scenarios. The improved models will allow
              systematic testing of the impact of high-energy events, which is otherwise hard
              to quantify, because of the relatively short measurement records in the High
              Arctic. Furthermore, the model will enhance  predictions of sediment flux into
              the ocean.  In a wider perspective, the project opens up new horizons to the
              integration of glaciological models and three dimensional sedimentary models.
              At the NSF sponsored meeting on 'A Strategy for a Community Sediment Model',
              the link between glaciological and sedimentary models was recognized as one of
              the areas where important scientific progress can and shall be made. The Clyde
              River forms a unique present-day setting, but is a representative
              'type-location' for the entire U.S. east margin under glacial conditions. The
              present offshore stratigraphic architecture depends heavily on the sedimentary
              processes during the last glacial period.  Improved models of the stratigraphic
              architecture of the shallow coastal zone will facilitate coastal
              management.




