Title       : Food Safety Standards, Scientific Knowledge, and the Moral Economy of
               Meatpacking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0240347

Award Number: 0240347
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Dunn elizabeth.dunn@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT
SES 0240347
"Food Safety Standards, Scientific Knowledge, and
              the Moral Economy of Meatpacking"
Elizabeth Dunn, University of Colorado

In
              July, 2002, the ConAgra meatpacking plant in Greeley, Colorado, recalled 19
              million pounds of beef potentially contaminated with E.coli. Journalists wrote
              vivid prose about the stench of the feedlots and the horrifying conditions in
              the packing plant, but this was only one of many recent, widely publicized
              global meatpacking disasters. In recent years, thousands of cattle with Mad Cow
              disease have been destroyed; hundreds of thousands of sheep and pigs with Foot
              and Mouth disease have been slaughtered; and widespread discussion has arisen
              about meat irradiation, the labeling of organic meats, and the safety of meat
              imports. All of these controversies hinge on the creation and enforcement of
              standards for food production.
But what exactly do standards regulate? The
              proposed research investigates standards not simply as technical rules but as
              aspects of a moral economy that governs industrial sectors, firms, and people
              (Thompson 1971, Busch 2000). How do national or global standards shape local
              places? The PI has developed a standards chain methodology to trace standards
              from their production in technical committees, through the global and national
              institutions that introduce and enforce them, down to the people who make their
              livelihoods from meat. This research will compare the deployment of scientific
              knowledge in two standards-writing bodies: Codex Alimentarius and the US
              Department of Agriculture. It will also examine how new regulations shape meat
              production in Poland and the United States and explore their effects on the
              people of two meatpacking towns: Greeley, Colorado, and Sanok,
              Poland.
Standardization is a crucial means of governance in the world economy.
              Yet, we know very little about how the ostensibly objective and scientific
              knowledge employed in the organizations that produce standards are entwined
              with the locally specific interests of the people who, in producing food, are
              coerced or entrusted to use standards. How are the farmers, firms, and workers
              who produce and process food represented in the process of creating
              standards?
Given the institutional constraints firms face, how do they respond
              to those standards? The stakes in standardization are not trivial: a miniscule
              change in a single standard might force smaller processors and farmers out of
              business (Gmyrek 2001), cost larger producers millions of dollars in lost
              revenue (Wilson and Otsuki 2001), or restructure sectors of the food system
              along industrial lines (Busch 1997, Flynn et. al. 1994).
Investigating
              standards as elements of a moral economy means asking not only how they shape
              large-scale economies but also how they transform the micropractices of the
              workplace. How do people such as Poland's small-hold farmers or Greeley's
              immigrant meatpackers perceive and experience these global forms of regulation?
              What cultural resources do they use to modify, resist or circumvent regulation
              (Scott 1998)? By comparing Poland, which was shaped by state socialism, with
              the United States, which has faced consolidation of capitalist agribusiness,
              the research asks how standards interact with regimes of accumulation, or
              large- scale patterns of economic institutions, and the mode of social
              regulation, or the social norms, values, and habits that govern individuals,
              economic actions. The broader impacts of this research include contributions to
              the public debate over food safety (Turner 2001) and suggestions of ways to
              include underrepresented groups such as Polish farmers or Mexican immigrant
              workers in the standards-writing process. The research will be shared with
              standards producers in the hope that it will also introduce into public policy
              an awareness of the wider social impacts of standardization.

