Title       : SGER: Stochastic Algorithms for Visual Search and Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0240148

Award Number: 0240148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Yuille yuille@stat.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Song-Chun Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              SGER Proposal 0240148
DDMCMC Algorithms for Rapid Search and Detection
PI:
              A.L. Yuille
University of California, LA


The proposed study is to design
              and implement a rapid visual search algorithm called DDMCMC, which uses
              data-driven feedforward visual cues to drive a Monte Carlo algorithm. This
              approach combines the speed of feedforward algorithms with the high quality
              performance of top-down model instantiation algorithms. DDMCMC was developed
              for the image segmentation problem by the Co-PI and was demonstrated to give
              fast and very accurate segmentation results on large datasets (with
              groundtruth). DDMCMC is generalized to the search and detection task by using
              techniques such as AdaBoost learning to determine effective feedforward
              algorithms to drive the MCMC algorithm. 

The broader impact is to develop
              computer vision algorithms to help the blind and visually impaired (though we
              will also use this grant to train graduate students). To achieve this, a pilot
              study of the DDMCMC algorithm will be developed for the specific task of
              searching for, and then reading, informational signs (the results can be
              communicated to a visually impaired user by a speech synthesizer). This study
              will be aided by researchers at the Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute
              (SKERI) who include two blind engineers. The proposed algorithms will be
              designed and tested on image datasets taken by blind volunteers using head or
              body mounted cameras (to ensure the realism of our approach).  Researchers at
              SKERI will also give feedback on the practicality of the approach and how it
              compares with alternative technologies for this task (none of which use
              computer vision). Computer vision has enormous potential to help the visually
              disabled provided fast and effective algorithms are developed.

