Title       : Studies of Methyl Farnesoate in Crustaceans: Physiological Significance and
               Peptide Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0240903

Award Number: 0240903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480320             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Borst dwborst@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Lovett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Crustaceans have a rich diversity of hormones that regulate their physiology,
              development, reproduction, and behavior.  One of these compounds appears to be
              methyl farnesoate (MF), a sesquiterpene produced by the mandibular organ (MO). 
              Recent research suggests that MF may affect crustacean growth and reproduction,
              but these studies do not definitively prove these roles.  Other research has
              shown that the eyestalk produces a peptide (MO-inhibiting hormone, MO-IH) that
              can inhibit the production of MF by MO in vitro, but it has not been shown that
              MO-IH regulates MF in vivo.  The research described in this proposal will
              explore these issues in the green crab, Carcinus maenas. 

The physiological
              role(s) of MF will be investigated by infusing crabs with MF (to increase MF
              levels) and/or with purified MO-IH (to decrease MF levels).  Some animals will
              be transferred to dilute seawater, which causes a chronic rise in MF levels,
              before infusion with MF and/or MO-IH.  These procedures will be used to test
              hypotheses that MF regulates osmoregulation and stimulates ovarian and
              testicular development.  Purified MO-IH will also be used to develop antisera
              to MO-IH, and these antisera will be used to develop immunological test for
              this peptide.  MO-IH and MF will be measured in hemolymph from crabs in
              different physiological states to test the hypothesis that MO-IH regulates
              hemolymph levels of MF. 

These studies will answer fundamental questions
              about the roles of MF in the physiology and development of this important group
              of animals.  The results may be useful in designing strategies to increase the
              growth rate and reproductive fecundity of valuable crustaceans (e.g. shrimp),
              which could benefit consumer and the aquaculture industry.  Finally, many of
              these studies will be performed by undergraduate students, providing them with
              a hands-on opportunity to learn science during the academic year and for
              extended periods during the summer.  


