Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Collaborative Research: The Biogeochemical Cycling of Iron in
               Waters of the Subantarctic Southern Ocean (FeCycle)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0240092

Award Number: 0240092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9653               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Wilhelm wilhelm@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0238615
McKay

A multidisciplinary and multinational research group working
              on board a New Zealand ship and led by Dr. Philip Boyd of University of Otago,
              New Zealand, will seek to gain a better understanding of the role of iron in
              the structure and function of the ecosystems of the Southern Ocean. This award
              supports Dr. Robert McKay of Bowling Green State University to participate in
              this field research as the lead Principal Investigator for a group of three
              U.S. scientists and a graduate student involved in the same research cruise and
              supported by separate grants.  His U.S. co-Principal Investigators and their
              award numbers are Steven Wilhelm of the University of Tennessee at Knoxville
              (0240092) and David Hutchins of the University of Delaware (0236987).

 The
              specific research foci of the three U.S. scientists differ.  Dr. McKay will
              measure diagnostic indicators of iron limitation such as the ratio of
              flavodoxin to ferrodoxin. Dr. Wilhelm and Dr. McKay will evaluate degrees of
              iron stress in the phytoplankton community using state-of-the-art prokaryotic
              bioreporter constructs.  Dr. Hutchins will simulate changes in diapycnal iron
              inputs using a novel shipboard natural community chemostat system.  He will
              also apply a newly developed trace metal clean surface wash method to measure
              scavenged and interior pools of particulate iron.

The micronutrient iron
              limits phytoplankton growth and photosynthesis over most of the large Southern
              Ocean surrounding Antarctica. This in turn affects the global carbon
              cycle.
Most studies of iron in the ocean have come from adding artificially
              high levels and monitoring the changes seen in the affected body of water. Very
              little is known about the major pools, fluxes and biogeochemical pathways of
              this limiting nutrient under unperturbed natural conditions.  This research
              effort will employ several novel techniques to assess microbial impacts on and
              reactions to iron levels in a natural oceanic environment. This will be a
              significant contribution to the ability to model the natural marine iron cycle
              in an important region of the world's ocean. If successful, the innovative
              techniques employed will have wide value to other marine scientists.  It will
              have educational impacts for the US graduate student who will participate and
              for students of the US investigators who will learn about the work.


