Title       : Density vs. Trait-Mediated Interactions Between Predators and Prey: Their
               Influence on Rocky Shore Algal Diversity and Community Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0240265

Award Number: 0240265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey C. Trussell g.trussell@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The trophic cascade concept has profoundly improved our understanding of how
              predator-prey interactions shape the structure and diversity of ecological
              communities.  Trophic cascade studies typically focus on how predator effects
              on prey density propagate through food chains to shape species diversity and
              community structure (i.e., Density-Mediated Indirect Interactions).  Recently,
              there has been growing interest in interaction modifications: the presence of a
              third species (predator) in the system alters the interaction between two other
              species (prey and their resource).  Trait-Mediated Indirect Interactions
              (TMIIs) are those that occur because of predator effects on prey traits rather
              than prey density.  For example, in aquatic systems water-borne predator risk
              cues can induce changes in prey behavior, such as feeding rates, thus altering
              the prey.s impact on lower trophic levels.  Hence, TMIIs emphasize nonlethal
              predator effects in contrast to the more prevalent emphasis on lethal indirect
              effects (DMIIs).  
	Although ecologists are beginning to appreciate the
              importance of TMIIs, there is still a limited understanding of the factors
              governing the relative importance of density and trait-mediated predator
              effects and how they shape the diversity and structure of ecological
              communities.  Classic work on the importance of herbivorous snails to the
              diversity and structure of macro-algal communities on rocky shores has left a
              lasting impression.  Luchenco demonstrated that diversity and succession in
              these communities is closely tied to snail (Littorina 
littorea) density and
              that the functional nature of this relationship differs between tidal pools and
              emergent substrata.  Moreover, she hypothesized that green crab (Carcinus
              maenas) predation may exert an indirect influence on algal communities by
              regulating L. littorea density.  This hypothesis is conceptually appealing, but
              over 20 years have passed without it being tested experimentally. 
	Recent
              data suggest that the suppression of snail grazing by green crab risk cues can
              have a significant effect on rocky shore algal communities.  This research
              examines the relative importance of density and trait-mediated interactions
              between green crabs and L. littorea to patterns of algal diversity and
              structure on rocky shores by asking the following questions: 
 --I.  What
              factors shape the relative importance of density and trait-mediated effects? 

              -- II.  How may the relative importance of DMIIs and TMIIs influence long-term
              algal diversity and community structure on rocky intertidal shores? 
 -- III. 
              Can habitat-specific differences in the relative importance of DMIIs and TMIIs
              explain differences in the functional relationship between algal diversity and
              snail density in two prominent rocky shore habitats: emergent substrata and
              tide pools? 
 	This research will have broad implications to empirical and
              theoretical ecology by explicitly examining the role higher order interactions
              play in shaping long term community dynamics.  By working in a system (a)
              widely held as a classic demonstration of the role of density-mediated effects
              and (b) that has contributed significantly to the development of modern
              ecology, the proposed research will provide a better understanding of the
              processes shaping diversity and structure in rocky shore and other communities.
               Because these food chains are relatively simple and easily manipulated, these
              habitats afford an excellent opportunity to explore these issues.

