Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic Reaction Rates and
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0240203

Award Number: 0240203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendall N. Houk houk@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the ongoing work of Dr. Kendall N. Houk in the Department of Chemistry
              at the University of California, Los Angeles.  The work is aimed at using
              theoretical and computational methods to address four projects, pericyclic
              mechanisms, molecular device design, biological catalysis, and organometallic
              mechanisms. Houk is the world leader in the computational study and
              understanding of pericyclic reactions. He continues to make key contributions
              on methodology for accurate predictions of activation parameters, and in
              unraveling mechanistic details including competitions between concerted and
              diradical alternatives. Through the proposed work we will gain a better
              understanding of stepwise pericyclic reactions, which is intellectually
              challenging, and of synthetic importance. In addition, the PI continues to
              apply his expertise in pericyclic reactions and computational methods to new
              areas using theoretical methods that are complemented by experimental studies.
              The research provides valuable experience for undergraduate, graduate, and
              postdoctoral students.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the research activities
              of Professor Kendall N. Houk of the University of California- Los Angeles. 
              Professor Houk's work in the application areas of molecular device and
              materials and biological catalysis overlap strongly with technology areas of
              importance to the U.S.  The current period of funding will allow the
              fundamental knowledge generated by Prof. Houk to be transferred into other
              application areas that could bolster America's competitive edge in chemical
              technology.

