Title       : Atomic Chains on Silicon Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0240937

Award Number: 0240937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franz J. Himpsel fhimpsel@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The condensed matter physics project will focus on self-assembly methods for
              fabricating nanostructures with one-dimensional order.  Particular emphasis is
              placed on achieving atomically-precise structures, such as a chain of atoms as
              the ultimate nanowire.  Silicon surfaces are chosen as templates because
              silicon is the natural interface for connecting nanodevices to microdevices and
              because of the wealth of processing methods developed for silicon technology. 
              The following goals will be pursued: (1) 	Produce atomic chains on silicon with
              tailored properties, such as dimensionality, metallicity, and magnetism; (2)
              Map energy bands and Fermi surfaces of atomic chains by angle-resolved
              photoemission and search for predicted exotic states in one dimension; and (3)
              Explore fundamental limits of data storage at the atomic scale, using
              self-assembled tracks at surfaces.  The budget is primarily devoted to the
              education of graduate students.  They will gain expertise in the field of
              nanotechnology that will serve them well for careers in academia, industry, and
              government.  A course on nanoscience and technology is under development that
              aims at a web-based, up-to-date introduction to new and exciting developments
              in this rapidly-evolving field.  This project can be expected to have impact on
              the fabrication methods for new materials in microelectronics, particularly in
              self-assembled storage media.

The goal of this project is the design of
              artificial materials with one-dimensional character, for example chains of
              metal atoms at silicon surfaces. An atom chain represents the ultimate
              nanowire. The wave functions of the electrons in atomic wires will be
              determined in order to explain conductivity in one dimension, where exotic
              phenomena are predicted.  This project can be expected to have impact on the
              fabrication methods for new materials in microelectronics, particularly in data
              storage. The self-assembly methods developed during this project enable
              mass-production of nanowires and patterned storage media on silicon and extend
              silicon technology down to the single nanometer regime. By going all the way to
              the atomic limit it is possible to achieve structures with atomic perfection,
              such as a memory with tracks exactly 5 atoms wide and a single atom storing one
              bit.  The proposed budget is primarily for the support of graduate students,
              including summer projects for beginning graduate students, undergraduates, and
              high school students.  They will gain expertise in the field of nanotechnology
              that will serve them well for careers in academia, industry, and
              government.


