Title       : Imitatio Vitae: Artificial Life and Intelligence, 1730-1950
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0240431

Award Number: 0240431
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Riskin jriskin@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the genesis of synthetic life. Its aim is to produce a
              book about attempts to simulate the behaviors and bodily functions of living
              creatures from the emergence of such attempts in the early 18th century through
              their saturation of European culture and economy at the turn of the 20th, and
              up until the emergence of electronic computing in the 1940s. The author will
              follow the lead of the inventors and consider these early simulations as
              experiments testing the essence of life and intelligence on the one hand, and
              of the inanimate and unintelligent on the other, transforming both sides, the
              active and the inert, as they progressed. Could one design a machine that could
              talk, write, play chess, make music, draw pictures, sense, digest food, bleed,
              breathe, have feelings, and learn?  If so, asked early designers of artificial
              life, would it imply that life and mind were essentially mechanical; or rather
              that such capacities as talking and making music were inessential to living and
              intelligent beings; or yet that inert matter and mechanism hid an intrinsic
              capacity for life? The result of these investigations was an ever-changing
              epistemological and social taxonomy, sorting the animate from the inanimate,
              the organic from the mechanical, the intelligent from the rote, projecting, at
              each turn, new definitions of life and intelligence.  This continual process of
              redefinition was by no means of purely philosophical interest, but was
              inextricably tied to a set of economic and social problems and implications.
              Certain human occupations came to seem less human, and others more human,
              according to what machines could and could not do. For example, when it became
              possible to weave patterned fabrics by machine, weaving fell on one side of the
              border between what could be mechanized and what could not. In contrast, the
              design of such fabrics landed on the other side since it seemed impossible to
              automate the creative work of design. Central to the book's analysis will be
              the inextricable engagement of social, epistemological and economic forces in
              directing projects in artificial life. The intellectual merit of the project is
              three-fold: first, to tell a new story about early modern science and
              technology, of a tradition of attempts to synthesize life and mind; second, to
              restore to these preoccupations of the current day the fullness of their
              historical backgrounds; and finally to understand the complex historical
              process by which certain features of life and intelligence have come to seem
              salient, then faded into obscurity and been replaced by others, and of the
              consequences, both philosophical and social, of this continual redefinition of
              what it means to live and to think. As to its broader impact, this research has
              already generated two new courses and the beginnings of an archive of materials
              (documents, photographs, and videos) for public presentation and for teaching
              students, especially those entering science and engineering fields, about the
              role of history in defining their work and the philosophical and social
              implications of their projects.


