Title       : Legitimacy and Policing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0240938

Award Number: 0240938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom R. Tyler tom.tyler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The importance of legitimacy lies in the argument that people more willingly
              comply with legal authorities when they trust them and view them as entitled to
              be obeyed.  This willing compliance is an important supplement to traditional
              deterrence-based approaches to compliance, and facilitates more effective and
              efficient policing.  Further, the importance of encouraging public cooperation
              with and support for the empowerment of the police is increasingly being
              recognized as equally central to the success of policing efforts to manage
              crime and urban disorder and legitimacy also encourages cooperation and
              empowerment.   Hence, legitimacy is a key attribute for authorities such as the
              police.   However, there is evidence that police legitimacy is low,
              particularly among minority group members.  This research addresses this issue
              by exploring the psychology of legitimacy to provide a better picture of what
              sustains or undermines public trust and confidence in the police.  The project
              builds upon a recently completed study of a diverse sample of 1,650 New
              Yorkers, interview about their views on the New York Police Department (NYPD). 
              These respondents will be recontacted and, where possible, reinterviewed one
              year after their initial interviews to create a panel design.   This dataset
              will then be used to explore the dynamics of legitimacy on two levels: personal
              and organizational.   On the personal level, the panel data will be used to
              more rigorously test the arguments about the nature of the dynamics of
              legitimacy during personal experiences with legal authorities.  The panel data
              also are used to more effectively examine the psychological dynamics
              influencing legitimacy.  In this case, however, those dynamics involve the
              influence of legitimacy on everyday compliance and cooperation, as well as on
              the willingness to empower legal authorities.  In addition, a panel dataset
              will allow the influence of procedural justice on legitimacy to be more
              effectively modeled.    These analyses explore the role of legitimacy in the
              authority dynamics underlying the relationship between community residents, the
              police, and the law.  In addition, they test the potential for managing those
              dynamics via process-based strategies of regulation.  Hence, the study will
              have both theoretical and policy-related value.
