Title       : Proposal to Organize a Workshop on Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education,
               Sept. 11-12, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0240378

Award Number: 0240378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Fonash sjf2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Batt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Waldron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Hallacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1084,1653,1682,7202,9162,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Attention to the development of interdisciplinary education programs that engage
              the interest of students of all ages, but especially at the undergraduate
              level, is critical to ensure leadership in the area of nanotechnology.  The NSF
              Workshop on Nanotechnology in Undergraduate Education is jointly supported by
              the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research in the
              Directorate of Mathematics and Physical Science, and the Directorate of
              Engineering.  The workshop focuses on new examples of introductory
              undergraduate courses that are presented through the development of text,
              software, laboratory and demonstration experiments, and web-based resources;
              the development and dissemination of new teaching modules for nanoscale science
              and engineering that can be used in existing undergraduate courses;  and the
              incorporation of undergraduate research opportunities based on nanoscale
              science and engineering into the curriculum at any level, particularly during
              first and second year studies.  The workshop will involve participants from
              various scientific disciplines involved in nanotechnology and from all levels
              of undergraduate education to present and discuss ways to enhance the education
              and training of undergraduate students.

In addition, the workshop is driven
              for the demand for nanotechnology workers in at least three industrial sectors.
               First are the established industries that traditionally use micro- and
              nanotechnology, such as microelectronics, information storage, optoelectronics,
              and others.  Second are the industries that have been newly created by this
              technology, among which are the micro-electromechanical industries and the
              emerging nanobiotechnology and nanoelectronics start-ups.   The third driving
              sector is composed of the major industries that have never used this technology
              but are now actively embracing it.  Among these are giants such as the
              pharmaceutical and chemical industries.  The emergence of nanobiotechnology,
              the application of the tools and processes developed for micro and
              nanofabrication to create devices to explore biology, may have a greater impact
              than has already been realized in the electronics industry.  In addition to
              these product-producing industry sectors, there is a growing workforce demand
              coming from micro- and nanotechnology research centers housed in industry,
              universities, and national laboratories that are advancing understanding of
              this new field of science and engineering. 

The workshop will also discuss
              the need for outreach activities to promote nanotechnology education and career
              opportunities at the K-12 level, and to provide professional development
              opportunities in nanotechnology for educators at all levels, including
              pre-service teachers.   Meeting the need for a skilled nanotechnology workforce
              will thus require that larger numbers of K-12 students in general pursue
              science, mathematics, engineering and technology education, especially students
              from traditionally underrepresented groups. 

