Title       : Redox-dependent Regulation of the Structure and Function of HSF1 in Mammalian
               Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0240009

Award Number: 0240009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Y. Liu liu@biology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is well known that the structure and function of proteins and consequently
              the activity of cells can be regulated by reversible and covalent modification
              of specific amino acid residues in proteins, and that post-translational
              modification reactions, such as phosphorylation, provide important biological
              switches in cells.  The goal of Dr. Liu's research project is to establish the
              posttranslational, oxidation- and reduction- (redox) dependent thiol-disulfide
              exchange of cysteine-SH as a cellular mechanism regulating the structure and
              function of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), an important and ubiquitous
              transcription factor that responds to stress.  Specifically, Dr. Liu and her
              research team will evaluate if oxidation and covalent crosslinking of cysteines
              may: (a) provide a mechanism to restrain the inadvertent activation of HSF1 in
              cells grown under a normal, unstressed condition, or (b) represent a
              pathophysiological manifestation of oxidative stress that limits the activation
              of HSF1 and induction of the cellular stress response as Dr. Liu and her
              colleagues have previously observed in a number of aging cells, tissues,
              organs, and animals.  The successful completion of this research will provide
              useful information on the relationship of redox-dependent protein modification,
              transcription factor regulation, and the molecular basis of transcription
              factor dysfunction under a variety of physiological and pathophysiological
              conditions.  It is anticipated that this research will contribute to the
              emerging concept that redox-dependent modification of proteins can provide a
              versatile epigenetic mechanism by which cells regulate important biological
              processes.  The active participation and involvement of undergraduate and
              graduate students in this research will help to accomplish an important goal of
              research universities, namely the teaching and training of future research
              scientists.
