Title       : Data Fusion for Inverse Electrocardiography: Synthesis of Signals from Multiple
               Sensor Types and Locations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0240910

Award Number: 0240910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Throne robert.throne@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0001315
Throne
Knowledge of how electrical potential patterns on the heart
              surfaces evolve over time can be an extremely valuable tool in the diagnosis
              and treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular diseases.  Hence, researchers
              have proposed numerous minimally invasive approaches for inferring cardiac
              electrical activity from measurements of electrical activity made at more
              accessible locations.  In these types of inverse problems the goal is to
              estimate an input (the surface electrical potentials) based on a measurement of
              the output (the electrical activity measured at a less invasive location).
              These particular inverse problems are extremely ill-conditioned, and
              consequently small errors in the measurements cause enormous (hundreds of times
              larger) errors in the estimated cardiac potentials.  The overall goal in this
              project is to employ data fusion-- systematic combination of signals from
              multiple sensors, types of sensors, and sensor locations-- to improve the
              potential estimates on the interior and exterior surfaces of the heart. 

The
              development of minimally invasive, stable inverse techniques will substantially
              affect the treatment of cardiac disease.  In addition, the data fusion
              techniques developed for these inverse problems will impact research in such
              diverse fields as identifying sources of electrical activity within the brain,
              structural damage identification, electronics cooling, materials
              characterization, and online machine tool wear monitoring.


