Title       : Dissertation Research: Medium and Message in the Consumption Junction:
               Retailers, Consumers, and the Invention of Movies on Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0240273

Award Number: 0240273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7975               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Kline rrk1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In its first sixty years, the US motion picture industry evolved a clearly
              defined structure incorporating specific technical artifacts and social
              practices into a system stretching from cameras to distribution networks to
              theater projectors, from Hollywood studios to audiences around the world.
              However, in the past two decades, new technologies and new social practices
              have altered the industry dramatically. We now watch movies in theatres,
              airplanes, cars and our own living rooms, and we encode them on celluloid, on
              videotape, on DVD, and as streams of electricity. The socio-technical system
              that constitutes the motion picture in America has not so much shifted as
              exploded in complexity, and yet the idea of a movie seems as unproblematic in
              American culture as ever. This dissertation research project is studying one of
              the major sites where new understandings of both the nature of motion pictures
              as well as their proper use were constructed - the network of video retail
              stores of the 1980.s. Video retailers created and facilitated a new
              distribution network that served as a consumption junction (Cowan 1987) of
              users, movie studios, and manufacturers where the groundwork was laid for much
              of our current understanding of entertainment and media technologies.
              Ultimately, the story of how motion pictures came to be viewed on videotapes in
              the home rather than simply in theaters is largely the story of how these
              mediators managed to construct the idea of a message (a motion picture) that
              was completely distinct from the medium on which it was played, an idea which
              was essential to the establishment of one technical system (translation of
              magnetically encoded tapes into pixels on a cathode-ray tube) as equivalent to
              another (projection of celluloid prints). NSF funds will support data
              collection at various research sites: The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
              Sciences library; trip to Blockbuster Entertainment; and the Video Software
              Dealers Association.


