Title       : Dissertation Research: Construction and Deployment of "Deviance" in Neoliberal
               Philadelphia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0240320

Award Number: 0240320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith G. Goode judithgoode@cs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1390,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research by a cultural anthropologist will investigate
              development in two working class neighborhoods of Philadelphia. Focusing on the
              most stigmatized and "deviant" population - substance using and/or mentally ill
              adults - the research will examine how community members and development
              specialists understand deviance, as individuals who are at risk and under
              stress, and who present risk and act as stressors to the community. The
              research will study how deviance is understood by "Community-Based
              Organizations" (CBOs) and medical and social service providers to mentally ill
              and substance using adults, as well as by local institutions and community
              members. The research builds on three years of preliminary research with local
              CBOs and residents. Current research focuses on service provision to recipients
              in order to assess how they, their communities, and community organizations are
              targeted for development in ways that construct them as "deviant," and how
              these actors interpret the label of deviance to acquire resources.
The
              research advances understanding by exploring the effects of economic processes
              such as structural adjustment, privatization, and market-based development. It
              also examines the effects of the medicalization of social life beyond the realm
              of biomedicine. The project analyzes social and medical services provided to
              recipients within the larger context of what - and who - should be included in
              "community development." Identifying the various models of "community" and
              "development" - that are used to understand poverty and substance use - can
              point out factors that may hinder community development, service provision, and
              grassroots struggle.
The broader impact of this project lies in its practical
              applications for community development and service provision. The new knowledge
              to be created will be useful to community development planners, as well as
              community members and organizations. The project will also contribute to the
              training of a young social scientist. 

