Title       : Chloroplast-Localized N-terminal Protein Processing by Peptide Deformylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0240165

Award Number: 0240165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynnette M. Dirk adownie@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Houtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne-Frances Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1168,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Peptide deformylase (DEF), an essential co-translational protein-processing
              enzyme that catalyzes the removal of the N-formyl group from nascent
              polypeptides in prokaryotic organisms, has been identified in plant
              chloroplasts and mitochondria. Inhibitors of DEF are phytotoxic, exhibiting
              characteristics of broad-spectrum herbicides, but the mechanism by which DEF is
              essential for cell viability is unknown. Because chloroplast-translated
              proteins are relatively limited in number and many have been extensively
              characterized both functionally and physically, this organelle provides a
              unique opportunity to study the essential nature of protein processing by DEF.
              Understanding chloroplast-localized DEFs and their role in establishing the
              mature biologically active form of newly-translated chloroplast-proteins is
              important, and can be achieved by fulfilling the following objectives: 1)
              identifying amino acid residues instrumental in active-site metal ion
              coordination and catalysis utilizing high-resolution NMR analyses coupled with
              site-directed mutagenesis; 2) elucidating the functional significance of
              chloroplast N-terminal protein processing through comparative 2D-PAGE analysis
              of a T-DNA insertional Atdef2-knockout mutant; and 3) determining the authentic
              subcellular and suborganellar location of Arabidopsis DEFs using full length
              GFP fusions.

Diverse chloroplast processes critical to plant survival rely
              on proteins produced in the chloroplast which interact directly with imported
              proteins. Thus, how these proteins are processed by peptide deformylase and the
              relationship with other protein processing events define a fundamental
              determinant of chloroplast function. The understanding gained by completing
              this research will validate peptide deformylase as a viable target for a new
              class of broad-spectrum herbicides without mammalian toxicity, and create
              predictive rules governing chloroplast protein processing that could
              substantially enhance the success of chloroplast-targeted foreign gene
              expression for enhancing crop productivity. Exposure of undergraduate,
              graduate, and post-doctoral scholars to these interdisciplinary studies and the
              multi-user facilities required will provide unparalleled, multifaceted research
              and learning experiences, including participation in the commercialization and
              technological transfer of ideas and discoveries.

