Title       : Characteristics of Cyclone Development in the Arctic and Their Hydrologic
               Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0240948

Award Number: 0240948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Serreze serreze@kryos.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
OPP-0240984
Serreze
Barry

This study will improve our
              understanding of the development and decay of extra-tropical cyclones in
              northern high latitudes and their hydrologic impacts. The study will focus on
              two key regions: 1) the northern North Atlantic, in particular the area around
              the Icelandic Low and the marginal ice zones of the Greenland and Barents seas;
              and 2) a domain comprising northeast Eurasia extending to the central Arctic
              Ocean.

The first region, representing the terminus of the North Atlantic
              cyclone track, has first order impacts on heat and moisture transports into the
              Arctic basin and the circulation of the sea ice cover, in particular, the flux
              of sea ice through Fram Strait. Variability in this ice flux has potentially
              strong influences on the ocean's thermohaline circulation. Past studies have
              shown that cyclone variability in this region is closely tied to the phase of
              the Arctic Oscillation /North Atlantic Oscillation (AO/NAO), but relatively
              little attention has been paid to the role of local development processes.
              Synoptic activity in this region during the winter season appears to be
              strongly influenced by vorticity production in the lee of southeast Greenland
              and enhanced baroclinicity along the sea ice margins. The hypothesis is that,
              1) such local development processes are important in modulating the Fram Strait
              ice flux; and 2) the intensity of these local development processes is
              associated with differences in the general synoptic environment associated with
              the positive/negative phases of the AO/NAO.

Studies for the second domain
              will focus on summer. Summer is characterized by development of a pronounced
              baroclinic region along the shores of northeast Eurasia. It is interpreted to
              arise from strong differential heating between the cold Arctic Ocean and snow
              free land. Development of the baroclinic region over northeast Eurasia is
              attended by frequent cyclogenesis in the same region where a particularly large
              fraction of annual precipitation falls during the summer months. Cyclones
              generated over northeast Eurasia often migrate into the central Arctic Ocean.
              The hypothesis is that the cyclogenesis maximum can be explained through
              interactions between coastal baroclinicity and orographic development
              processes. A second hypothesis is that cyclones forming in this region
              significantly impact on the wind driven sea ice circulation in the central
              Arctic Ocean and are primary drivers of the summer maximum in precipitation
              over the central Arctic Ocean and coastal zone.

These studies will use the
              suite of atmospheric fields from the  National Center for Environmental
              Protection (NCEP) and ERA-40 reanalysis systems, along with generated data
              sets. These include six hourly time series of cyclone activity, frontal
              location and intensity, and Q vector fields. Use will also be made of daily
              satellite derived fields of sea ice motion and concentration together with
              daily precipitation over both land and the Arctic Ocean.


