Title       : Dissertation Research: Taming the Hypervariable Witness: The Introduction,
               Contestation, and Regulation of Forensic DNA Evidence in the American Legal
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0240482

Award Number: 0240482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5062               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Beatty beatty@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation grant supports research to examine the introduction,
              contestation, and regulation of forensic DNA analysis within the context of law
              enforcement institutions, biotechnology companies, and the American legal
              system.  The primary objective of this research is to construct a historical
              narrative that answers questions about how the technique evolved from an
              academic invention in late 1984 to a highly commercialized tool of forensic
              science by early 1995.  The investigator will focus on the disputes and
              negotiations among biotechnology firms, forensic scientists, law enforcement
              agencies, lawyers, academic scientists, and legislators over the proper means
              to ensure the quality, reliability and admissibility of DNA evidence in an
              adversarial legal setting. The intellectual merit of this project is that it
              critiques the most prevalent argument about the relationship between science
              and law: the notion that there is an inevitable culture clash when these two
              powerful institutions interact.  In opposition to this theory, the investigator
              will argue that the history of DNA typing represents the hybridization of
              knowledge and practice from various legal sources, corporate culture, and a
              multiplicity of scientific disciplines.  Thus, DNA 
typing was not simply a
              product of science being introduced into the legal system; instead, it was
              co-produced by actors in multiple disciplines over the course of a decade.  
              The investigator has both the opportunity and challenge to supplement the
              published and archival record with oral history interviews.  To this end, about
              40 interviews have already been conducted with a diverse array of historical
              actors.  In addition, the investigator has collected patents, court
              transcripts, technical reports, protocols and instruction manuals from law
              enforcement agencies and biotechnology companies, news articles, conference
              proceedings, as well as transcripts of testimony before legislative bodies and
              policy committees.  The NSF dissertation improvement grant will allow the
              investigator to complete this research by funding trips to California, New
              York, and Washington, DC to interview historical actors and to examine their
              private materials.  It will also allow him to make use of the DNA
              Fingerprinting Archive at Cornell University's Kroch Library, which was
              collected with the support of the NSF.   The broader social impact of this
              project is that it will provide much-needed insight into how science and law
              interact with one another. This knowledge will be useful in training judges and
              lawyers who must deal with scientific and technical issues, as well as
              scientists who increasingly find themselves involved in legal disputes. The
              results of this project will be disseminated not only through the
              investigator's dissertation and articles in scholarly journals, but also
              through articles in law reviews and scientific journals like Genetics and
              Journal of Forensic Science.  


