Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Delocalized Knowledges: Conceptualizing Problem
               Gambling on an American Indian Reservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0240263

Award Number: 0240263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa D. O'Nell tonell@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0240263
O'Nell / Penickova
Current studies suggest a significantly higher
              prevalence of psychiatrically defined "problem gambling" among Native Americans
              than among non-indigenous populations. Native Americans living on reservations
              typically obtain mental health care from federal government institutions
              employing primarily non-Native clinicians trained in Western psychology and
              psychiatry. Native Americans, however, have their own understandings of what
              constitutes mental illness and often point out the cognitive gulf among the
              non-Native clinicians and their clients. This dissertation research tests the
              hypothesis that there is a cognitive gulf between the Western Apaches living on
              a reservation in Eastern Arizona and the local clinicians in the
              conceptualization of "problem gambling."  The researcher, a cultural
              anthropologist, will explore the explanations and definitions of mental
              illnesses recognized by tribal members and local mental health care providers.
              Using data from an extensive series of focused interviews, she will compare the
              two groups' explanations and definitions of "problem gambling" and examine how
              these, and explanations of mental illnesses generally, overlap or diverge. The
              research will provide a detailed examination of how tribal definitions are
              represented in local diagnostic practice.  
The new knowledge generated by
              this research will add to our understanding of disordered behavior in a
              culturally diverse social setting. The broader impact from the analysis of the
              local definitions of "problem gambling" will inform the development of more
              culturally sensitive, and locally relevant diagnostic instruments, leading to
              more effective counseling and education programs. The project also contributes
              to the education of a young social scientist. 

