Title       : Mechanism Based Design of Novel Inhibitors of Dinuclear Hydrolases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0240810

Award Number: 0240810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Holz RHOLZ@CC.USU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1166,9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry and the
              Molecular Biochemistry programs supports research by Professor Richard B. Holz
              at Utah State University to determine a detailed catalytic mechanism for the
              leucine aminopeptidase from Aeromonas proteolytica (AAP) and the dapE-encoded
              N-succinyl-L,L-diaminopimelic acid desuccinylase (DapE) from H. influenzae and
              to design and syntheize potent inhibitors of DapE.  . This research involves an
              interdisciplinary approach that incorporates biochemical, spectroscopic, and
              X-ray crystallographic methods and the synthesis of small molecule inhibitors
              of DapE.  The work addresses five key areas: (1) Which residues in the active
              site of AAP play catalytically important roles? (2) The development of Laue
              X-ray diffraction methods to study the catalytic mechanism of AAP. (3)
              Characterization of how substrate- and transition-state analog inhibitors
              interact with DapE. (4) Preparation of altered enzymes of proposed active site
              residues in DapE. (5) The development of a detailed mechanism of action for AAP
              and DapE

Hydrolases that contain dinuclear metal centers are central to
              numerous biological processes and, consequently, characterization of their
              structure and function is a problem of outstanding importance.  They play
              important roles in tissue repair, protein maturation, hormone level regulation,
              cell-cycle control, as well as cell wall synthesis.  Several dinuclear
              aminopeptidases have broad substrate specificities and are widely distributed
              in both plant and animal tissues.  Their biological and medicinal significance
              is extensive due to their roles in the degradation of proteins and biologically
              active peptides, including hormones. The importance of understanding the
              reaction mechanism of leucine aminopeptidases is underscored by the fact that
              leucine aminopeptidase activity has been observed on the surface of tumor
              cells, and such activity is known to play key roles in oncogenesis.  In
              addition, the naturally occurring peptide analog inhibitor, bestatin,
              significantly decreases HIV infection in males by inhibiting leucine
              aminopeptidase activity.   For DapE's, the emergence of several pathogenic
              bacterial strains that are resistant to all currently available antibiotics
              emphasize their importance, since both products of the mDAP/lysine biosynthetic
              pathway, mDAP and lysine, are essential components of the peptidoglycan cell
              wall for Gram-negative and most Gram-positive bacteria. 

This research aims
              toward a detailed understanding of hydrolytic reactions catalyzed by dinuclear
              metal centers, which may lead to the development of new antibiotics and also
              supports the development of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
              students.

