Title       : Dissertation Research: Support for Tanfer Emin: Technological Change in
               Pregnancy Termination, 1850 - 1980
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0240325

Award Number: 0240325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth S. Cowan ruth.cowan@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the last three decades, studies in the history and sociology of technology
              have taught us a great deal about the processes of invention, development, and
              diffusion.  However, very few of these studies bring the insights of the
              history of technology to bear on medical and reproductive technologies, despite
              the fact that these technologies are having an enormous social, ethical and
              economic impact on today's world. By placing these reproductive technologies in
              their proper historical context, this dissertation research project will not
              only elucidate the issues with which our predecessors struggled, but also shed
              a ray of light on the current debates over pregnancy termination and the likely
              social impact of new technologies such as RU-486. Almost nothing is known,
              historically, about the science and technology of pregnancy termination.  No
              scholar has ever thoroughly explored the changing technologies of pregnancy
              termination during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and no effort has
              been made to understand how these changing technologies were connected to the
              politics of medical professionalization, specialization, and commercialization.
               This dissertation project seeks to fill this historical vacuum.  This study
              will trace the changes in pregnancy termination technology from 1850 (when
              herbal methods began to be replaced by surgical methods, and knowledge about
              fertilization was growing) to 1980 (by which time numerous new surgical methods
              had been developed and diffused, both fertilization and ovulation were well
              understood, and the different stages of fetal development had been demarcated).
               Since pregnancy termination has always been a politically charged subject,
              these scientific and technological changes must, of necessity, be viewed within
              the context of a variety of disputes: disputes between laypeople and
              professionals about who should be licensed to control pregnancy termination;
              disputes between men and women about who should be responsible for fertility
              control; disputes between those who want the procedure to be legal and those
              who want it banned; disputes between advocates of one technological system over
              another.  This dissertation project will thus be a study both in the social
              construction of technology and in the technological construction of one very
              significant social process -- pregnancy termination.  In preliminary research,
              the Co-PI has uncovered  material in published sources (medical journals,
              medical textbooks, patent records, trade catalogues) and in archival
              collections. NSF funds support travel to other relevant archival collections. 
              
 


