Title       : Redistribution in a Divided Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0240186

Award Number: 0240186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Austen-Smith dasm@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wallerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although there is a rich literature exploring the logic of political competition
              over redistributive policies, there are few theoretical studies that include
              the existence of social cleavages other than the division by income level.  Few
              observers, however, think that the politics of redistribution in the U.S. can
              be understood without consideration of the complications introduced by racial
              divisions.  Moreover, the U.S. is not unique in being divided according to
              ascriptive characteristics.  While  salient cleavages differ from country to
              country, the existence of politically significant racial ethnic, religious, or
              linguistic divisions is widespread.  

The goal of this research is to study
              political conflict over redistributive policies in a society that is divided by
              race, religion, language, or other ascriptive characteristics.  In the past,
              consideration of non-economic cleavages in theoretical work has been inhibited
              by the difficulty of modeling policy choices along two or more dimensions. 
              Recent developments in formal theory now make it possible to develop a rigorous
              model of redistributive conflicts in a society divided by ascriptive traits as
              well as income.  The research will build an integrated political economy model
              in which individuals are distinguished by earning ability and an ascriptive
              characteristic (here, race); the policy space is a proportional redistributive
              tax rate and an affirmative action constraint on firms in the labor market. 
              The distribution of income and the policy are endogenous, with the latter being
              the outcome of a legislative bargaining game between three parties.  This study
              will explore conditions under which the claim that social divisions reduce the
              support for redistributive policies is correct and study more generally the
              relationship between policy outcomes and the distribution of income in
              heterogeneous societies.  Preliminary results suggest that the relative
              political weights given to different economic subgroups within the minority
              play an important role; in particular, the more weight accorded to low income
              members of the minority, the more emphasis there is on direct redistribution
              through the tax system relative to indirect redistribution through affirmative
              action in the labor market.

