Title       : Infrared Spectroscopy of High-Tc Superconductors in High Magnetic Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0240194

Award Number: 0240194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri N. Basov dbasov@physics.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator project is focused on investigations of the
              electrodynamics of high-Tc superconductors in high magnetic fields using
              infrared (IR) spectroscopy.  Through the use of systematic spectroscopic
              measurements, in a challenging parameter space involving high magnetic fields,
              low temperature, IR frequencies, it is expected that some of the long-standing
              issues in the area of high-Tc superconductivity will be resolved.  Proposed
              measurements will focus on the examination of the vortex state in high-Tc
              materials, emergence of the electronic transport across the boundary of the
              insulator-superconductor transition as well as on the investigations of the
              normal state response in the regime where superconductivity is suppressed by
              high magnetic field.  The integration of research and education within a
              challenging experimental project will aid the preparation of highly skilled
              personnel with expertise in the area at the merger of condensed matter physics,
              optics and materials science. Training of graduates will tremendously benefit
              from the use of national facilities at the National High Magnetic Field
              Laboratory. 

The origin of high-Tc superconductivity in the copper oxides is
              one of the central unsolved problems in contemporary physics. The search for
              the high-Tc mechanism involves a large fraction of the condensed matter
              community and has already led to entirely new concepts in condensed matter
              science. New initiatives described in this proposal will significantly advance
              our present understanding of the high-Tc phenomenon by way of addressing
              critically important questions. Specifically, the proposed program is aimed at
              detailed investigations of the electrodynamics of high-Tc superconductors in
              the previously unexplored parameter space involving high magnetic fields, low
              temperatures and infrared frequency range.  The research activities will
              naturally merge the boundaries of condensed matter physics, optics and material
              science. This particular combination has been identified as "critical enabler"
              of future technology that "promises to have a pervasive impact on life in the
              21st century" in a recent report of the National Research Council. This
              challenging research program will serve as a unique training ground for
              graduate students.  NSF funding will broaden participation of groups currently
              underrepresented in graduate education. 

