Title       : The Role of Calcium Channels in Facultative Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0240917

Award Number: 0240917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary A. Toranzos                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela Gelli acgelli@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gelli of the University of California at Davis,
              to study how fungal cells use calcium channels to proliferate and survive
              within the host environment. Like all eukaryotic cells, fungal cells translate
              changes in their environment into physiological responses and adaptations
              through cell signaling events.  Dr. Gelli proposes that calcium channels in
              fungal cells initiate a calcium-dependent signaling pathway by responding to
              particular host environmental conditions. Once activated the calcium-dependent
              signaling cascade promotes fungal proliferation, growth and cellular
              morphogenesis.  The ultimate goal is to understand how calcium channels
              function within signaling pathways to promote fungal proliferation and growth
              within the host. It is anticipated that this research will provide the
              knowledge to alter channel function or regulation as a means to prevent fungal
              proliferation and ultimately prevent fungal survival.

The facultative
              fungus, Cryptococcus neoformans will be used as the model organism in this
              research since this fungus offers a particularly unique opportunity to examine
              the role of calcium channels in stimulus-response coupling in the fungal-host
              relationship. Since C. neoformans is phylogenetically at the junction between
              some of the most destructive plant pathogens (such as smuts or rusts), and
              economically important food sources (mushrooms) within the Basidiomycota, the
              proposed research will impact the field of agriculture. Also since calcium
              channels in fungi have never been characterized at the level of detail proposed
              here, it is anticipated that this project will likely produce the first
              mechanistic insight in calcium channel activity in the entire fungal kingdom.
              This kind of insight will be useful to all researchers who study calcium
              channels in other fungi and in animals. In addition, the development of robust
              procedures for applying electrophysiology to fungal cells will benefit these
              same researchers.  Additionally, Dr. Gelli is involved in an outreach program
              to attract high school students into the laboratory.  This will be a great
              opportunity to get many of these students involved so that they can see first
              hand the various aspects of fungal physiology.  

