Title       : SGER: Operational and Organizational Change with Applications to Stopping
               Terrorism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0240944

Award Number: 0240944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard I. Zangwill willard.zangwill@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1786,5376,7207,9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will apply the concepts of
              process analysis, which provides a systematic and well-known means to improve
              the manufacturing and systems in organizations, to the challenge of obtaining
              intelligence information for stopping terrorism.   To complete almost any
              activity requires a series of steps from beginning to end, and process analysis
              considers the totality of those steps including their individual performance
              and how they interact.   In manufacturing applications, for example, the
              process starts with raw material and continues through various specific steps
              until the product is made.  Process analysis enables one to identify
              bottlenecks, delays, where defects are created and so on.  Most importantly, it
              can identify the critical few leverage points where small changes can quickly
              produce big improvements.  Indeed, that is the hallmark of good process
              analysis, achieving a significant improvement fast, in just a few months.
              

The intelligence cycle has many powerful similarities to the manufacturing
              process, with  the product being an excellent report instead of a quality item.
                The raw material is the raw data obtained from human intelligence, signal
              intelligence, satellites and so on.  Clearly, if the raw material is poor, so
              will be the intelligence report. After collection the information must be
              filtered since much of it is noise, just a raw material must often be processed
              into usable form.  Then the analyst does the analytical work by putting the
              components together into a coherent whole, just as modern manufacturing might
              create an advanced specialized semi-conductor.  Given the similarities and
              abundance of knowledge about improving processes, this research hopes to
              identify a few critical leverage points in the production of intelligence. 
              These leverage points then could be improved quickly thereby producing an
              improvement in the quality and excellence of intelligence against terrorism.
