Title       : SGER: Exploratory Research on Material Properties of Fire Protective Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0240228

Award Number: 0240228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Mowrer fmowrer@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Modern steel-frame high-rise buildings are typically protected from fire by the
              application of spray-applied fire resistive materials (SFRMs).  These materials
              have a number of desirable attributes, including light weight, low thermal
              conductivity, low cost and ease of application. 
Despite their widespread use
              in fire resistant assemblies, the high-temperature properties of SFRMs are not
              well characterized.  With increasing interest in analytical approaches to
              evaluating the impacts of fires on structures in the wake of the World Trade
              Center collapses on September 11, 2001, there is an increasing need to
              understand and characterize the high-temperature properties of SFRMs.  The
              purpose of this exploratory research is to evaluate the high-temperature
              properties of current and potential SFRMs to determine the fundamental bases
              for their fire resistive properties.

Samples of current and potential SFRMs
              will be subjected to fire heat fluxes using a bench-scale cone calorimeter. 
              The thermal and mechanical properties of the SFRMs will be evaluated before,
              during and after exposure to these fire heat fluxes.  Scanning electron
              microscopy will be used to observe changes in the microstructure of the SFRMs
              resulting from fire exposure and these changes in microstructure will be
              evaluated in terms of their potential effects on thermal and mechanical
              properties.  It is hypothesized that different SFRMs have different mechanisms
              to reduce heat transfer to the substrates they are protecting.  Some SFRMs are
              purely insulative, while others include endothermic dehydration or sublimation
              processes in addition to insulation to reduce heat transfer.


