Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge Systems and Social Networks: The
               Delaware Nation and Its Neighbors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0240056

Award Number: 0240056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8036               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Jackson jjackson@Ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0240056
Jackson / Fair
This dissertation research project of a cultural
              anthropologist investigates the different types of knowledge, traditional and
              non-traditional, that exist within an American Indian community in Anadarko,
              Oklahoma. This community forms a social network containing members of the
              Delaware Nation and expands to include members of the Caddo and Wichita tribes.
              The primary hypothesis is that people who are more central within the community
              have a higher level of traditional knowledge. However, these same individuals
              may not always have less familiarity with non-traditional knowledge systems,
              (such as science or non-Native ways of speaking). For example, traditional
              tribal knowledge and science might exist as complementary ways of knowing. In
              order to test these statements, the researcher, will map out the social network
              of the Delaware, Caddo, and Wichita community. Next, the traditional and
              non-traditional knowledge levels of individuals will be assessed using
              quantitative and qualitative measures. Correlating individuals' position in the
              social network with their levels of traditional and non-traditional knowledge
              will demonstrate where knowledge in located in the social network. The results
              of this project will clarify several important issues in the anthropological
              study of knowledge and social systems.  First, the study addresses the manner
              in which communities maintain and preserve traditions over time and within
              regional social networks.  Second, the project investigates the impact of
              historical circumstances on the creation and re-creation of traditions. 
              Finally, it will revise and refine existing models of cultural change in
              American Indian communities.  Current models, developed in the 1950s and 1960s,
              generally posit the deterioration of tribal and community specific traditions
              in the face of pan-tribalism and assimilation.  Newer research suggests that
              these models are grossly inadequate.  
The broader impacts of this project
              include a newer, more sophisticated understanding of contemporary American
              Indian social and cultural life. The new knowledge created by this project will
              help undermine popular stereotypes about Native American traditionalism and its
              presumed opposition to Western knowledge. Furthermore, the results of this
              project will assist tribal governments in more efficiently allocating funding
              and resources for cultural preservation programs. In addition, the project
              contributes to the training of a young social scientist. 


