Title       : SGER: Postfire Community Structure and Species Area Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0240353

Award Number: 0240353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon E. Keeley Jon_Keeley@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to request funds from the SGER program for research to study
              postfire plant response in chaparral shrublands burned during the massive fires
              this summer in Arizona and New Mexico.  There is an urgency to this request
              because the work needs to be initiated this September.  While extensive
              research has been conducted on the immediate postfire response of California
              chaparral, relatively little is known about these Southwestern U.S. chaparral
              stands.  Californian chaparral has a unique ephemeral postfire flora comprising
              hundreds of mostly annual species derived from long-lived seed banks, the vast
              majority of these species are endemic to California.  There is reason to
              believe the immediate postfire response is different in Arizona and New Mexico
              chaparral stands, and is dominated by herbaceous and woody perennials.

These
              Southwest U.S. chaparral stands are of interest for what they can potentially
              tell us about causal factors behind species area relationships.  Prior studies
              show annual dominated California shrublands exhibit very different species area
              relationships then perennial dominated Australian shrublands.  There is
              evidence that community structure revealed by very different
              dominance-diversity curves play a role in the species area relationship and
              life form differences are hypothesized to be the primary determinate of species
              area relationships.  The Southwestern U.S. chaparral stands will provide an
              independent test of this idea.   An additional dimension of this project is the
              predicted differences in functional type response to fire in these summer rain
              shrublands relative to summer drought shrublands in California.  The
              competitive relationships of the two main disturbance functional types,
              reprouters vs. seeders are predicted to differ between these two climate
              regimes.
