Title       : Sequential Lineups: Contributions of Distinctiveness and Recollection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0240182

Award Number: 0240182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Gronlund sgronlund@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The advent of DNA testing has demonstrated that innocent people are in prison,
              and faulty eyewitness identification has been shown as the primary contributor
              to the conviction of the innocent. However, a set of procedural safeguards now
              exist that can improve the reliability of eyewitness identification. Among the
              most promising is the use of sequential lineups. A sequential lineup (i.e.,
              viewing suspects one at a time) is thought to be superior to a simultaneous
              lineup (i.e., viewing all suspects at the same time) because it leads a witness
              to compare each successive person in the lineup to the witness' memory of the
              perpetrator. In contrast, a simultaneous lineup leads a witness to choose the
              person in the lineup who looks most like the perpetrator, which is problematic
              if the police have the wrong man and the actual perpetrator is still at-large.
              Without an theoretical understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
              sequential lineup advantage, however, the nationwide adoption of sequential
              lineups as a procedural safeguard will be hampered.  The goal of this research
              is to develop a quantitatively specified model of the mechanisms underlying the
              sequential lineup advantage. 

The principal investigator hypothesizes that
              the sequential lineup advantage is due to: 1) enhanced encoding of distinctive
              information and 2) use of a recall process to access that information. This
              project comprises experiments that test these hypotheses.  In one line of
              experiments, the encoding conditions will be modified to make the originally
              distinctive stimulus (i.e., height) no longer distinctive. If the model is
              right, this should make the sequential lineup advantage disappear. To evaluate
              the contribution of recall, attention is divided during lineup testing.
              Dividing attention nullifies the use of a recall process, and the sequential
              lineup advantage should disappear.  Procedural safeguards are available that
              can enhance the accuracy of eyewitness identification, but without full
              understanding of what these safeguards do and why, their influence will be
              limited. This grant will redress this limitation by developing and testing
              quantitatively specified explanations of the mechanisms underlying one such
              procedural safeguard, sequential lineups. Finally, an improved understanding of
              how a sequential lineup protects the innocent may point to other improvements
              to eyewitness identification procedures that will further enhance the
              reliability of eyewitness identification. 

