Title       : Shortening velocity and power output of muscles that produce ballistic movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0240349

Award Number: 0240349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kiisa C. Nishikawa kiisa.nishikawa@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Pierotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              New insights in biology have often come from studies of animals that exhibit
              some extreme of performance. In such animals, principles of function common to
              all animals are exaggerated, and are therefore observed and studied more
              readily. Ballistic tongue projection in toads represents one such extreme.
              During ballistic tongue projection, toad tongues can leave the mouth at
              accelerations of 2500 m/s2. Previous and ongoing research in the laboratories
              of these investigators has focused on elucidating mechanisms by which mouth
              opening muscles of toads produce the power required for this extremely rapid
              movement.
	The work in this project will focus on understanding the
              force-velocity relationships and power output of two muscles that are involved
              in powering ballistic movements: 1) the m. depressor mandibulae, which is
              solely responsible for mouth opening during tongue projection ; and 2) the m.
              semimembranosus, which along with other muscles, extends the hind limb during
              jumping. The proposed studies will use the classic load clamp or quick release
              technique to quantify the biphasic shortening behavior of these muscles during
              the transition from isometric tetanus to isotonic shortening. In the load clamp
              technique, an activated muscle is stimulated to develop tension while
              contracting against a load that prevents it from shortening. When the load is
              reduced, the muscle first shortens rapidly and then decelerates to a slower
              shortening velocity.
	In contrast to most recent studies which measure only
              the velocity of shortening during the slow phase, these investigators measured
              velocity of shortening during the initial fast phase as well. Four important
              new aspects of the shortening behavior of muscle have been discovered. During
              the fast phase: 1) shortening velocity can be high (up to nearly 100 times
              Vmax), and it differs between jaw and hind limb muscles; 2) external work
              performed contributes to total power output, although the magnitude of the
              contribution varies between the jaw and hind limb muscles; 3) shortening
              velocity increases with the duration of isometric pre-stimulation; and during
              the slow phase 4) shortening velocity also increases with the duration of
              isometric pre-stimulation, at least in some muscles.
	These results are
              consistent with a model in which a series elastic component within the
              sarcomere is stretched by the contractile elements during isometric tetanus,
              and the degree of stretch increases with the duration of isometric
              pre-stimulation. Preliminary data suggest that muscles differ adaptively in how
              kinetic energy is distributed between the fast and slow phases of shortening. A
              mechanism, such as phosphorylation of the thick and/or thin filaments, that
              controls the distribution of kinetic energy between the fast and slow phases
              would likely be important in controlling muscle power output during ballistic
              movements.
	The proposed studies will extend these preliminary studies.
              Specifically, the investigators will: 1) compare biphasic shortening of anuran
              jaw and hind limb muscles in species of anurans that differ in feeding and
              jumping performance; 2) quantify the effects of duration of isometric
              pre-stimulation and muscle length on biphasic shortening; and 3) examine the
              relationship between movement velocity and duration of muscle pre-activation in
              freely behaving animals.
	The proposed studies are likely to demonstrate: 1)
              that a significant amount of elastic potential energy, stored during isometric
              pre-stimulation, is converted to kinetic energy at the instant of release to
              isotonic shortening; and 2) that muscles differ in their strategies for
              distributing this kinetic energy between the fast and slow phases of
              shortening, thereby optimizing their power output during shorter vs. longer
              contractions. In these ways, the proposed studies have the potential to change
              our concept of how muscles shorten, especially at the high velocities that
              occur during ballistic movements.

