Title       : Theory of Composite Fermions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0240458

Award Number: 0240458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jainendra K. Jain jain@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0240458
Jain
This award supports fundamental theoretical research and
              education involving the fractional quantum Hall effect.  The PI will continue
              his work on composite fermions, electrons bound to an even number of quantized
              vortices. Most of the qualitative phenomenology of the fractional quantum Hall
              effect can be understood by neglecting the residual interaction between
              composite fermions. In recent years, improved experiments have revealed subtle
              features that go beyond this model. The main goal of this research is to study
              the effects of interaction between composite fermions to explain existing
              experimental anomalies and make predictions for future experiments. The PI will
              also use recently developed techniques to further refine the quantitative
              accuracy of the theory, which should shed light on several interesting
              questions, for example, the competition between the Wigner solid and the
              fractional Hall liquid, and the physics of edge states. Broader impacts of this
              work include graduate level training of the next generation of condensed matter
              theorists in the areas of quantum mechanics, many body physics, nanophysics.
              Students will also learn a wide range of modern numerical techniques, including
              the Monte Carlo method and gain proficiency in the use of parallel computers.
              Fundamental research on two-dimensional electron systems has helped drive
              spectacular improvements in materials quality, especially in GaAs
              semiconductors. 
%%%
A system of many electrons may act in surprising ways
              that cannot be extrapolated from the knowledge of the behavior of a single
              particle. Its understanding requires fundamentally new concepts. This award
              supports fundamental theoretical research and education on one such system,
              electrons confined to two dimensions at the interface between two
              semiconductors, cooled to low temperatures and exposed to a strong magnetic
              field. Electrons in this system exhibit integral and fractional quantum Hall
              effects, and at the same time provide realizations of subtle quantum mechanical
              states including Wigner crystals, skyrmions, stripes, and Tomonaga-Luttinger
              liquids. While progress has been made toward understanding various aspects of
              the fractional Hall effect, this research focuses on new regimes where many new
              quantum mechanical states are likely to be discovered and will focus on
              advancing the theory of composite fermions, electrons bound to an even number
              of quantized vortices, which currently captures the qualitative features of the
              fractional quantum Hall regime. Anomalies observed in recent experiments
              provide motivation for this work.  
This award contributes to the education of
              the next generation of condensed matter theorists in the areas of quantum
              mechanics, many body physics, and the physics of nanoscale systems. Students
              will also learn appropriate related numerical techniques, including the Monte
              Carlo method, and gain proficiency in the use of parallel computers.
              Fundamental research on two dimensional electrons systems has helped drive
              spectacular improvements in materials quality, especially in GaAs
              semiconductors. 
***


