Title       : Nuclear Resonance Spectroscopy of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0240955

Award Number: 0240955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358275             (Estimated)
Investigator: J T. Sage jtsage@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Champion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7246      BIOLOGICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1144,1164,7246,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This experimental program will exploit technological advances that establish
              nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy (NRVS) as a site-specific,
              quantitative probe for vibrational dynamics in iron- containing proteins and
              model compounds. Ultrahigh resolution synchrotron-based measurements of X-ray
              absorption near the 14.4keV  57-Fe Moessbauer resonance reveal the complete
              vibrational spectrum of Fe.. NRVS provides quantitative information on
              vibrational amplitudes as well as frequencies and allows one to deduce the
              direction of Fe motion from measurements on oriented samples. Observations will
              include structurally sensitive modes, or vibrational spectators, that are not
              easily measurable using other techniques.  A theme of particular interest is
              the identification and characterization of vibrational participants, modes
              directly involved in biological reactions. Fe is the reactive center of many
              biological reactions, and reactive modes involving the Fe must contribute to
              the NRVS signal. Measurements on Fe porphyrin powders and single crystals,
              coupled with normal mode analysis, will establish the character of observed
              modes, including participants, and provide a basis for interpreting
              measurements on proteins.  An issue of particular interest in the protein
              studies is whether vibrations remain localized at the active site, or acquire a
              more global character by vibrational mixing with the surrounding polypeptide,
              and the structural factors responsible for this local or global character. 
              

The project will have a broad impact in at least three areas: (1) Work on
              this project is an outstanding training opportunity.  (2) The project
              establishes collaborative ties between disciplines and institutions,
              necessitating diverse expertise in synthetic chemistry, molecular biology, and
              modern computational approaches. (3) Development and dissemination of
              next-generation instrumentation at a multi-user facility is an integral aspect
              of the proposed work, as Instrumental advances developed in support of the
              proposed work become available to other synchrotron users. 

This award is
              co-sponsored by the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Science
              Directorate and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences.

