Title       : Gender and Cooperation in Social Dilemmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0240802

Award Number: 0240802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent Simpson bts@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research extends recent work on the conditions under which gender affects
              cooperation in "social dilemmas," or collective action situations that pose
              conflicts between the individual's own interests and the group's interests. 
              Despite theoretical expectations of gender differences in which women are seen
              as more likely to cooperate than men, nearly four decades of research has
              failed to find clear patterns consistent with these expectations.  The first
              goal of this research is to examine whether the failure to draw more definitive
              conclusions from previous work stems from the fact that past studies have
              relied exclusively on the "Prisoners' Dilemma" (PD) paradigm to look for gender
              differences.  Several theories suggest we should expect gender differences in
              cooperation, but not necessarily in PD.  More specifically, these theories
              predict that females are more likely to respond non-cooperatively to the "fear
              component" in social dilemmas (the prospect that one's cooperation may be
              exploited), while males are more likely to respond non-cooperatively to the
              "greed component" (the temptation to free-ride on others' cooperation).  Since
              the PD situation contains both fear and greed components, it is not surprising
              that previous research has not shown clearer evidence of gendered responses. 
              Two experimental studies will be conducted here in an effort to disentangle the
              fear and greed components of cooperation.  The first study varies the relative
              size of the fear and greed components.  The second study investigates the
              effects of the gender composition of groups on cooperation.  Because social
              dilemmas are inherent in a wide range of social, economic, and political
              situations, the broader impacts of this research lie, in part, in its capacity
              to illuminate the factors that lead to cooperation or failure to cooperate in
              situations where there are conflicts between individual and collective
              interests.  Further, this research should produce a better understanding of the
              determinants of gender differences in behavior in a variety of collective
              action contexts, from everyday social exchanges in friendships and families,
              between neighbors, in workplaces, as well as in contributions to and
              participation in large-scale organizations and collective action.

