Title       : Interactions Among Observations of Laterally Advected Heat and Moisture, Cloud
               Properties, Surface Temperature, Surface Radiation Fluxes, and Net
               Precipitation in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0240827

Award Number: 0240827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Ackerman stevea@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the proposed investigation the PIs will examine interactions and feedbacks
              among five fundamental components of the Arctic environment: horizontally
              transported heat and moisture, cloud properties, surface temperature, net
              precipitation, and surface radiation fluxes. Conventional meteorological data
              are sparse over the Arctic Ocean, and other than surface pressure fields and
              temperatures there is relatively little information with which to investigate
              these issues in a pan-Arctic sense. Newly available satellite-derived data sets
              from the NOAA/NASA Pathfinder Program offer an unprecedented opportunity to
              observe the Arctic climate by providing measurements of atmospheric quantities
              spanning two decades. Preliminary calculations using these data indicate that
              significant, cohesive changes have occurred in surface temperature, advection
              patterns, and cloud properties, but how are they related to each other? How do
              these apparent trends relate to changes in the surface radiation balance? Can
              the observed trends be explained by large-scale atmospheric circulation
              features, such as the Arctic Oscillation, North Atlantic Oscillation, North
              Pacific Oscillation, or others? These are the questions the PI's expect to
              address in this investigation. The proposed study speaks directly to three of
              the four hypotheses targeted by the new multiagency initiative called the Study
              of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH): 1) Unaami (the name given to the suite
              of observed pan-Arctic changes) is related to the Arctic Oscillation, 2)Unaami
              is a component of climate change, and 3) Feedbacks among the ocean, land, ice
              and the atmosphere are critical to Unaami. Using two newly-available, 20-year,
              satellite-derived data sets in combination with surface observations, the PI's
              will diagnose patterns of and interactions among change in transported heat and
              moisture, cloud properties, surface temperature, net precipitation, and surface
              radiation fluxes, and test the hypothesis that these patterns are interrelated
              and aligned with large-scale circulation features in the atmosphere. The
              broader impacts of this activity are 1) to contribute toward understanding and
              predicting global climate processes and change, 2) to involve graduate students
              in the research, and 3) to provide material to be included in undergraduate
              course material for classes in remote sensing and cryospheric processes.
