Title       : SGER: Miniature Temperature Sensors for Harsh Environments and Studying Energy
               Transport at Microscales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0240020

Award Number: 0240020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie Phinney phinney@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,7234,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research advances the capabilities for performing thermal measurements at
              small scales, which in turn, facilitates the design, development, and
              production of devices and systems for commercial and government applications
              based on micro- and nanotechnologies.  Micro- and nanosystems are enabling
              innumerable exciting and beneficial applications for society; however, many
              challenges are created by miniaturization including thermal measurement at
              small scales, below 100 microns.  The development of alternative and easy to
              use thermal metrology methods is necessary for the design, development, and
              optimization of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and nanoelectromechanical
              systems (NEMS).  The temperature sensors are based on the thermomechanical
              response of a structure when heated so that it thermal expands differently than
              the underlying substrate.  Since only optical access is needed to make the
              measurement, this temperature-sensing scheme can be used in harsh environments,
              e.g. high temperatures, where electrical signals can no longer be obtained. 
              Additionally, these microsensors will be used to study fundamental issues of
              microscale energy transport such as the amount of convection and radiation at
              small scales.  This research program will train students in fabrication and
              characterization skills needed in micro- and nanotechnology industries, and the
              results will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community and public. 
              The award is funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of
              the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.


