Title       : Symposium on Cardiovascular Technologies: Devices and Tissue Engineering in
               Hartford, Connecticut
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0240854

Award Number: 0240854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Bronzino joseph.bronzino@beaconalliance.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    860/297-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0240854
Bronzino
Important advances in "Cardiovascular Technologies" occurred
              during the past decade; implantable defibrillators, new stent designs for
              angioplasty, and heart assist devices including new artificial heart designs.
              Additionally, there have been breakthroughs in "tissue engineering" that are
              expected to revolutionize the treatment of cardiovascular disease. This area of
              technology is important with the Symposium and the associated Technology Fair
              being designed to provide practicing professionals and students interested in
              bioscience and engineering an opportunity to become familiar with some of the
              latest developments in the field.  The topics to be covered include: "Advances
              in the Design of the Artificial Heart, the ABIOCOR Artificial Heart Program",
              "Frontiers of Organ and Tissue Replacement", "Cardiovascular Tissue
              Engineering", "Fetal Cardiology", "Advances in Interventional Cardiology", and
              "Electrical Mapping of the Heart". 
 
The primary objectives of this
              Symposium and the Associated Technology Fair are:
	
Present insights into the
              new research and development efforts underway on developing new cardiovascular
              technologies.

Present examples of successful academic/industrial
              collaborations in these areas.

Provide the opportunity for researchers and
              entrepreneurs to present innovative approaches and products related to the
              entire field of biomedical engineering.

As illustrated by the topics to be
              covered, the intellectual merit of the Symposium is high and will have
              significant impact on the bioscience and biomedical engineering community in
              the region. Through the publication of the Proceedings a beneficial impact on
              students and professionals will extend to the national level. The associated
              Technology Fair provides an opportunity for both students and professionals to
              discuss the process of innovation with those currently engaged in the
              technology development process.

