Title       : First Japan-U.S. Workshop on Testing, Modeling and Simulation in Geomechanics;
               Boston, MA; June 27-29, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0240765

Award Number: 0240765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry A. Yamamuro yamamuro@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0240765, Jerry A. Yamamuro, U. of Delaware 
"First Japan-U.S. Workshop on
              Testing, Modeling and Simulation in Geomechanics"

This action provides
              support for the First Japan-U.S. Workshop on Testing, Modeling and Simulation
              in Geomechanics, to be held in Boston, Massachusetts, June 27-29, 2003.  This
              meeting was initiated by the signing of an Agreement of Cooperation between the
              American Society of Civil Engineers Geo-Institute (G-I) and the Japanese
              Geotechnical Society (JGS).  The purpose of this agreement is to "promote and
              enlarge the exchange of technical, scientific and professional knowledge to
              better serve the interests and welfare of their members, the engineering
              profession in general, and the public in both countries."

The goal of the
              Workshop is to bring together the top researchers from Japan and the United
              States in various fields of geomechanics, specifically experimentation,
              constitutive modeling, and numerical simulations.  Researchers from Japan and
              the U.S. will be invited to present current relevant research activities on a
              variety of topics for the expressed purpose of sharing knowledge so as to
              foster and build cooperative efforts between the two countries.

The topics
              that will be presented are of broad current interest, and are considered to be
              the state-of-the-art.  They include: inherent and stress system-induced
              anisotropic properties; highly non-linear stress-strain behavior; elastic
              stress-strain behavior at small strains; post-peak stress-strain behavior;
              mechanics of shear banding; effects of strain rate, aging, and viscous effects
              on stress-strain behavior; effects of particle size and gradation on
              stress-strain behavior; stress-strain behavior and residual strains obtained
              from cyclic loading; mechanics of soil liquefaction; and soil dynamics and the
              determination of soil behavior using geophysical methods.  The types of
              geomaterials will be limited to unbound and cemented soils.

Information
              about the Workshop and its activities will be disseminated via the World Wide
              Web.  Papers and abstracts will be posted on this website for general access,
              but, especially by non-participants.  E-mail discussions before and after the
              Workshop will be implemented to obtain feedback and to create new ideas for
              future workshops.  The proceedings of the workshop will be made available
              electronically.

