Title       : Mechanical Explanation in Ancient Greek Philosophy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0240316

Award Number: 0240316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Berryman berryman.9@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT
SES 0240316
Sylvia Berryman, Ohio State
              University
"Mechanical Explanation in Ancient Greek Philosophy"



This
              project aims to develop a new characterization of mechanistic explanation
              in
ancient natural philosophy. It has been recognized that the current
              practice of applying the terms mechanical or mechanistic to characterize
              ancient natural philosophers is problematic. This project argues that the
              applicability of the term mechanistic does not depend on necessary and
              sufficient conditions, but rather on a method of understanding natural
              processes by analogy to mechanics as that is understood. Understanding the term
              in this way draws attention to developing ideas about the mechanical art in the
              ancient world, and the application of these to the understanding of the natural
              world. An alternative way of characterizing the significance of ancient atomism
              is offered, namely, the presence of conservationist assumptions about
              causation.
The project begins from an argument to the effect that attempts to
              define mechanistic conceptions by a single characteristic are wanting. Both the
              many different ways in which the mechanistic is typically characterized, and
              the frequency of open-ended lists, indicate that the term refers, at heart, to
              the use of analogy to the discipline of mechanics as a guide in investigating
              the functioning of natural processes. As such, the development of mechanistic
              thought requires a developed mechanical art to serve as a point of reference:
              comparisons to real working artifacts play a role quite different from that of
              imaginary conceptions. There is evidence in late antiquity that at least some
              thinkers adopted the approach that proved influential in the early modern
              world, namely, the attempt to understand nature as working like constructed
              devices. This work examines evidence that ideas from the mechanical art were
              applied to the understanding of natural processes, and that mechanics was
              understood as a part of natural philosophy. So understood, the term mechanistic
              has little relevance to understanding ancient atomism. It offers a proposal
              towards understanding the feature of atomism that has lent credence to this
              usage: the principle that nothing comes from nothing justifies the assumption
              that causation ought to be answerable to certain quantitative restrictions.
              This seems to have developed independently of the idea that nature works like a
              machine.
This proposal aims to develop a new conception of the terms in which
              the study of ancient natural philosophy is framed, and thereby to help foster
              philosophical interest in the development of ancient mechanics and its impact
              on ideas about the understanding of natural processes. It is hoped that this
              research will help foster the renewed interest among scholars of ancient
              philosophy in the interactions between the scientific work of the Hellenistic
              period and philosophical ideas about nature and its explanation.

