Title       : SGER: Forest Fires and Soil Weathering: Do Extreme Wildfire Events Impact the
               Weathering of Soil Mineral Components?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0240303

Award Number: 0240303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Pope Popeg@mail.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brigitte P. Neus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,9196,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Catastrophic burning of conifer forests during wildfires frequently results in
              surface temperatures in excess of 600 degrees C.  This presents an extreme and
              unique environment with consequences for weathering of rocks and minerals in
              the soil.  Changes in mineral and rock weathering affect erosion, water
              infiltration, and nutrient availability and are important impacts of wildfire. 
              This research will address how mineral constituents of the soil react to the
              extreme heat of forest fires, and how this impacts the physical properties of
              the soil  The research compares weathering characteristics of soil components
              (minerals and particles) from recently burned sites with weathering
              characteristics of soils in unburned areas, using the Hayman (Colorado) and
              Rodeo-Chedeski (Arizona) fires of summer 2002 as case studies. About 25 sites
              from each fire will be surveyed in areas varying in topography and degree of
              fire impact.  A field survey will assess (1) environmental impacts (erosion,
              vegetation loss); (2) soil profiles; (3) soil physical properties; and (4)
              weathering of rock outcrops and cobbles. Samples will be taken throughout the
              soil profile for laboratory analysis. Laboratory analysis will include: (1)
              particle size analysis; (2) backscatter electron microscopy to assess
              mechanical and chemical weathering of soil particles and minerals at small
              scales; (3) inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy to assess
              the soil's chemical composition and nutrient depletion due to leaching, (4)
              x-ray diffraction to identify clay minerals and post-fire alteration of these
              minerals; (5) water loss on heating to identify the amount of water held at the
              molecular level; and (6) tests using high temperature (oven) exposure of
              unfired soil samples in order to simulate and model fire conditions. It is
              expected that severe fires will have a significant impact on weathering of
              soils including alteration and disintegration of minerals, aggregation and
              cementing of soil particles, and release and leaching of elements and nutrients
              from the soil. 

A better understanding of soil weathering processes will
              lead to more comprehensive information for management of the soil and the
              ecosystem, and aid reclamation efforts following catastrophic fires. This
              research project will provide a laboratory assessment of weathering
              characteristics that will be linked to associated field characteristics; this
              information will be able to be applied by forest and watershed managers. For
              example, where soil weathering has produced particle disintegration due to
              enhanced weathering, forest managers might anticipate soils of finer texture,
              with less water infiltration and higher surface runoff and erosion rates.
              However, finer soils tend to resist water repellency often observed after
              fires, and may promote an increase in nutrient availability. These soils would
              be most suitable for revegetation if surface runoff can be controlled. If fires
              promote the weathering-related release of cementing agents like iron, aluminum
              and silica, soil particles could combine into larger aggregates, resulting in a
              coarser soil. Coarse soils would have higher infiltration rates (with less
              surface runoff), but higher water repellency, and a greater susceptibility for
              nutrient leaching. Recovery of such soils from wildfire may be harder. 
              Recognizing how these disparate processes occur is not well understood at
              present. This project will address these unknowns by applying advanced
              instrumentation and detailed field survey with modern knowledge sense of how
              soil, vegetation, and atmospheric systems interact. 

