Title       : CAREER: Active Orthotics for Helping the Neuromuscularly Impaired to Walk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0240313

Award Number: 0240313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gill A. Pratt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin W. Olin College
	      1735 Great Plain Avenue
	      Needham, MA  024921245    /   -

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many neuromuscularly impaired and/or elderly individuals find  it  too difficult
              or too frightening to walk. Often these individuals  can  walk  in  controlled
              environments, but lack the strength  to  recover  from large force disturbances
              encountered  in  the  real  world. Such individuals might be helped if a
              lightweight, active,  leg  orthosis occasionally acted to compensate large 
              forces  and  stabilize gait when a fall is immanent. There are three technical 
              and two scientific challenges that must be addressed to make such  a   device 
              possible.  Technically,  the  system  must  be   very  lightweight, have no
              need for external (e.g. e.m.g.) sensors, and  have a battery that lasts at
              least an entire day. Scientifically,  the  system must act with appropriate
              mechanical behavior and  be  able  to  estimate the user's ground-relative limb
               configuration  and motive intent based on a minimum of sensory information. 
              All  five  of  these issues will be addressed in this study.   On  the 
              Educational frontier, the subject of computer architecture is one  of   the 
              most  rapidly  evolving  in  the  field  of  electrical  engineering  and 
              computer science.  In order to  teach  computer  architecture  to
              undergraduates, we must give them  a  laboratory  substrate  that  is both
              motivating (in that students  can  build  circuits  that solve interesting
              problems in real time)  and  not  prohibitively difficult to use. The
              educational portion  of  this  grant  will  be  used  to complete work on a 
              scalable  FPGA  lab  substrate  for computer architecture education. It will 
              also  be  used  to  aid an ongoing effort to restructure MIT's common  core 
              curriculum in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science into  a  more
              coherent whole.
