Title       : Growth and Dynamics of Extended Actin Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0240770

Award Number: 0240770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1238316            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anders E. Carlsson aec@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0240770
Carlsson
	This work is aimed at clarifying the mechanisms by which
              cells integrate a set of external inputs to determine a motility response.
              Algorithms are developed for treating cross-linking and elasticity of growing
              actin-filament networks in the presence of several types of cross-linking
              proteins. These are used to determine the response of a cell to external
              signals that influence cross-linking and branching rates. The algorithms use a
              stochastic-growth methodology, which treats actin filament growth,
              depolymerization, capping, branch formation and detachment, and attachment of
              filaments to each other by cross-links. Elastic effects are included in the
              algorithms by the use of a special-points method. The three-dimensional
              structure of the actin cytoskeleton is followed at a resolution of individual
              subunits. The values of the rate parameters in the model are obtained from in
              vitro experiments for simplified cases. The code is also used to evaluate the
              potential for spontaneous formation of localized protrusions. The model
              predictions are tested by polymerization experiments with several types of
              cross-linking and branching proteins. 
	Practically all types of cells are
              capable of moving in a way very different from muscle cells: white blood cells
              chasing bacteria, cells moving to remodel tissue after an injury, and migrating
              cancerous cells. Such motion is based on the protein actin, which is very
              abundant in cells, and accumulates in long filaments. These filaments can
              connect to each other, forming networks or other types of structures, which can
              push against a cell membrane and thus cause the cell to move. The "decision"
              about whether and how a cell moves is based on external signals, which activate
              or deactivate various types of filament connections. But it is not known
              exactly what actin structures form in response to a given set of external
              signals. The calculations predict these structures using powerful simulation
              methodologies based on parallel computers. By thus establishing the response of
              the actin structures in cells to external signals, one can hope to better
              understand the nature of diseases related to these actin structures. This will
              also help in understanding the migration of cancerous cells, which could
              eventually aid the development of cancer treatments. This grant is made under
              the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of
              Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National
              Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of
              Health.

