Title       : Phylogenetic diversity of bacterioplankton in relation to distribution of
               cell-specific physiological properties and environmental conditions in an
               upwelling ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0240785

Award Number: 0240785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry F. Sherr sherrb@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn B. Sherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Marine bacterioplankton are central and quantitatively significant components of
              marine ecosystems; their role looms large in determining the capacity of
              oceanic systems to sequester atmospheric CO2 into the deep ocean.  Current
              models constructed to examine these questions consider marine bacterioplankton
              as a monolithically active compartment. This is in large part due to the lack
              of understanding regarding whether specific phylogenetic or physiologically
              identifiable groups of bacteria have distinct conditions for optimal growth, or
              whether diverse groups of bacterioplankton do in fact respond uniformly to
              changing environmental conditions, as the models assume. Flow cytometric
              enumeration of marine bacterioplankton using nucleic-acid specific stains has
              shown the routine presence of two distinct clusters of bacterial cells based on
              cell-specific nucleic acid (NA, i.e. DNA and RNA) content. Opposing ideas have
              been proposed concerning these distinct clusters of bacteria: 1) most bacterial
              activity is due to cells with higher nucleic acid content (high-NA), while
              lower nucleic acid content cells (low-NA) are either slow-growing or dead, or
              2) both high-NA and low-NA cells have similar biomass-specific rates of
              activity. This research will focus on the high-NA and low-NA cells present in
              bacterial communities in the Oregon upwelling ecosystem. Two alternative
              hypotheses will be examined: Ho 1. High-NA and low-NA bacterial cells are
              composed of phylogenetically distinct bacterial assemblages that show
              differences in physiological activity. This would be the case if high NA and
              low-NA cells tend to fall into separate assemblages of cells that are adapted
              to different growth strategies.  Ho 2- High-NA and low-NA cells tend to have
              similar phylogenetic compositions and similar biomass-specific rates of
              activity. The approach will involve flow cytometric enumeration and sorting of
              bacteria based on cell-specific nucleic acid or protein content. Sorted
              bacteria will be assayed for cell-specific activity via prior labeling with
              radioactive substrates, and assayed for phylogenetic diversity via PCR
              amplification of DNA extracted from sorted cells followed by DGGE analysis,
              sequencing of selected gel bands, and phylogenetic identification. At the same
              time, radiolabeled subsamples will be collected on filters and analyzed by
              combined microautoradiography and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
              using domain-specific probes, as well as more specific probes, in order to
              determine the relative contribution of substrate-active phylogenetic groups to
              total bacterial abundance. A main goal of the project is to put the results in
              ecological context, i.e. to relate variability in activity and diversity among
              high-NA and low-NA bacterioplankton to environmental parameters likely to
              affect the growth of marine bacteria (e.g. potential bottom-up controls such as
              phytoplankton biomass and riverine DOC influx). 

Intellectual merit: This
              research project will address the linkages between physiological and
              phylogenetic diversity in marine bacterioplankton, and how such linkages might
              affect bacterial processing of organic matter in marine systems. The results
              would be a significant step in understanding the role of specific phylogenetic
              components of the bacterioplankton community in global biogeochemical cycles
              and carbon flux.  Broader impacts: This project will support the Ph.D. thesis
              research of a female graduate student and provide the student with
              post-doctoral training; it will also enhance the teaching efforts of the P.I..s
              and support the common use Flow Cytometry Facility and molecular genetics
              capabilities in the College of Oceanography and Atmospheric Sciences. 

