Title       : Geometrical Approaches to Frustrated and Many-Body Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0240953

Award Number: 0240953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Henley clh@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0240953
Henley
This award supports theoretical and computational research and
              education seeking to elucidate the origins and effects of strong correlations
              in fermion and boson systems and the role of frustration in spin systems. The
              research has three focus areas.
I. A model of spinless fermions with neighbor
              exclusion will be further studied, via variational wavefunctions for holes
              moving on the stripes, the charged, quantum fluctuating antiphase boundaries,
              found in this model and for analytic justification of the low-density fermi
              liquid. A Wigner-crystal-like phase is a candidate for spontaneous currents, as
              is a 2 1 ladder.
II. A truncation scheme for interacting-fermion Hamiltonians
              on lattices is aimed at constructing renormalized creation operators on blocks
              of sites by a sort of canonical transformation, and thereby extracting
              quasiparticle dispersion relations. It will be tested for the square-lattice,
              neighbor-excluded spinless fermion model. An alternative truncation criterion
              for such blocks will be tested, that uses the (many-particle) density matrix on
              clusters overlapping the blocks, to optimize the translational invariance of
              the truncated wavefunction. Finally, adaptations of the Cluster Dynamic Mean
              Field Theory will be explored, that replace single-electron Green's functions
              on a block by a dynamic version of the block's density matrix,
III. Spin
              correlations will be predicted for the highly frustrated and degenerate
              pyrochlore lattice antiferromagnets, in two regimes. For the disordered regime,
              unusual singularities in the diffuse neutron diffraction pattern will be
              explained in terms of the constraint of zero total spin in each tetrahedron,
              and a complete ?ting form will be developed. In the large-S Heisenberg spin
              regime, an effective Hamiltonian of Ising-gauge form will be investigated as
              encoding the ground-state selection effects of harmonic spin-waves, and the
              exact ordering pattern will be derived from spin-wave expansion to anharmonic
              order. In two-dimensional models, a high-?eld square lattice spin model and a
              similar "quantum 6-vertex model" will be investigated using the map to an
              interface and coarse-graining, to extract dynamic structure factors. 
Projects
              I and II are aimed at the fundamental question: how can we truly understand the
              groundstate correlations of a strongly interacting model, possibly in an exotic
              quantum state, when brute-force computational power is inevitably too limited?
              Rather than augment computational power, the PI seeks to make better use of
              potential information in any simulation, by understanding better what degrees
              of freedom are the most important, and what additional quantities are desirable
              to measure. The style of this research is pertinent to pedagogical goals: the
              priority is to develop pictures that fairly represent the fundamental reasons
              for a phenomenon, or counter-examples that force a re-thinking of common
              assumptions, rather than produce close fits of experimental results. This
              motivates a search for the simplest concrete model that exhibits a particular
              effect. Rather than adapting well-known techniques to additional systems for
              which answers are desired, these projects aim to develop new techniques, that
              complement existing techniques by providing a different viewpoint and hopefully
              by being more concrete or transparent (e.g. preferring real over Fourier space
              or direct mappings over dualities, when either way will work). Project III is
              motivated by ongoing experiments in highly frustrated magnets. This area has
              the potential to be a rich source of interesting strongly interacting systems.
              The complicated lattices and ordering patterns provide much scope for the
              geometrical approach that has been a theme of the PI's work. Broader impacts of
              this work include graduate and higher level education in modern condensed
              matter theory and the possibility that this research creates tools and insights
              that not only lead to progress on rich and difficult problems of strongly
              correlated electron systems, but are also applicable to broader areas of
              condensed matter physics. 
%%%
This award supports theoretical and
              computational research and education seeking to elucidate the origins and
              physics of strongly correlated electron materials and the role of frustration
              in spin systems. The research involves the creative blending of advanced
              theoretical techniques, computation, and nonstandard models to develop new
              techniques and physical insights into the rich and exotic quantum mechanical
              states displayed in strongly correlated electron materials. A thrust of the
              research aims to maximize information obtained from computational simulations
              on small systems. Another focus of the research involves systems of spins with
              geometric arrangements that are not compatible with the interactions between
              them.  Understanding the effects of this frustration observed in some materials
              may open avenues to the discovery of new materials that may exhibit
              qualitatively new strongly correlated quantum states. The broader impacts of
              this work lie in graduate and higher level education in the modern condensed
              matter theory and in the possibility that this research creates tools and
              insights that not only lead to progress on a notoriously hard problem but find
              application outside the original area of research. 
***

