Title       : Noise Studies of Disordered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0240644

Award Number: 0240644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Weissman mbw@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics research applies low frequency noise and aging
              techniques to several unsolved problems of disordered condensed matter.  The
              primary foci will be mixed-phase colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) materials and
              relaxor ferroelectrics.  Noise provides a sensitive probe of the mixed-phase
              states involved in much CMR, allowing direct thermodynamic measurements of
              small regions and revealing the extent to which the current flow can be
              inhomogeneous.  The roles of random substitutional disorder, of net strain, and
              of anisotropic strain constraints in stabilizing mixed phases will be
              investigated in several materials, particularly manganites.  Multilayer
              materials with net doping equal to that of conventional solid-solution
              materials will provide a particularly direct test of the role of quenched
              randomness.  Relaxor ferroelectrics freeze into an overall disordered
              collection of locally ferroelectric nanodomains, allowing them to retain useful
              high dielectric and piezoelectric coefficients over a broader temperature range
              than do conventional ferroelectrics.  However, there is little consensus on the
              mechanism or mechanisms behind this glassy freezing in various relaxors.  Noise
              and aging allow determination of the forms of unconventional, glassy freezing
              on scales both larger and smaller than those of the nanodomains.  A new model,
              analogous to a reentrant spinglass freezing, is suggested by initial results on
              some standard relaxors.  Comparative studies of several dissimilar relaxor
              materials will sort out which models are applicable to which categories.  The
              graduate students working on these projects have been able to use both
              table-top small-science techniques and sophisticated lithography and
              characterization techniques.  They have typically gone on to work in the
              materials side of the computer industry or in further basic
              research.

Although there are many well-developed techniques for studying
              regularly ordered crystalline materials, which have formed the basis of the
              semiconductor industry, many of the materials now under development for use in
              sensors and other applications are disordered.  The techniques for studying
              disordered materials, in which every site is a bit different from every other
              site, are not so well developed.  In disordered materials, there are typically
              many slightly different physical states among which the material spontaneously
              fluctuates, giving rise to low-frequency noise.  This research focuses on using
              that noise as a probe to study the basic physics of several materials.  One of
              the main types to be studied will be colossal magnetoresistive materials, which
              can be driven from a poorly conducting non-magnetic state to a conducting
              metallic state by application of a magnetic field, providing a potentially
              useful sensor device.  Initial studies show that this change typically happens
              by a patchwork of conducting and non-conducting regions, rather than by a
              smooth homogeneous change. Noise provides a way of seeing the behavior of the
              individual patches, and thus allows a detailed look at how changes in materials
              affect this transition.  The other main topic will be relaxor ferroelectrics,
              which freeze into a patchwork of regions in which the electrical dipoles of
              many thousands of crystalline cells line up together, but these units then
              collectively freeze in a random-looking pattern.  That random pattern turns out
              to have useful properties unlike those of regular patterns.  Noise studies (and
              related studies of slow aging vs. time) allow determination of the scale and
              type of the interactions driving this peculiar freezing.  The students working
              on these projects have been able to use both table-top small-science techniques
              and sophisticated large-scale facilities for making and characterizing samples.
               They have typically gone on to work in the materials side of the computer
              industry or in further basic research.

