Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Shotgun Sequencing of Tetrahymena thermophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0240361

Award Number: 0240361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2567000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Eisen jeisen@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tetrahymena thermophila is an excellent model microbial organism for fundamental
              eukaryotic experimental cell and molecular biology and for comparative and
              functional genomics. Tetrahymena is a free-living, non-pathogenic member of a
              unique group of eukaryotes known as the Alveolata. Because Tetrahymena exhibits
              remarkable functional conservation at the molecular and cellular level with
              animals (more so than other model systems such as yeast) and because scientists
              have developed robust and novel molecular genetic tools for studying its
              biology, Tetrahymena is an ideal model system for the investigation of animal
              biology. Tetrahymena is also an excellent model system for general studies of
              eukaryotes and for studies of related pathogenic organisms such as the
              causative agent of malaria. The primary goal of this project, a collaborative
              effort of The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) and the Tetrahymena
              research community, is the whole-genome shotgun-sequencing, assembly and
              annotation of the expressed (macronuclear) T. thermophila genome. The project
              has three aims: (1) To whole-genome shotgun sequence and assemble the
              macronuclear genome to a depth of 3.5-fold sequence coverage (Funding for an
              additional 3-fold coverage has been obtained from the NIH, so the combined
              result of NSF and NIH support will be 6 to 7-fold coverage.); (2) to annotate
              and analyze the genome sequence, including the identification of putative
              genes, prediction of gene function, and other features standard for genomic
              analysis; and (3) to facilitate user-friendly and free access to the T.
              thermophila genome sequence and annotation by the creation of interlinked
              genome databases. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a
              collaborative activity between the National Science Foundation and the
              Department of Agriculture.
