Title       : Nonlinear Signal Analysis Approach to Protein Structure/Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0240230

Award Number: 0240230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Zbilut Joseph_P_Zbilut@rush.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Webber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rush-Pres St Luke Med Ctr
	      1653 West Congress Parkway
	      Chicago, IL  606123809    312/942-5479

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0240230
Zbilut
	This project takes a unique and somewhat novel approach by
              treating the amino acid code as a "signal." In so doing it uses recurrence
              analysis, a method derived from nonlinear dynamics. An important feature of
              this method is the absence of mathematical assumptions: proteins are relatively
              short, nonlinear and nonstationary, thus precluding the uninformed use of more
              traditional signal analysis methods. This strategy seeks to uncover unforeseen
              "singularities" of hydrophobicity in proteins and related function. The main
              steps of this signal analysis approach can be summarized as follows: 1) use of
              an hydrophobic code for primary structures; and 2) treatment of the
              hydrophobicity distribution along the sequence like a time series, with the
              corresponding use of nonlinear signal analysis techniques, in order to underpin
              fine position-dependent properties of the hydrophobicity profiles. It is
              posited that singularities in the code identify important loci at which
              proteins may fold correctly vs. aggregate. Moreover, the direction chosen is
              dependent upon local factors, or boundary conditions, which force a stochastic
              understanding of the process in terms of combinatorial probabilities. There is
              also a suggestion that these folding choices describe natural processes of
              aging and/or pathology The main aims of the project are: 1)the development of a
              preliminary taxonomy of these hydrophobic singularities; 2)a cataloguing of the
              singularities' protein context; i.e., a determination of their boundary
              conditions(e.g., secondary structure, absolute values, scaling etc.); and 3)an
              evaluation of their correlation with physico-chemical properties especially
              electrostatic variables The entire structure of the protein is fitted to
              perform many tasks but possibly only local patches (and consequently peculiar
              local hydrophobicity singularities) may be crucial for a given action or
              structure.
	From a chemical viewpoint, proteins, which are important elements
              in all forms of life, are made of amino acids. The majority of proteins "fold"
              as relatively small self-contained structures. Each protein found in nature has
              a specific three-dimensional structure and this structure is determined by the
              sequence of amino acids and their attendant degrees of aversion for water. This
              makes the particular linear arrangement of amino acids constituting a protein
              an efficient recipe for the solution of a chemico-physical problem that
              basically is the folding to a given unique three-dimensional structure in water
              solution. What the sequence must attain in order to be a real protein is
              basically to be water-soluble, having a well-defined (if not necessarily
              static) three-dimensional structure allowing for motions in solution (proteins
              do their work in a dynamical way by coordinated motions of their scaffolds)
              while at the same time maintaining their global shape. This is not an easy task
              and only a relative minority of linear amino acid arrangements are effective
              solutions to this problem. This is equivalent to saying that the "code" linking
              a sequence to its particular structure is not immediately apparent.
              Nevertheless it is known that the three-dimensional structure of a protein is
              in some (still obscure) way encoded in its amino acid order. Indeed, this
              question is more intriguing given the evidence that any protein can "misfold,"
              causing possibly diseases such as Alzheimer's, "mad cow" or "aging" in general.
              Thus, the most basic problem in the sequence/structure puzzle is: "What
              particular linear arrangement of amino acids makes a real protein. This project
              seeks to answer this question by using unique "signal analysis" techniques
              which may uncover peculiarities in the sequence. Clearly, should distinctive
              conditions be discovered which promote particular protein folding behavior,
              enhanced understanding (and control) of pathology, senescence, and therapeutics
              could result. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to
              Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
              competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
              National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
              Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.

