Title       : Micro-evolutionary Effects of Sea-ice Conditions in the Ringed Seal, Phoca
               hispida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0240992

Award Number: 0240992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per J. Palsboll palsboll@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Palsboll
OPP-0240992

Sea ice constitutes a dominant, but highly
              dynamic physical feature of marine Polar environments and significantly affects
              the distribution of most species. Much attention has been placed on correlating
              species distribution with annual ice conditions, but no study has focused on
              the micro-evolution of marine fauna as a function of annual ice conditions.
              This study will test the hypothesis that annual sea ice conditions
              significantly affects the micro-evolution of Polar marine fauna by use of
              high-resolution population genetic analysis of Greenland ringed seals (Phoca
              hispida). In total 96 nuclear SNPs (Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms) genotypes,
              in addition to the nucleotide sequence at the maternally inherited
              mitochondrial control region, will bedetermined in 1,054 ringed seals samples
              collected in highly different annual sea ice regimes around Greenland and
              Svalbard.   

Intellectual merits: The study will focus on the connection
              between the effects of a dynamic key physical feature of the Polar environment
              and the micro-evolution of Polar fauna. The analyses will estimate the relative
              effects of commonly occurring differences in annual sea ice dynamics, Knowledge
              of the micro-evolutionary effects of sea ice conditions in Polar fauna will add
              to the foundation of our assessment and predictive abilities of the long-term
              effects of climate changes in Polar Regions. The ringed seal is centrally
              placed in the Arctic food web, so any processes that affect them cannot be
              viewed in isolation but will likely extend to other species to which the ringed
              seal is trophically linked. The high-resolution genetic approach taken is novel
              aimed at natural populations in a non-model species.

Broader impacts: The
              results will have direct relevance in terms of formulating management policies
              for ringed seals and those species that are part of the same food web.  Ringed
              seals are harvested for local subsistence in the Arctic and understanding the
              processes that limit or facilitates dispersal is central in defining biological
              sound management policies. The study enhances includes an international
              collaboration between a U.S. education and research institution and a Danish
              non-educational research institution. The project involves education and
              training of a doctoral student and postdoctoral researcher in state-of-the-art
              genetic analyses of natural populations The results will be published in
              scientific journals and the data will be made available upon request. All
              mitochondrial DNA  haplotype sequenceswill be deposited in the public sequence
              databases (e.g., GenBank). 

