Title       : Dissertation Research: Exploring Cultures within University-Industry
               Partnerships: A Case Study of the California Institutes for Science and
               Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0240560

Award Number: 0240560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander W. Astin aastin@gseis.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While related literature highlights several issues pertaining to
              university-industry partnerships, the possible consequences of bringing
              together individuals from academic and corporate cultures to implement
              long-term research programs are poorly understood.  Moreover, it is unclear how
              academic and corporate partnerships ultimately affect the process of scientific
              research.  Accordingly, the objective of this dissertation improvement grant
              will be to examine how collaboration between individuals within the California
              Institutes for Science and Innovation shapes organizational culture and
              scientific research.  The study will employ a multi-site case study approach,
              which will include in-depth interviews, participant observation, and open-ended
              surveys with both faculty members and corporate professionals at three of the
              institutes.  An initial pilot study at the fourth institute will provide
              guidelines for developing the research protocol and interpreting the findings. 
              Finally, document analysis of printed and audio-visual materials from each of
              the four the institutes will be conducted to highlight the history, structure,
              and development of the institutes.  Given that little is known about these
              partnerships, this study will provide a better understanding of how such
              collaborations work, how organizational culture develops within the institutes,
              and how these partnerships affect scientific innovation.  Understanding how
              academic and corporate cultures collaborate in joint ventures has the potential
              to impact practice, policy, and theory.  On a practical level, this study can
              inform the institutes and others who are interested in forming similar
              partnerships as they set priorities and make organizational decisions.  In
              addition, since the investment in these institutes is substantial and designed
              to be a long-term commitment to these partnerships, the findings from this
              study can lay the groundwork for future research on the California Institutes
              for Science and Innovation in later stages of development.  On a policy level,
              this study will hopefully contribute to an understanding of how these
              institutes are working to fulfill the needs of the state.  From a theoretical
              perspective, this study will contribute to the understanding of scientific
              cultures and the blending of cultures in the implementation of a joint venture.
              
