Title       : World Archaeological Congress 5 Participant Support Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0240286

Award Number: 0240286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999               (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. McGuire rmcguire@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In June of 2003 the World Archaeological Congress (WAC) will hold its first full
              international Congress in North America in Washington D.C. WAC 5 will bring
              together hundreds of scholars, Indigenous Peoples, and others genuinely
              interested in the past to promote the exchange of the results of archaeological
              research; professional training and public education for disadvantaged nations,
              groups, Indigenous groups and First Nations peoples; and the conservation of
              archaeological sites. The Congress is expected to attract about 1100 people who
              will meet together for five days, attending approximately 800 presentations
              from as many as 70 different countries.  The National Science Foundation will
              support attendance at the congress by 5 Third World scholars and Indigenous
              People.  WAC 5 is being held in partnership with the Smithsonian Institution's
              National Museum of Natural History, and National Museum of the American Indian
              and in collaboration with the Getty Conservation Institute.  Supporters of WAC
              5 include: US National Park Service, Archeology and Ethnography Program, US
              Dept of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Flinders
              University, South Australia, American University, Library of Congress, Society
              for American Archaeology, and the US Bureau of Land Management.

The Congress
              will focus on three major issues of international importance to
              archaeology:
1.	programmatic/policy issues concerning future directions in the
              practice of global archaeology.
2.	practical/ technical knowledge to increase
              self-reliance and responsibility in protecting sites, artifacts and
              intellectual property.
3.	theoretical frontiers and research results with
              relevance across national boundaries.

WAC 5 will contribute to advancing
              knowledge and understanding in archaeology and it will have broader impacts on
              the world.  WAC congresses have been unique in their ability to bring together
              international researchers for the sharing of research results, the forging of
              theoretical advances, and the development of archaeological methods.  They have
              facilitated international cooperation on issues of heritage management, the
              conservation of archaeological sites, and on relations between archaeologists
              and indigenous peoples.  WAC 5 will continue this tradition by bringing
              together archaeologists and Indigenous People from around the world in a
              structured program to advance knowledge and understanding in archaeology.  The
              Congress will also include public programs, workshops on the curation and
              conservation of archaeological materials, and symposiums on heritage management
              designed to promote teaching, training, and learning and to develop
              international infrastructure for networks and partnerships on these themes. WAC
              5 will help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
              archaeology.  The governance structure of WAC gives Third World Scholars and
              Indigenous people a prominent role in the organization. Third World Scholars
              and Indigenous people have made up a third to a half of the participants in
              previous congresses. WAC 5 can only achieve these goals with the participation
              of many people from underdeveloped countries and Indigenous People who cannot
              afford the high travel costs to Washington D.C. 

