Title       : Dissertation Research: Metrics of purity: linguistic registers, cultures of
               waste-reckoning, and the circulation of scientific knowledge in La Paz, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0240375

Award Number: 0240375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10505              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Silverstein m-silverstein@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research offers an ethnographic account of the circulation of
              scientific knowledge about water quality and wastewater discharge in La Paz,
              Bolivia. Recent ethnographies of science, technology, and society (STS) have
              emphasized the laboratory as an important site of cultural production. They
              have done so, however, by assuming the pre-existence of laboratory science as
              an authoritative institutional form -- research begins in the laboratory and
              follows scientists and engineers as they actively extend its sphere of
              
application. But how does laboratory science come into being as an
              institutional form in the first place? How is the institutionality and
              authoritativeness of a laboratory-based science of the everyday and everywhere
              -- a science of impurity -- established, or not, in La Paz? This research
              addresses these fundamental questions by supplementing STS studies with a
              linguistic anthropological analysis of registers (different ways of saying the
              same thing associated by speakers with socially-recognizable practices and
              their practitioners). Examining the circulation of knowledge in the framework
              of registers provides a means for modeling how people use verbal and textual
              representations to locate themselves in relation to the authority and
              institutionality of laboratory science, and how this self-positioning is
              transformative of the very same institutionality and authority. La Paz, a city
              of linguistic, ethnic, and demographic differences, is the setting for such
              inquiry, as the very existence and authority of laboratory science is rendered
              problematic. In the last 10 years, economic reforms in La Paz have led to the
              creation of a hotly contested market for scientifically managed water and
              wastewater services. Through an examination of speaker's usage and awareness of
              differentiable register phenomena used for reckoning waste/water (tractable
              formally as distinct linguistic repertoires involving measure-phrases and
              specialized lexemes), the objective of this research is to describe how the
              laboratory science is carved out (or not) as the authoritative center of a
              regime of circulating knowledge about waste/water. NSF is supporting data
              collection using ethnographic and linguistic methods in two research sites: at
              a private waste/water company in La Paz; and in an indigenous Aymara
              neighborhood. This research intends to make a practical contribution to debates
              about the growing worldwide waste-crisis, offering a cross-cultural perspective
              which includes documentation of an underrepresented people's lived-experience
              of an endemic waste-problem. It will also contribute to building an
              interdisciplinary bridge between STS and linguistic anthropology. 
 


