Title       : Redox Active Dendrimers and Molecular Capsules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0240295

Award Number: 0240295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel E. Kaifer akaifer@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the ongoing work of Professor Angel E. Kaifer in the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Miami.  Professor Kaifer's work examines the
              electrochemistry of several macromolecular and supramolecular systems. The PI
              will synthesize and characterize redox active dendrimers, investigate new
              host-guest binding interactions between guest residues in these dendrimers and
              freely diffusing host molecules, and design and develop novel systems capable
              of forming molecular capsules under redox control. The PI has presented a
              clearly articulated plan intended to better understand the factors that control
              the thermodynamics and kinetics of electron transfer to redox groups appended
              to the focal point of dendrimers. These are important studies, because unlike
              the bioinorganic community, Kaifer's work is intended to use the secondary
              structure around the redox group to control redox properties.  This is
              precisely what happens in proteins.  The success of this work is leading
              Professor Kaifer in a new direction that involves the assembly of dendrons
              using smaller host molecules. In the future, this should provide a means to
              assemble more complex supermolecules that are even better protein
              analogs.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              of the Division of Chemistry supports the research activities of Professor
              Angel E. Kaifer in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami. 
              Professor Kaifer's work is significant since his studies may lead to the
              development of novel electrochemical sensors and intelligent materials. Also,
              it may provide insight into biological electron transfer reactions. The work
              will be carried out by a diverse group of graduate students and postdoctoral
              associates who will be trained in synthetic, chromatographic, spectroscopic and
              electrochemical techniques. 

