Title       : Climate and Glacier Variations in Scandinavia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0240861

Award Number: 0240861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard B. Conway conway@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT
OPP-0240861
Conway

This is a collaborative proposal by Principal
              Investigators at the Universities of Washington and Stockholm. The Principal
              Investigators will investigate relationships  between  variations  of  climate 
              patterns  in  the  North  Atlantic  and glaciers in Norway and Sweden. They
              will focus on the west coast of Scandinavia for three reasons. First, the
              future of the glaciers in relation to climate change has important consequences
              for regional hydrology and global sea level.  Second, historically, pronounced
              glacial fluctuations suggest that the region is highly sensitive to climate
              anomalies.   Winter climate in the is dominated by a large-scale climate
              pattern known as the Northern Hemisphere annular mode (NAM) that depends on the
              strength of the polar night jet stream. Variations in the NAM have a
              particularly strong effect along coastal Scandinavia; analysis of the glacial
              record has potential to greatly improve understanding of present and past
              behavior of the NAM.  Third, an improved understanding of the climate of the
              region may also be key for helping to resolve outstanding issues concerning the
              role of the thermohaline circulation in natural climate variability.   Their
              approach is to make use of the existing suite of high-resolution measurements
              that have been made on the glaciers of Scandinavia, and gridded atmospheric
              National Center for Environmental Prediction/National Centers for Atmospheric
              Research (NCEP/NCAR) reanalysis) data that are available for the last 50 years.
              Specifically, they will 1) establish modern (past 50 years) relationships
              between climate and glaciers by applying their well-proven models and the
              NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis data; 2) use the statistics of climate-glacier response to
              derive possible climate conditions that would produce glaciers of the extent
              known to exist in Scandinavia during the Little Ice Age; and 3) use the
              statistics to investigate potential glacier changes under future possible
              climate scenarios. 

Quantitative understanding of interactions between
              climate and glaciers is important for two reasons.  First, the record of past
              glacier fluctuations can be used to help reconstruct past patterns of climate. 
              Second, the future of glaciers in the face of climate change has important and
              global consequences for sea level and hydrology.  This research involves
              collaboration with Principal Investigators at the Universities of Washington
              and Stockholm, so it will foster international co-operation. The research will
              also provide core education for a graduate student in Earth and Space Sciences
              with an emphasis in climate and glaciology and the student will benefit from
              exposure to the international community. 
