Title       : Financial Support for the International Conference "GMOs in 2030: Reaping the
               Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls?", October 14-18, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0240254

Award Number: 0240254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman C. Ellstrand Ellstrand@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Sutch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT
SES 0240254
"GMOs in 2030:Reaping the Promise While Leaping
              the Pitfalls?"
Norman Ellstrand, University of California, Riverside

"GMOs
              in 2030: Reaping the Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls" will be convened by
              the Biotechnology Impacts Center at the University of California, Riverside
              (UCR) October 14-18, 2003. The organizers are Norman C. Ellstrand, Professor of
              Genetics and Director of the Biotechnology Impacts Center, and Richard Sutch,
              Distinguished Professor of Economics. Nearly everyone who has looked at the
              issue, from biologists and agronomists to economists and ethicists to ordinary
              thoughtful people, agree that there is tremendous potential in the new
              discoveries occurring in biotechnology. At the same time, there is uncertainty
              over the environmental, social, ethical, legal, economic, and cultural
              consequences of the new technologies emerging now and those yet to come. The
              objective of "GMOs in 2030: Reaping the Promise While Leaping the Pitfalls?" is
              to take a visionary and mindful approach to the use of genetically modified
              organisms (GMOs) for the benefit of humankind and the environment by
              identifying principles and protocols that will serve as a framework for a
              civilized, respectful and informed dialog on the myriad issues facing society
              in the application of biotechnology. The conference will be distinctive from
              others exploring issues associated with biotechnology in that it will integrate
              leading scholars from a variety of disciplinary perspectives, as opposed to
              most conferences on the topic, which typically involve life scientists
              exclusively with one or a few token humanists or social scientists, or vice
              versa. Conference participants will examine such over-arching topics as the
              responsibility of humankind in stewardship of the biosphere vs. the ability to
              manipulate life at the gene level and public participation in the assessment of
              biotechnology applications. Case studies examining the genetic modification of
              rice to provide enhanced nutrition and of mosquitoes to provide protection
              against certain insect-vectored diseases will endeavor to illustrate the
              complexity and interrelatedness of the issues raised by the GMO revolution. The
              conference organizers intend to present these and other compelling questions in
              a format that will be attractive to world-class thinkers both from within and
              outside of the United States. To insure that conference outcomes reach policy
              makers, biotech industry representatives, non-governmental organizations and
              other interested scholars, a book on possible policy approaches to the issues,
              with chapters authored by the major participants, will be published, as will
              policy briefs on specific issues. The proposed conference will advance the
              teaching and training of young, promising researchers and scholars;
              postdoctoral scholars and graduate students, including those from
              underrepresented groups, will be particularly encouraged to participate. This
              proposal seeks partial financial support of the conference from the National
              Science Foundation.

