Title       : Activation of Oxygen: Mechanistic Aspects of Electron Transfer and Atom Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0240409

Award Number: 0240409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Espenson espenson@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreja Bakac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by James Espenson and Andreja Bakac, Department of Chemistry,
              Iowa State University. The project will explore the chemistry of transient and
              metastable oxyl radicals, their interactions with transition metal complexes
              and their role in organic oxidation reactions. More specifically, the
              phthalimide-N-oxyl radical, PINO*, will be examined as a potential promoter in
              industially important reactions such as the oxidation of para-xylene and other
              aromatic compounds. PINO* could potentially replace the corrosive promoter
              bromide currently in use. Detailed mechanistic studies of these complicated
              oxidation reactions, including hydrogen atom abstractions and electron
              transfers, will help us better understand these fundamental processes.

This
              work has potential implications for the commodity and fine chemicals
              industries. The research will also include studies of a group of inorganic
              compounds that, in the process of oxygen activation, exhibit chemical
              transformations typically observed only in complicated enzymatic systems.
              Oxidation and free radical chemistry are involved in oxidative stress, aging,
              heart disease, cancer and inflammatory illnesses, so a better understanding of
              these very reactive species will benefit medicinal chemistry and toxicology.
              Chemists trained in free radical chemistry can contribute to both the chemical
              industry and medicine.

