Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigation of Paleoenvironment, Geomorphic Processes,
               and Carbon Stocks of Drained Thaw-Lake Basins, Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0240338

Award Number: 0240338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39087              (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Bockheim bockheim@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities
              of Wisconsin-Madison and Cincinnati.  About 20% of the Arctic Coastal Plain is
              covered by thaw lakes developed over ice- rich permafrost and a larger
              proportion of this landscape is also scarred by drained thaw-lake basins, which
              become sites for the accumulation of organic carbon as peat deposits.  The
              Principal Investigators will study of the origin of thaw-lake basins and
              associated geomorphological, biological, and pedological processes, building on
              work done on the Barrow Peninsula during 2000-2002. High-resolution
              multispectral satellite data will quantify the size frequency distribution and
              derive morphometric characteristics for lakes and drained thaw-lake basins
              across the Coastal Plain.  In addition, drained lake basins will be selected
              for intensive ground-based analysis between Barrow and Atqasuk. The PIs will
              use the vegetation to select an equal number of young, medium, old and ancient
              drained thaw-lake basins. Ground-penetrating radar and extensive winter soil
              coring will be used to map unconformities between underlying lake sediments and
              the post-drainage organic deposit. Combined with satellite imagery to determine
              the areal dimensions, the volume of organics within the 40 basins will be
              estimated to determine the amount of soil carbon stored in the organic layer
              and upper lacustrine deposits.  These results will estimate the amount of
              carbon sequestered in drained basins.  Radiometric dating of the in situ peat
              above the clastic lake basin sediments will estimate of the date of lake
              drainage and basin inception. There is evidence to suggest that these events
              may be related to climatic change, while other lakes have drained in response
              to coastal erosion.  The research will use paleoecological indicators to
              reconstruct the spatial and temporal response of vegetation and soil to climate
              on the Coastal Plain during the Holocene. High-frequency core dating will be
              used to derive carbon accumulation rates and organic soil chemistry and state
              of decomposition to determine whether carbon accumulation rates respond to
              regional changes in climate or if they are influenced to a greater degree by
              local rates of plant succession. Extensive spatial and temporal analysis of
              thaw-lake basins will 1) add to our understanding of the basic processes
              responsible for these important elements of the northern Alaskan landscape, 2)
              provide new information on landscape-scale response to climate change, and 3)
              help develop and validate causative models of environmental change and carbon
              sequestering.

  Broader impacts include 1) accessing traditional knowledge
              of local elders in Barrow, who have primary and secondary information on recent
              lake drainage and flooding events; 2) enhancing education of students at the
              Barrow High School through the recently established NASA-funded Alaskan Native
              Remote Sensing Education Project; 3) strengthening links with other U.S.
              agencies; and 4) continuing to provide scientific training to undergraduate
              students through several NSF programs.  All satellite imagery, core
              stratigraphy, Global Positioning System transects, and pollen/microfossil data
              will be made publicly available through web sites, archives at the National
              Snow and Ice Data Center, and the Paleoenvironmental Arctic Sciences web site. 
              

