Title       : Degeneration, Regeneration and the Inheritance of Acquired Characteristics: The
               Steinach-Kammerer Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0240151

Award Number: 0240151
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Logan cheryl_logan@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the cultures of Europe and
              America eagerly and often used the biological world as a metaphor for
              explaining the social and psychological. Among the most prominent of the
              biological concepts used to structure society was the concept of degeneration.
              Degeneration was believed to be a fundamental physiological process that
              produced the gradual decay of life, a process by which inherently progressivist
              processes such as evolution, growth and development, could be reversed by an
              equally powerful and immanent process of decay. Conceived in terms of heredity
              and physiology, the concept dominated society during an unprecedented period of
              growth in biology, and by the1890s, the full authority of the science of
              degeneration had been extended from biology to people. Many-- homosexuals, the
              mentally retarded and mentally ill, non-European indigenous cultures,
              alcoholics, the poor, women-were considered degenerate. The same period also
              saw much scientific analysis of regeneration, degeneration's less well-known
              biological opposite. But there were few social 'regenerates': the concept of
              regeneration rarely saw social application. Analyses of the socially degenerate
              were linked to the study of heredity. Social scientists and policy makers
              believed that degenerate individuals displayed damaged and progressively
              deteriorating heredity. And their damaged heredity, it was thought, could
              contaminate their children and, indeed, the entire human species. This
              assumption was widely associated with belief in the inheritance of acquired
              characteristics, a concept hotly debated in biology from 1880-1930. Within the
              sciences of heredity, however, debates on the inheritance of acquired
              characteristics and the process of degeneration were matched by debates on the
              process of regeneration. But most physicians, psychiatrists and social thinkers
              ignored regeneration in their efforts to save humankind. The scientists working
              from 1904-1925 at the Institute for Experimental Biology in Vienna were an
              exception. The proposed project will explore the social, political and
              intellectual influences that led to their emphasis on regeneration and its
              application to society. The proposal focuses on the collaboration between Paul
              Kammerer and Eugen Steinach. Their research dealt with sexuality, a traditional
              bastion of the concept of degeneration. The emphasis will be that the rejection
              of nationalism, class, and race theory associated with Kammerer's socialist and
              communist views led to an equally strong emphasis on regeneration produced by
              the inheritance of acquired characteristics. He viewed use inheritance as a
              process that could counter the negative effects of degeneration and, through
              regeneration, restore and improve society. Kammerer and Steinach's research on
              climate and masculinity was an empirical attempt to enact this restoration. Few
              issues in science have seen more debate among both experts and policy makers
              than the nature-nurture issue. Growth in contemporary knowledge of genetics and
              the publication of the genome project have once again placed these issues in
              the forefront, as several approaches now challenge the relationship between
              genotype and phenotype implied in Crick's central dogma. The word is no longer
              used, but, as philosopher Ian Hacking notes, the degeneracy research program is
              still in evidence: "Biological stigmata of degeneracy are back, not as
              Lombrosian physiognomy, but as serotonin depletion or genetic markers. . . .
              Only in one respect is . . . the degeneracy program significantly different
              from earlier days. It comes from the cachet of genes" (2001, p. 152).
              Complicated scientific and ethical issues are raised by the application of
              biology to important human problems. One of the most informative ways to
              address them is through the historical perspective offered by thinkers who
              illustrate how social influences have altered the solution of similar problems
              in the past.
