Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Strawberry Notch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0240727

Award Number: 0240727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Utpal Banerjee banerjee@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                             Notch (N) signaling is important for many different intercellular
              communications events that are critical for proper development. This pathway
              has been conserved from worms to humans and has functional consequences for
              many different tissues types. Mutations in the members of the Notch pathway in
              humans have been implicated in the development of cancer, Alagille syndrome,
              CADASIL and in Alzheimer's disease.  Two different kinds of Notch signaling
              have been described in the literature. The first, called lateral signaling, is
              a mechanism by which cells that are initially equivalent, interact through this
              pathway and create a pattern in which only a fraction of the cells are biased
              to assume a differentiated fate. This involves an interactive process that
              requires repeated Notch signaling via feedback loops. In contrast, during
              inductive Notch signaling, the signaling cell is intrinsically distinct from
              the one receiving the signal. The signaling causes the activation of
              fate-specifying molecules in the cell receiving the signal.
	Most identified
              members of the Notch signaling are widely expressed and participate in both
              inductive and lateral inhibition pathways. What then causes the distinction
              between these different signaling events?  Genetic analysis in Drosophila has
              shown that Strawberry Notch (sno) functions as a positive component of the
              Notch signal transduction pathway. The sno gene encodes a highly conserved
              nuclear protein that is expressed in all ectodermally derived tissue. Studies
              aimed at determining the function of this gene showed that sno participates in
              many different inductive signaling processes initiated by the Notch receptor,
              but does not have any function in lateral signaling by Notch.
	 More recently,
              sno has been shown to be important for the expression of the Notch ligand,
              Delta in R cells of the Drosophila eye. The RTK signal mediated by the EGF
              pathway was also shown to contribute positively in this process.  Two proteins,
              Sno and Ebi, are responsible for alleviating this repression. These results
              suggest that Sno and Ebi function in conjunction with the EGFR pathway to
              depress Su(H) through proteasome mediated degradation of co-repressors. Thus,
              the difference between the lateral inhibitory and inductive Notch signaling
              does not reside in events downstream of Notch. Rather, this distinction is a
              result of the differences in the way the Notch ligand Delta is controlled. Sno
              is an important link between RTK and Notch pathways in this process.
 	The
              current proposal is aimed at studying the biochemistry of Sno function in S2
              and cl-8 cells to determine if it indeed directly participates in the
              derepression of Su(H) targets. Genetic studies suggest that deltex (dx)
              exhibits strong genetic interaction with sno. This proposal is aimed at
              studying the possible role of dx in the regulation of Delta in association with
              Sno. Finally, the sequencing to the Drosophila genome has led to the
              identification of a gene similar to sno called sno-related (snor). Genetic and
              molecular characterization of this gene are proposed. Taken together, we expect
              to unravel the mechanism for proteasome mediated regulation of multiple
              signaling pathways by Sno-like proteins.

