Title       : Fundamental Understanding of Deformation Mechanisms in Nanocrystalline
               Superplasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0240144

Award Number: 0240144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amiya K. Mukherjee akmukherjee@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is designed to gain a fundamental understanding of the deformation
              mechanisms of plasticity in nanocrystalline materials. The nanostructured
              metallic materials will be produced by several processing methods that include
              high-pressure torsion of cast material, pulsed electrodeposition, and
              crystallization from metallic glass. The phenomenon of sliding along the grain
              interfaces is one of the dominant rheological characteristics in elevated
              temperature plasticity. The ultrafine-grained nanocrystalline materials contain
              a very large density of interfaces and they offer a unique opportunity to study
              the structural state of grain boundary and its role on grain boundary sliding
              in elevated temperature plasticity.  The intellectual merit lies in attempting
              to correlate the microstructural information with the mechanical data obtained
              from such nanoscale materials in the context of plasticity in really diminished
              length scales.  Special emphasis will be given to the difficulty of
              intragranular dislocation generation inside the matrix in truly nanoscale
              structure and its implication to slip accommodation processes in current models
              of nanocrystalline plasticity at elevated temperatures.

The grant explores
              whether the observed increase in superplasticity with decreasing grain size is
              a general phenomenon or not. Increasing superplastic strain rate will decrease
              forming time and will make it an economically viable process. Lowering
              superplastic forming temperature will allow utilization of some of the existing
              forming technology for shop-floor practice in industrially significant
              intermetallic structural materials. The results are expected to be
              technologically significant in forming of sensors and devices with complex
              shapes that can benefit from the nanocrystalline matrix with large ambient
              temperature strength and hardness.

