Title       : Dissertation Research: Envisioning a Technological State: Reactor Design Choices
               and Political Legitimacy in the Soviet Union and Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0240807

Award Number: 0240807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce V. Lewenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports dissertation research to investigate the interweaving of
              technology and politics in the early stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear
              program.  It will analyze the technological, social, economic and political
              factors that influenced the choice of particular reactor types, and show how
              these design choices set the parameters for further technological developments.
               First, it will explore the history of the two major Soviet reactor types and
              attempt to unpack the technological and political discussions surrounding the
              decision to adopt these types as standard reactors for the Soviet civilian
              nuclear industry.  It will then identify these reactors' "techno politics,"
              i.e., how reactor designers, engineers, and nuclear power plant operators
              appropriated particular versions of this history, and how scientific and
              technological success was deployed as a powerful tool for political legitimacy.
               The project aims at reconstructing how the contingent, controversial, and
              sometimes arbitrary sets of decisions concerning reactor designs were
              transformed into linear, logically developing narratives of technological
              progress.  In order to understand the state endorsed representations of nuclear
              power in relation to "unofficial" stories, it will combine archival documents
              relating to the early stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear program with
              in-depth interviews of reactor designers and nuclear power plant operators. The
              social history of Soviet reactor design is a unique site to understand
              decision-making processes at the interface between science, technology, and the
              state.  It intends to clarify the connections between technological choices and
              political agendas by showing how technological artifacts like nuclear reactors
              served as powerful rhetorical resources to challenge or sustain the political
              and social order.  This project can contribute to our understanding of
              contemporary notions of reactor safety, and it can illuminate the quandaries of
              a state-enacted popularization of science and technology.   


