Title       : Engineering and Exorcism in Counter-Reformation Rome: Power, Knowledge and
               Urbanization, 1562-1612
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0240358

Award Number: 0240358
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela O. Long pamlong123@cs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : P, Long
	      3100 Connecticut Ave. NW
	      Washington, DC  200085100    202/265-0225

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the 50 years following the Council of Trent, fundamental reforms of the
              Catholic church were accompanied by numerous major projects of construction and
              engineering in the city of Rome. The streets were redesigned, paved, and in
              some cases newly constructed. The ancient columns of Trajan and Marcus Aurelius
              were repaired. Obelisks that the ancient Romans had carried from Egypt were
              excavated and transported to new locations at the center of important squares.
              With elaborate public rituals, Pope Sixtus V (1585-1590) exorcised the columns
              and obelisks of their pagan spirits and topped them with Christian symbols.
              Between 1562 and 1612 three great aqueducts were built on the ruins of the
              ancient Roman aqueducts, allowing for the expansion of the population and an
              abundant supply of water for fountains, drinking, and industrial uses such as
              mills. New palaces, churches, and other buildings were constructed, and the
              Pontine marshes in the countryside surrounding Rome were drained. Other
              projects emphasized the foundation of knowledge that supported the papacy and
              other centers of power in Rome. Cartographical and natural history projects
              included the hall of metals and minerals in the Vatican palace, described by
              papal physician Michele Mercati, and the great Hall of Maps designed by Ignazio
              Danti. Both the popes and the Farnese family created botanical gardens. Such
              projects of cartography and natural history combined with great construction
              and engineering projects to enhance the temporal and spiritual power of the
              papacy and of other centers of power in Rome, including the courts of the
              cardinals. This project undertakes the extensive archival research that is
              necessary for the completion of a book that consists of a cultural history of
              engineering in counter-reformation Rome. The approach seeks to explicate
              technical methods, materials, and other aspects of the process of building and
              engineering. It also seeks to understand the decision-making that brought about
              engineering projects, the actual work of completing them, and the ways in which
              ordinary people living in Rome were affected by such endeavors. It includes
              investigation of surveying, cartography, and natural history projects that
              formed part of the broader context of engineering, construction, and the
              development and display of knowledge in these decades. The study entails
              investigation of numerous archival documents and rare printed books.
              Technology, engineering, and construction as well as disciplines such as
              cartography and natural history will be investigated as integral aspects of the
              cultural and religious life of the city and as essential modalities of early
              modern urbanization. This project's broad conceptualization combined with its
              foundation in extensive archival research will make it an important case study
              for urbanization. It will provide a model study for teaching and for further
              research on Rome and on other cities. The wider understanding that it will
              bring to the subject of urbanization and its relationship to engineering,
              technology, and other aspects of culture will be extremely valuable, given the
              importance of cities to early modern and modern history.
