Title       : Dissertation Research: Digital Aspirations: Malaysia and the Multimedia Super
               Corridor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0240536

Award Number: 0240536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Roberts geg207@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project intends to expand our knowledge of the role of
              information technology (IT) in large-scale state development projects in the
              non-Western world by focusing on the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC), a new
              high technology urban region being built in Malaysia.   The MSC is the linchpin
              of a state sponsored national development strategy intended to make Malaysia a
              developed nation by the year 2020.  Through the provision of a wide spectrum of
              IT infrastructure, including broadband and wireless Internet access for all
              businesses and households located in the MSC, the Malaysian government intends
              to create its vision of an ideal nation and citizenry that can take advantage
              of the so-called Information Age.  This large scale provision of IT
              infrastructure, then, is about more than the creation of a technology hub for
              economic development.  It is envisioned as the key to creating a zone for the
              reimagination of Malaysia and Malaysians as a nation and people.  Consequently,
              the provision of IT infrastructure in the MSC involves a radical transformation
              of the social and physical landscape of the region that is directly linked to
              national development and national identity. This research is focused on three
              questions: (a) how are IT, national development, and national identity linked
              through the MSC; (b) how are access to, and use of, IT in the 
MSC socially
              differentiated; and (c) how do groups in the MSC, defined by their different
              positions in relation to access and use of IT, perceive the present and future
              consequences of IT-led development for nation building and national identity?
              The project seeks to examine how assumptions about the transformative power of
              IT and its actual use affect: (a) the economic goals of national development
              and the political goals of nation building in Malaysia; (b) existing and
              emerging social differences in accessibility to, and use of, IT; and (c)
              groups. perceptions of the present and future consequences of IT-led
              development for nation building and national identity in Malaysia.  The
              research will provide insights into how 
state and non-state actors represent
              and use IT to build and contest the imagination of a technologically developed
              nation in the Information Age.  NSF funds will support data gathering from: (a)
              a discourse analysis of state planning documents; (b) an institutional and
              household survey of differences in access to and use of IT by groups living and
              working in the MSC; and (c) in-depth interviews with subsets of these groups
              defined by their differences in access to and use of IT.  The broader impacts
              of this project will be to: (a) contribute to key theoretical and conceptual
              issues in contemporary scholarship in technology, geography, and development
              studies through the publication of journal articles, participation in scholarly
              meetings, and a book manuscript; and to (b) address issues of IT-led
              development strategies to wider academic and non-academic audiences through a
              variety of media. Along with the publication and presentation of research
              results in scholarly journals, at professional meetings, and in the classroom,
              a series of articles in non-specialist magazines is anticipated. Through the
              specific example of the MSC, these articles will discuss the implications of
              the increasingly wide scale adoption of information technology into many
              aspects of people's lives in both the 'West' and 'non-West.' 


