Title       : Interactions in Time and Space Variability in a Chihuahuan Desert Ecosystem:
               Jornada LTER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9240261

Award Number: 9240261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1314390            (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Schlesinger schlesin@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1129,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research project will examine the general hypothesis that                 
              desertification has altered a previous, relatively uniform                     
              distribution of water and nitrogen by increasing their spatial                 
              and temporal heterogeneity, leading to changes in community                    
              composition and biogeochemical processes in Chihuahuan Desert                  
              ecosystems.  The Jornada Experimental Ranch (southern New                      
              Mexico), with a 75-year history of rangeland research, has                     
              documented extensive changes in vegetation cover - from perennial              
              grassland to several kinds of shrublands - which are one result                
              of desertification.  The work will include measurements of net                 
              primary production, root growth, decomposition, soil water                     
              dynamics, surface hydrology, dynamics of animal populations,                   
              animal-produced soil disturbance, nitrogen cycling processes and               
              stable isotope distributions of nitrogen and carbon in widespread              
              ecosystems, ranging from black grama (Bouteloua eriopoda)                      
              grassland, to desertified, persistent shrublands of chreosotebush              
              (Larrea tridentata), tarbush (Flourencia cernua) and mesquite                  
              (Prosopis gladulosa).  A conceptual model of desertification will              
              be tested by long-term water augmentation and mechanical                       
              homogenization of water and nutrients.  Data from these studies                
              will be used to parameterize process models.  Measurements of                  
              water, wind, and gaseous transport and run-on diversion                        
              experiments will provide data for a desert landscape model.  Data              
              derived from satellite remote sensing of vegetation and soils                  
              will be incorporated into a dynamics geographic information                    
              system model of the Jornada Basin.                                             
                                                                                             
              Institutional support remains excellent for the continuation of                
              this project.  Facilities are very good. The three-institution                 
              collaborative arrangement involving several investigators has                  
              been well thought out and should prove to be highly beneficial                 
              and productive.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Results from this research project should yield major finding                  
              that are fundamental to the broad field of ecology.                            
              Additionally, results should be important to the future, better                
              enlightened management of arid land resources.
