Title       : ETA Project: Development of Educational Technology Awareness among Professional
               Educational Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1992 
File        : a9254376

Award Number: 9254376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47625              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Dianne Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intl Soc for Techn in Educ
	      P.O. BOX 4437
	      ALEXANDRIA, VA  223030437    208/420-0508

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The adoption of technology by education has always lagged                      
              behind the same technology's widespread use by other                           
              segments of society.  The pace of technology development,                      
              and the impact this pace has on society, coupled with the                      
              massive problems of science and mathematics education in                       
              this country, has made this time lag no longer tenable.  As                    
              a society, we can not afford inefficient and limited use of                    
              the capabilities of technology to help educators attack the                    
              problems of education for all citizens.                                        
                                                                                             
              The full participation of educational professional                             
              associations in defining a policy along these lines is a                       
              fundamental component of planning how to accelerate the pace                   
              of adoption of technology by education.  The presence of                       
              many such associations in the Washington, DC area offers a                     
              good opportunity for taking first steps towards assessing                      
              teh state of knowledge by educational leaders, and for                         
              creating a forum to help coordinate their activities.                          
                                                                                             
              The outcome of this project will be a clearer definition of                    
              who are the stakeholders for the incorporation of                              
              technologies in education, a membership profile of the                         
              associations, their leaders, and their technology awareness                    
              and plans, and a series of targeted forums and discussions                     
              where educational leaders and NSF program officers can                         
              interact and explore policy issues related to the adoption                     
              of telecommunication technologies in education.
