Title       : Team Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9254653

Award Number: 9254653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $759542             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Haase david_haase@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alton J. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project called 'Team Science' will directly aid the                       
              school districts of northeastern North Carolina where there                    
              are a disproportionate share of rural, poor and minority                       
              children.  Thirty-two teachers each year from these counties                   
              will be brought to North Carolina State University for a four                  
              week program which will emphasize hands-on learning through a                  
              mixture of low-tech, "homemade science" activities and high-                   
              tech microcomputer based laboratory activities.  The pedagogy                  
              will emphasize cooperative learning, station laboratories, and                 
              the integration of physics and chemistry.  The teachers will                   
              jointly plan and schedule their teaching programs for a van                    
              which will visit their school at least once each semester                      
              during the academic year.  This van will be loaded with new                    
              physics and chemistry station laboratories and microcomputers                  
              and will be driven by a master teacher who has worked with                     
              each of the participants during the summer.  They teachers are                 
              selected in teams of two, physics and chemistry, for this                      
              project.  The Science House faculty will maintain the                          
              equipment and provide other support over the year.  During the                 
              year the teachers will meet at least four times to discuss                     
              their successes and problems.  The teachers will return to the                 
              university for a second summer session, building on the                        
              previous summer and the experience of the academic year.  In                   
              addition  a new cohort of 32 teachers from new high schools                    
              will be chosen and started in the project with a second van to                 
              visit their schools.  A third cohort will then be chosen for                   
              years 3 and 4.  This project has a 11.5% sharing of the cost                   
              of the grant.
