Title       : Princeton Earth Physics Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9254951

Award Number: 9254951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233047             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guust M. Nolet nolet@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Phinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              PEPP proposes to install a simple seismograph in schools and                   
              colleges, to create a computer network to share data and                       
              information, and to form a network of supporting IRIS-members* to              
              train and support science teachers.  The main goals are:                       
                                                                                             
              .  To develop "hands on" seismological equipment for use at high               
                   schools and colleges, to increase the curiosity of students               
                   to explain nature,                                                        
              .  To increase the understanding of physical concepts through                  
                   connected lab experiments, while developing a sense of                    
                   familiarity with the seismometer as an instrument based on                
                   these concepts,                                                           
              .  To train teachers to do real "classroom science" with their                 
                   students and provide scientific back-up for these                         
                   activities,                                                               
              .  To stimulate interaction between teachers in Earth sciences                 
                   and physics with researchers in geophysics,                               
              .  To give teachers organizational and intellectual support by                 
                   providing materials, computer networking as well as research              
                   opportunities,                                                            
              .  To disseminate PEPP nationally and build a unique                           
                   seismological array that allows students and teachers to                  
                   make real discoveries.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Rather than stop at the classroom "demonstration" level, PEPP                  
              tries to extend all the way towards real science.  This unique                 
              feature of PEPP will greatly contribute towards the enthusiasm of              
              both students and teachers.  It will take three years to develop               
              the first PEPP modules with the necessary infrastructure and to                
              show the feasibility in a pilot project before moving on to a                  
              final project at national scale.
