Title       : An Interdisciplinary, Laboratory-Oriented Courses Sequence for Computer-Based
               Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1993  
File        : a9254317

Award Number: 9254317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Kurtz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sam V. Dauzat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis E. Roemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micheal B. O'Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              Most universities require all students to attain some                          
              understanding of computing as part of their college experience.                
              Often courses in "computer literacy" are offered to meet this                  
              requirement.  These courses, as they are currently taught, are                 
              often inadequate for a number of reasons.  First they tend to                  
              present descriptions of what computers can do rather than focus                
              on how people can use computers to solve problems.  Also, they                 
              concentrate on teaching the syntax of currently popular                        
              software packages or programming languages, instead of focusing                
              on the underlying characteristics of these tools.  These                       
              courses also fail to represent the breadth of the computing                    
              sciences.  Hence, what is learned tends to be shallow and of                   
              short term value.                                                              
              There is a critical need for a general course, accessible to                   
              the average college freshman, that will introduce the                          
              underlying principles of computing while stimulating the                       
              student's problem solving abilities.  The proposed course will                 
              meet these objectives.  The hear of the approach is to present                 
              abstract concepts through the use of computer-based                            
              simulations.  These simulations will allow students to explore                 
              the concepts in a "hands on" manner.                                           
              The course is designed to be taught in a single semester and                   
              will provide an overview of computer science.  Many facets of                  
              the discipline will be explored through lecture and the                        
              accompanying laboratory exercises.  Topics include:  common                    
              applications, such as spreadsheets, databases, computer aided                  
              design, artificial intelligence, and computer graphics;                        
              algorithms and the major programming paradigms (functional,                    
              procedural, and logical); computer architecture, including                     
              machine organization and digital logic; and foundations of                     
              computing, including automata theory, Turing machines, and                     
              complexity theory.                                                             
              The course development effort is truly interdisciplinary with                  
              faculty from Computer Science, Business Administration,                        
              Education, Engineering, and Arts and Sciences actively involved                
              in the course design.  Evaluation plans call for initial                       
              development of the course materials at Louisiana Tech                          
              University followed by their use a several other universities.                 
              Plans for dissemination include making all courseware developed                
              for this project available via the Internet.  The PIs also plan                
              to write an introductory computer science text to facilitate                   
              the use of the course materials at other institutions.                         
              The essence of this development is a structured laboratory                     
              environment, including both open and closed labs, that is                      
              completely integrated with the lectures.  It is the PIs belief                 
              that abstract concepts can be taught to, and understood by,                    
              students with limited math backgrounds if provided hands-on                    
              laboratory activities that cover the basic concepts. Students                  
              completing the course are expected to have a much greater                      
              appreciation for the computing sciences and many may be                        
              inspired to pursue careers in this area.
