Title       : Project PHYSLab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9254498

Award Number: 9254498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lowell G. Herr lherr@uswest.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              R S. Skinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Appel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Parlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catlin Gabel School
	      8825 S W Barnes Road
	      Portland, OR  972256527    503/297-1894

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During each of three years, Project PHYSLab will serve 20                      
              high school physics teachers.  The focus of Project PHYSLab                    
              is a three-week workshop for 20 teachers to learn and                          
              experiment with current technology designed to help students                   
              understand fundamental concepts in nature.  Teachers work                      
              with Microcomputer Based Laboratory (MBL) interfaces,                          
              spreadsheets, and a variety of physics related courseware.                     
              Teachers experiment with motion, force, temperature,                           
              magnetic field, light, sound and radioactivity probes.                         
              Computer interfacing experiments include the use of photo-                     
              gates and "Smart Pulleys".  In addition to the assortment of                   
              instructional hardware, a wide variety of physics-related                      
              software is used for data analysis.  Graphical analysis,                       
              equation fitting programs, spreadsheets, simulation                            
              software, and mathematical programs are all available for                      
              data analysis, computational instruction, and independent                      
              study.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Not all PHYSLab experiments require the use of a computer.                     
              A low-cost digital timer yields excellent data in projectile                   
              motion, free-fall, sound, and simple harmonic motion                           
              experiments.  Non-computer laboratory equipment provides                       
              graphical methods for analyzing two-dimensional collision                      
              problems.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Innovative laboratory experiments focus on fundamental and                     
              subtle concepts that students frequently find difficult.                       
              Many of the experiments are designed to overcome                               
              misconceptions students bring to the physics classroom.                        
              Project PHYSLab prepares teachers to help their students                       
              hypothesize, think, reason, understand, challenge, and                         
              analyze as they examine fundamental scientific ideas.                          
                                                                                             
              Project PHYSLab will prepare well-prepared physics teachers                    
              to lead workshops for their peers.  Each participating                         
              teacher will give at least two such workshops during the                       
              academic year following the summer workshop.  Workshops will                   
              be held at Catlin Gabel School, Portland, OR and at national                   
              meetings of the American Association of Physics Teachers.                      
              Project PHYSLab is dynamic in nature.  The workshop will                       
              continue into the future using the world-wide Internet for                     
              an extensive system of follow-up support and interactive                       
              experiences.  A network of follow-up activities and services                   
              is in place so that the support for the teacher continues                      
              well after the formal workshop ends.  This support is                          
              continuous and immediate.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The PI is Lowell Herr of Catlin Gabel School.                                  
                                                                                             
              Cost-sharing equals 60% of the NSF award.
