Title       : WUFNIKS! A Weekly Television Science Series for Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1994   
File        : a9254690

Award Number: 9254690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Al Hyslop   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Neon Inc
	      73 Spring Street
	      New York, NY  100125800    212/274-0349

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              60        Life Sciences                           
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  NEON, Inc. a not-for-propfit corporation, proposes a                      
              television series for children, initiallyu 30 programs,                        
              suitable for daily or weekly broadcast, for home viewing via                   
              PBSA (with appropriate availability elsewhere). Program                        
              length:  30 Minutes.                                                           
                                                                                             
                   The premise: Three Wufniks--creatures from the cartoom                    
              world--draw their way into our world and with the help of                      
              children, undertake the adventure of finding our what it's all                 
              about.  Thesek characters (played by adult professional                        
              performers in structurally sophisticated fantasy/animal                        
              costumes), move from dthe uncertain world of animated film                     
              into a range of encounters with ourrock-solid environment, get                 
              to know children and adults, scientists and laypeople, and                     
              must continually reconstruct their naive theories and their                    
              image of life on earth.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   The concept, designed to appeal to five- to nine-olds,                    
              combines education with entertainment (and is inclusive of                     
              other age groups, such as parents, to enhance educational                      
              effect).  School and other non-broadcast distribution of                       
              program elements is planned, plus ancillary materials                          
              including computer software and print.                                         
                                                                                             
                   The educational approach is interdisciplinary, with                       
              emphasis both on content and the development of positive                       
              attitudes towards science and mathematics; sub-objectives                      
              geography and history.  The Principal Investigators are a                      
              television producer experienced in science programming for                     
              children, and a scientist with extensive children's                            
              educational television background.                                             
                                                                                             
                   Program appeal for girls and minorities is integarl to                    
              the design; project staff will also cover a broad spectrum.                    
              Encouragement of science-and math-related audience activities                  
              is a project objective.  Planning includesds extensive                         
              outreach and promotion related to the show premise.
