Title       : Teacher Institute for Using Computer Visualization for Teaching Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9254634

Award Number: 9254634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis M. Fennell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1049076            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Huetinck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year Master's degree program is designed to train                   
              two groups of 40 well-prepared high school mathematics                         
              teachers to provide leadership in modernizing mathematics                      
              teaching in the greater Los Angeles area.  The program                         
              includes the study of mathematical content, pedagogical                        
              issues, and leadership skill development.  It focuses                          
              especially on the importance of visualization in                               
              mathematics--emphasizing applications of computers and                         
              graphing calculators.  The program format consists of a 2-3                    
              week summer institute, a 3-semester hour course in the fall,                   
              a 2-day winter workshop, and a course meeting for three long                   
              weekends in the spring.  This basic format is repeated in                      
              each of the three years.  Year 1 focuses on mathematical                       
              content, alternative teaching styles, and familiarizing                        
              participants with technology and its applications in the                       
              classroom.  During Year 2, participants assemble and adapt                     
              suitable curricular materials, and implement them in their                     
              classrooms--while, at the same time, they observe, document,                   
              and reflect on the changes in themselves and their students.                   
              Year 3 focuses on developing, practicing, and exercising                       
              leadership skills: participants are expected to present at                     
              local conferences, give in-service workshops, and--in                          
              cooperation with project staff--plan and put on local                          
              teacher conferences.  A master's thesis is required for the                    
              degree.  Plans call for supporting the participants in their                   
              implementation, dissemination, and reform efforts by means                     
              of electronic networking, periodic meetings, and a                             
              newsletter.
