Title       : C3P Comprehensive Conceptual Curriculum For Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9254590

Award Number: 9254590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2245263            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Olenick olenick@phys.udallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dallas
	      Univ Of Dallas Station
	      Irving, TX  75061    214/721-5000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project undertakes a four-year research and development                   
              effort to produce a comprehensive, conceptually-based                          
              physics program that integrates video-based, inquiry-based,                    
              and lab-oriented materials with findings from current                          
              research in preconceptions along with an effective pedagogy                    
              for use in physics teacher enhancement workshops.                              
                                                                                             
              In the initial stage an Oversight Committee composed of                        
              physicists, researchers, and other experts will be                             
              established to examine existing materials, such as PRISMS,                     
              CASTLE, InfoMall, Physics Teach to Learn, and Mechanical                       
              Universe, in light of research findings in physics                             
              education.  The goal will be to assemble "best of the best"                    
              into a coherent, multi-faceted Core Curriculum materials for                   
              teachers of physics and to produce a Workbook for student                      
              use.  All the materials will take an approach focussed on                      
              identifying students' preconceptions and misconceptions and                    
              replacing them with sound concepts.  An Academic Council of                    
              high school teachers will develop a draft of the                               
              comprehensive program in the first year of the project for                     
              review by the Oversight Committee.  The Project Staff will                     
              then refine the materials.                                                     
                                                                                             
              In the second year of the project, the Core Curriculum will                    
              be used for the education of seventy-five Leaders of Physics                   
              Instruction (LPIs) through a four-week long summer                             
              Leadership Institute at the University of Dallas.  During                      
              this Institute the LPIs will explore the materials and their                   
              effective use, gain insights into teaching through a                           
              conceptual approach, and have the opportunity to teach                         
              certain concepts to their peers.  During the following                         
              academic year, these teachers will use the materials in                        
              their classrooms and evaluate their effectiveness for                          
              improving students' understanding of physical concepts.                        
                                                                                             
              In the third year of the project, the LPIs will offer                          
              workshops for less-prepared physics teachers in their                          
              regions.  Local Educational Agencies will contribute to the                    
              project through the purchase of the materials for their                        
              teachers.  In the fourth year of the project, the LPIs will                    
              have a follow-up session to assess the workshops and to make                   
              plans for continuation of the program beyond the period of                     
              NSF support.  Through the continued offering of workshops by                   
              LPIs, that will be supported by non-NSF funds, it is                           
              estimated that 750 teachers and 30,000 students per year                       
              will be impacted by the project.                                               
                                                                                             
              Cost-Sharing equals 100% of the NSF award.
