Title       : PPD: High School/High-Tech Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1993    
File        : a9254399

Award Number: 9254399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wanda E. Ward                           
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christin W. Everly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moneta Development Corp
	      110 F # 1 Frederick Ave
	      Rockville, MD  20850    /   -

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1138,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Persons with disabilities are seriously underrepresented in                    
              science, mathematics, engineering, and in other high-                          
              technology careers.  To address this problem, a model                          
              program has been developed over the past decade that is                        
              dedicated to recruiting talented students with disabilities                    
              and encouraging them to pursue their interest in science and                   
              technology.  This program -- called High School/High-Tech --                   
              links educational institutions, businesses, and community                      
              organizations to provide enhanced educational opportunities                    
              in science, math and high-technology for talented disabled                     
              high school students in the 9th through 12th grades.  High                     
              School/High-Tech projects have enabled students with                           
              disabilities to attend and succeed in college and transition                   
              into careers in science and other high-technology fields.                      
                                                                                             
              A National Steering Committee on High School/High-Tech is                      
              comprised of representatives from business, industry,                          
              educational institutions, and government.  It is endeavoring                   
              to replicate its successful model throughout the country in                    
              order to reach as many students with disabilities as                           
              possible and to impart to them information concerning                          
              opportunities available to them in science and high-                           
              technology.  As a part of this endeavor, Moneta Development                    
              Corporation has been asked by the Steering Committee to                        
              produce a video that can be used by Steering Committee                         
              members in motivating education, community and business                        
              leaders to establish and operate new High School/High-Tech                     
              projects in new locations.  $20,000 has been requested from                    
              NSF to cost-share the production of this video.  It is                         
              anticipated that the video can result in the recruitment and                   
              initial training of hundreds of students with disabilities                     
              for careers in science, engineering, math and high-                            
              technology.
