Title       : Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9254084

Award Number: 9254084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Henderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed work is to develop a freshman                    
              level course, Foundations of Computer Science,in the interface                 
              of computer science and mathematics that integrates critical                   
              reasoning, provlem-solving strategies and discrete mathematics                 
              topics with fundamental computer science concepts.  Mathematics                
              and computer science educators have observed and commented on                  
              the weaknesses of entering college students in the areas of                    
              problem solving and mathematical reasoning, skills which are                   
              fundamental to computer science and should be a primary focus                  
              of the first college level course for computer science majors.                 
              The course to be developed emphasizes the importance of                        
              mathematics and provlem-solving concepts within the context of                 
              computer science and its applications. Computer laboratories                   
              are an integral component of this philosophy.  Hands-on                        
              experience acts as a catalyst to reinforce course material,                    
              provides motivation for learning and encourages students to be                 
              creative, independent thinkers.  An added bonus is the wide                    
              applicability of such an approach to other mathematically based                
              disciplines.                                                                   
              The primary objective is to develop and evaluate material which                
              makes it easier for educators to teach mathematically based                    
              introductory computer science courses and to integrate these                   
              concepts into existing courses. The material to be developed                   
              includes guidelines, available resources, annotated notes,                     
              problem sets, exam questions and laboratory software and                       
              manuals.  The material will be disseminated through                            
              announcements in mathematics/computer science education                        
              journals, meetings, newsletters, electronic bulletin boards and                
              direct nailings.  Evaluation of course material using both                     
              problem-solving and mathematics pre- and post- tests and survey                
              questionnaires can assess the suitability of this approach for                 
              introductory computer science and can improve the quality of                   
              the material.  Evaluation of laboratory material canalso                       
              significantly improve the quality of supporting courseware and                 
              manuals.
