Title       : Integrated Science for Elementary Teachers: A Course and Practicum Approach to
               Restructuring Undergraduate Science Preparation for Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9254158

Award Number: 9254158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $511821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mickey E. Gunter mgunter@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Gammon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Kearney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Bitterwolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks support to develop and implement a two-                    
              semester course of instruction designed to provide an                          
              integrated introduction to science for pre-service elementary                  
              education (first through eighth grade) majors. Concurrent with                 
              an inquiry-centered laboratory-based content course is the                     
              development of a practicum in which the pre-service students                   
              will work with master teacher/mentors teachers to translate                    
              science content into actual learning situations with children.                 
              This practicum will involve teachers and students from the                     
              Moscow, Idaho Public Schools and the Couer d'Alene Reservation                 
              Schools. Additional school districts will be brought into                      
              participation as the project matures. At the end of three                      
              years, all elementary education majors will participate in this                
              program. The curriculum will be developed by six research                      
              faculty from the departments of chemistry, biology, physics,                   
              geology, and biochemistry, in collaboration with science                       
              education specialists as well as teachers and administrators                   
              from regional schools. The courses will present science as a                   
              seamless whole through a blending of discovery-based activities                
              and cooperative learning in a technology-rich environment.                     
              While this is a content curriculum, it will present science in                 
              ways that model the best teaching practices.
