Title       : SGER: Discrete Event Simulation of Self-Assembly Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0320595

Award Number: 0320595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell Schwartz russells@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0320595
Russell Schwartz
Carnegie Mellon University

Project Summary:
              Discrete Event Simulation of Self-Assembly Kinetics 
 
The goal of this
              project is to develop a novel computational tool for simulating generalized
              self-
assembly systems. Self-assembly systems consist of many small
              components, or subunits, that 
spontaneously arrange themselves into larger
              structures under appropriate conditions.  Among the 
many medically important
              self-assembly systems are viral protein shells, or capsids, which form
              
protective coats around the genetic material of viruses; amyloids, fibrous
              agglomerations of 
proteins that are implicated in Alzheimer.s disease,
              Huntington.s disease, and the prion diseases; 
and irregular protein
              aggregates.  For all of these systems, the process of assembly is only
              
partially understood.  In addition, self-assembly has attracted recent
              interest as a means of 
constructing man-made devices and materials on the
              nanometer scale.  Due to the small size, 
speed, and complexity of many
              self-assembly processes, they have proven difficulty to analyze
              
experimentally.  Simulation approaches have therefore emerged as a crucial
              avenue for gaining 
insight into the self-assembly process.  This project
              seeks to build on the prior work in the area by 
creating a model of the
              self-assembly process sufficiently versatile to capture a wide variety of
              
self-assembly systems, yet fast enough to handle realistic simulation sizes
              in a reasonable time. 
 
The basic methodology will involve combining
              techniques developed in prior modeling work on 
this problem with a
              computational method that has not previously been used for self-assembly
              
simulation.  The simulator will use a model of self-assembly dynamics based
              largely on the prior 
.local rules dynamics. model, which provided a versatile
              representation of high-level self-
assembly behavior in terms of low-level
              subunit interactions.  It will be efficiently implemented 
using a
              computational data structure called a .discrete event priority queue,. which
              will allow the 
simulator to step between changes in discrete state (such as
              subunits binding to one another) 
without the need for explicit integration
              over all time steps.  The result will be faster simulation of 
a highly
              general self-assembly model than was possible with prior methods.  The
              simulator will 
be implemented in Java to facilitate ease of development,
              extensibility, and portability.  
Implementation will be conducted through
              distinct phases devoted to developing an object model 
(which specifies how
              pieces of computer code interact with one another), coding and testing a
              
prototype simulator, and finalizing an optimized and well documented
              release-quality version.  
The end result will be both a stand-alone
              simulation tool and a set of computational classes 
available for extension
              and use in other programs.  This work will require innovation primarily in
              
mathematical models of self-assembly processes and in algorithms for their
              efficient simulation 
by a discrete event queue methodology.  Further
              innovation will be needed in the integration of 
existing knowledge from such
              areas as biophysics, algorithms, software engineering, and user 
interface
              design to produce a versatile, easy-to-use graphical simulation tool. 
 
The
              project can be expected to yield several benefits.  Its impact will be
              primarily on the field of 
self-assembly, by providing a general tool that can
              be used by researchers throughout the field for 
modeling known systems across
              size and time scales, developing computational prototypes of 
novel systems,
              and experimenting with interventions in both.  It will also provide new methods
              
and experience to the general field of biophysical simulation through the
              development of a novel 
simulation methodology, its implementation in a
              computational simulator, and optimization of 
algorithms for this problem. 
              The cross-disciplinary nature of the project will enhance its impact 
by
              providing for the computational community new variations on problems to be
              found in 
biophysical systems and providing for the biophysics community new
              computational techniques 
that can be brought to bear on other problems.  The
              work will also have educational value by 
providing interdisciplinary research
              experience to students, including two undergraduates, and by 
providing a
              simulator that can be used as both a research and a teaching tool. 
