Title       : Semantics of Action Verbs for Animtion Control of Task Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9209365

Award Number: 9209365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jugal Kalita kalita@pikespeak.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              Language has evolved rich vocabularies, especially action verbs and            
              their modifiers, that can felicitously describe simple as well as              
              complex movements performed by humans and others.  The overall long            
              term goal is to model the structure of human-like agents, instruct             
              them in natural language to perform simple physical tasks, and                 
              display e actions being performed in terms of computer graphics                
              animation.  The research addresses selected problems, issues and               
              methods of solutions in the overall endeavor.  The PI's Ph.D.                  
              dissertation(1990, University of Pennsylvania). argued that it is              
              necessary to investigate how natural language relates to concepts              
              of space, motion and force, and use these relations in the                     
              specification of lexical semantics of action verbs and their                   
              modifiers.  In the proposed research, we will further strengthen               
              the claims of obtaining useful lexical entries for an extended set             
              of action verbs and their modifiers.  We will investigate salient              
              functional, structural and other properties of manipulated objects             
              and the physical environment in general, required for motion bases             
              on the structure, function and other relevant constrain: this is               
              crucial to actually executing tasks specified by natural language              
              instructions in varying physical situations.  Meaning entries                  
              (given in natural language) for action verbs in human dictionaries             
              and determine the nature of processing necessary to use such                   
              entries for possible acquisition of new computational lexical                  
              entries.
