Title       : Projections of Cochlear Nucleus Axons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9209036

Award Number: 9209036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Smith Smith@neurophys.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom    C T. Yin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is directed towards understanding how                            
              auditory information is processed and coded by nerve                           
              cells in the cochlear nucleus, a portion of the brain                          
              pathways that are involved in hearing.  The auditory                           
              environment provides a rich and complex array of                               
              information from a myriad of sounds from different                             
              sources.  Some of this information, such as speech sounds,                     
              is highly relevant to us, while much of it is disregarded                      
              as extraneous noise.  The auditory central nervous system                      
              converts auditory information into neural signals which                        
              are later analyzed at different levels in the brain.                           
                                                                                             
              In order to understand how auditory information                                
              processing occurs, this research is being conducted to                         
              determine what aspects of auditory information are being                       
              coded by individual types of nerve cells in the cochlear                       
              nucleus as well as  where cochlear neurons send this                           
              information in the brain.  The activity of single nerve                        
              cells is recorded and analyzed using microelectrodes                           
              inserted into single neurons, the response to auditory                         
              stimulation is recorded, and a dye is injected into the                        
              nerve cell in order to identify it using histological                          
              techniques.  By locating and analyzing this labelled                           
              neuron using both light and electron microscopy, it is                         
              possible to answer a number of basic questions which                           
              include:  (1) Do certain types of cells encode specific                        
              parts of the auditory signal?  (2) What part of the brain                      
              do these cells relay information to?  (3) What are the                         
              interactions between individual types of neurons?  These                       
              studies are essential to understanding how such a complex                      
              sensory system provides us with the experience of hearing                      
              that is so crucial to perception and cognitive                                 
              experience.
