Title       : RUI: Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone Neuronal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9209643

Award Number: 9209643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Muske   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide that was                
              isolated from brain in 1971.  This hormone is released from neurons            
              of the anterior basal forebrain which project through the ventral              
              hypothalamus to the median eminence and act upon the pituitary to              
              regulate the control of luteinizing hormone and follicle                       
              stimulating hormones.  Thus, GnRH plays a pivotal role in ovulation            
              and testosterone production.  However, with the development of                 
              sensitive and specific antibody techniques, it has now become clear            
              that GnRH neuronal network is a complex, heterogenous system,                  
              comprising three or more discrete neuronal groups and spanning                 
              vastly different regions of the brain. Projecting to targets within            
              and outside the brain, GnRH serves as both a hormone and a                     
              neurotransmitter, and has multiple actions, on reproductive                    
              physiology and on species-typical behaviors associated with                    
              reproduction.  Moreover, the GnRH peptides occur in at least five              
              different molecular forms. Dr. Muske will examine a newly                      
              discovered population of GnRH neurons in the periventricular areas             
              of the diencephalon.  Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical                   
              techniques, she will identify the targets and projections of the               
              periventricular GnRH neurons for each of the different molecular               
              forms.  Dr. Muske will determine whether the periventricular GnRH              
              neurons constitute an unique system, with independent embryonic                
              origins and developmental history.  Finally, she will assess the               
              functional role of this system in the regulation of reproductive               
              behavior and physiology.  The results will provide new insights                
              into the organization, function and mechanisms of action of the                
              GnRH systems lying outside the endocrine hypothalamus.  Moreover,              
              many reproductive dysfunctions in humans result from a disorder in             
              the GnRH system.  For example, Kallman's Syndrome, a congenital                
              disorder characterized by sterility and anosmia, is caused by a                
              defect in the migration of GnRH neurons and hypogonadism,                      
              characterized by delayed puberty and sterility, results from                   
              GnRH deficiency.  Fundamental information gained from this work may            
              help facilitate the development of effective treatments for                    
              patients suffering from GnRH dysfunctions.
