Title       : Economic Integration of High-Wage and Low-Wage Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9209845

Award Number: 9209845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward E. Leamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There have been and continue to be a remarkable number of cases                
              in which high-wage and low-wage countries have become partially                
              integrated.  The increasing economic interdependence of the U.S.               
              and Japan beginning in the 1950's is one example.  The high-wage               
              European community has added Ireland, Spain, Greece and Portugal.              
              More recently there is the integration of West and East Germany;               
              and of Western and Eastern Europe generally.  Also there is the                
              increasing integration of the U.S. and Mexico and the partial                  
              integration of the U.S. with the rest of Latin America.  This                  
              project studies theoretically and empirically the consequences of              
              partial economic integration of high-wage and low-wage countries.              
              The goal is to understand what happens to output mix, factor                   
              returns, employment, unemployment, and prices as two or more                   
              regions with different wages are partially or fully integrated.                
                                                                                             
              One contribution of this research will be an assessment of the                 
              value of competing models as vehicles for understanding partial                
              economic integration.  A variety of different economic models                  
              will be considered, differing in terms of their assumptions                    
              regarding the degree of factor mobility between industries and                 
              between countries, the nature of the production process and the                
              character of competition in goods and factor markets.  Another                 
              contribution of this project will be the assessment of the impact              
              of various policy measures on the performance of an economy in                 
              the midst of an integration episode.  The possible policy                      
              measures include isolationist commercial policy, industrial                    
              subsidies, unemployment compensation, adjustment assistance, and               
              educational subsidies.
