Title       : Communication and Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9209401

Award Number: 9209401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Barfield                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald S. Wilkinson gw10@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research aims to determine the function and information                   
              content of communication vocalizations of a large, omnivorous                  
              bat, the greater spear-nosed bat.  The rich vocal repertoire,                  
              unusual social system in which unrelated females form long-                    
              lasting groups, and proclivity to forage in groups while                       
              producing loud, audible calls make this bat ideally suited for                 
              study.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Dr. Wilkinson's research is designed to determine if vocal                     
              advertisement and group foraging result in reciprocated or                     
              mutualistic benefits.  To discriminate between these                           
              alternatives, he will use infrared-sensitive video and                         
              computerized recording equipment to conduct observations and                   
              playback experiments on individually marked bats departing from                
              cave roosts or foraging in groups during three months of field                 
              work in Trinidad, West Indies.  Acoustic analysis of bat                       
              vocalizations recorded in the field from known individuals will                
              be used to indicate the type of information that could be                      
              contained in particular calls.  Behavioral experiments designed                
              to measure the energetic benefits of group foraging and                        
              information exchange, as well as the mechanism by which                        
              information is transferred, will be conducted on captive bats at               
              the National Zoo, Washington, D.C., over a seven-month period.                 
                                                                                             
              Reciprocal information exchange is common in all human societies               
              but is unknown for other vertebrates with the possible exception               
              of chimpanzees and dolphins.  This research should, therefore,                 
              add to our understanding of communication and cooperation in bats              
              and provide insight into the evolution of cooperative                          
              communication.  In addition, because this bat pollinates flowers               
              and disperses seeds from a variety of tropical trees, an improved              
              understanding of its foraging behavior may provide valuable                    
              information for conserving Latin American rain forests.
