Title       : An Expert System-Based Integrated Energy Management System, Award in Indian
               Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1995  
File        : a9209103

Award Number: 9209103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1989000            (Estimated)
Investigator: P K. Dash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Regional Engineering Col
	      
	      Warrangal, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              21        Mathematics                             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project provides for collaboration by an                    
              Indian scientist, Dr. P.K. Dash of the Department of Electrical                
              Engineering, Regional Engineering College (REC), Rourkela, and a               
              U.S. scientist, Dr. Saifur Rahman of the Department of Electrical              
              Engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VPI) in                         
              Blacksburg.  The scientists plan to study the complex                          
              relationships between the time and intensity of an electric                    
              utility's peak load, and the potential for cost reduction                      
              strategies by the utilities and consumers.  The study also seeks               
              to develop means for two-way exchange of information to be used                
              for decisions such as production scheduling and load control.                  
              The development of solutions will combine the capabilities of                  
              both expert systems approach and statistical techniques.                       
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This collaboration will build on existing research being               
              done by Dr. Rahman under an NSF/ECS grant.  This collaboration                 
              will benefit both sides by combining the abilities of the Indian               
              group to collect data from unique conditions in India and the                  
              advanced modelling and computational techniques at VPI.  The                   
              project meets the objectives of the U.S.-India Program.
