Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Compact Hausdorff Spaces and Set-Theoretic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9209711

Award Number: 9209711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Nyikos nyikos@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Over the last three decades there has been a revolution in                
              general topology and the theory of Boolean algebras, brought about             
              by powerful new techniques in set theory, including the method of              
              forcing pioneered by Paul J. Cohen, and by deep studies in the                 
              structure of inner models of set theory and large cardinals.  At               
              the same time, there has been striking progress in the theory of               
              compact Hausdorff spaces, and it is not always easy to see in                  
              advance whether extra set-theoretic assumptions are required.  The             
              investigator intends to continue his research on compact Hausdorff             
              spaces, including the application of special set-theoretic tools.              
              Other classes of spaces receiving attention will be the related                
              classes of countably compact and sequentially compact spaces, Moore            
              spaces, non-metrizable manifolds, Frechet-Urysohn topological                  
              groups and topological vector spaces, countably metacompact spaces,            
              and weak and weak* compact subsets of Banach spaces.  Finite group             
              actions on normal spaces will also receive some attention.                     
                   General topology is more of a foundational subject than the               
              rest of topology, concerning itself with very abstract spaces and              
              with the impact on topology of the adoption of variants of the                 
              axioms of set theory.  Although analogies to familiar objects of               
              geometry are valuable heuristics, the plastic, intuitive kind of               
              geometry involving low-dimensional manifolds is a far cry from the             
              study of subsets of a Banach space, the latter being more closely              
              related to classical analysis than to geometry, in spite of the                
              geometric terminology employed.  One major result of general                   
              topology in which Nyikos was involved a decade ago was the                     
              discovery that a famous unproved conjecture concerning Moore spaces            
              was actually independent of the usual basic axioms of set theory.              
              Moreover, it was shown to be inconsistent with the Cantor Continuum            
              Hypothesis, a far more familiar proposition that most working                  
              mathematicians would be likely to choose if they had to make a                 
              choice.  This result suggests the flavor of the best general                   
              topology.
