Title       : Specialization of the Right and Left Cerebral Hemispheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1994       
File        : a9209534

Award Number: 9209534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Hellige   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The cortex of the human brain is divided anatomically into two                 
              hemispheres, the right and the left, which, though roughly                     
              symmetrical in appearance, are not completely equivalent in their              
              information processing abilities and propensities.  This research              
              will investigate the consequences of this functional hemispheric               
              asymmetry for information processing in neurologically normal                  
              individuals.  The research will do so by investigating the manner              
              in which the two hemispheres make complementary contributions to               
              perception, cognition, and action.  One set of studies will                    
              increase our understanding of the nature of left-hemisphere                    
              dominance for a variety of linguistic processes as well as the                 
              consequences of this hemispheric asymmetry for the strategies                  
              typically utilized by neurologically normal individuals.  A second             
              set of studies will investigate in a number of different ways the              
              hypothesis that the two hemispheres are predisposed toward the                 
              efficient use of different types of visual information, i. e., that            
              the right hemisphere makes most efficient use of global or holistic            
              aspects of visual patterns whereas the left hemisphere makes most              
              efficient use of local or more fine-grained detail.  A third set of            
              studies will investigate the ways in which the brain encodes                   
              information about spatial dimensions such as left versus right.  A             
              fourth set of studies will deal with the question of how it is that            
              unity of thought and action emerges from a brain consisting of two             
              hemispheres that differ in so many ways.  These studies will                   
              determine the variety of ways in which the two hemispheres interact            
              with each other.  Of particular importance are studies that will               
              determine when and how the style of processing characteristic of               
              one hemisphere or the other comes to dominate performance.                     
              Cognitive neuroscience has helped us to understand the modular                 
              nature of the brain, to break it down into meaningful components.              
              These studies of interhemispheric interaction will begin to put the            
              components back together.  A fifth set of studies will investigate             
              individual differences in these aspects of hemispheric asymmetry               
              and interhemispheric interaction.  This will be done by having the             
              same individuals participate in a variety of experimental tasks and            
              by discovering how performance on one task relates to performance              
              on others.  All five sets of studies will address basic issues in              
              cognitive neuroscience.  At the same time, the outcomes will have              
              implications for a variety of more applied questions.  For example,            
              it has been hypothesized that a variety of learning disabilities               
              such as dyslexia and attentional deficit disorder result from                  
              unusual patterns of hemispheric asymmetry or from difficulty in                
              coordinating the activities of the two hemispheres.  The                       
              noninvasive behavioral techniques emerging from this research will             
              be capable of separating the many aspects of hemispheric asymmetry             
              and interhemispheric interaction and should make it possible to                
              test these hypotheses.
