Title       : Well-Posed Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9209738

Award Number: 9209738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Ralston ralston@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Eskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The problem of determining a quantum mechanical potential                 
              from its scattering amplitude goes back to the beginning of                    
              quantum mechanics.  One aspect of the problem which has received               
              little attention is finding data sets for which the problem is                 
              well-posed, i.e., that the mapping from the potential to the                   
              scattering data set is continuously invertible.  This work                     
              focuses on one such set, the so-called backscattering data.  It                
              is the data which occurs from the restriction of the scattering                
              amplitude to the direction opposite to the direction of the                    
              incident plane wave.  In dimensions three and higher, the                      
              relationship of the backscattering and potential is well                       
              documented.  In two dimensions or in cases where the data is                   
              restricted to half-spaces, there are obstacles which will be                   
              analyzed during the course of this project.  Other work on                     
              inverse scattering will focus on the wave equation with variable               
              speed of sound and the Schrodinger equation with both electric                 
              and magnetic potential. A second line of investigation concerns                
              hyperbolic partial differential equations defined in domains with              
              wedgelike boundaries and the propagation of singularities of                   
              solutions of initial-boundary value problems for second order                  
              equations in the presence of boundary wedges.                                  
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The inverse problems described in                
              this proposal play a central role in these studies. Their object               
              is not to state the relationships, but rather, to extract                      
              qualitative and quantitative meaning from them.
