Title       : Melt Polycondensation In A Rotating Disc Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1994   
File        : a9209187

Award Number: 9209187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyu-Yong Choi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Melt condensation polymerization techniques are used in the                    
              polymer industry for the synthesis of thermoplastics and                       
              specialty polymers.  For example, saturated polyesters (such                   
              as poly(ethylene terephthalate) - PET and poly(butylene                        
              terephthalate) - PBT), polyamides, polyarylates, and                           
              polycarbonates are manufactured in either semi-batch or                        
              continuous polycondensation reactors.  Many of these processes                 
              are characterized by multiple reaction stages and complex                      
              reaction networks that give rise to various unwanted side                      
              products.  The pure molten monomers are polymerized in the                     
              absence of added solvents - a more environmentally friendly                    
              process than other industrial polymerization processes.  The                   
              process is also advantageous because the polymers can be                       
              directly pelletized or spun into fibers.                                       
                                                                                             
              A common feature of industrial melt polycondensation processes                 
              is that multiple reaction stages are employed using several                    
              reactors in series.  For PET production, the sequential                        
              reaction procedure includes: (a) monomers, low molecular                       
              weight oligomers, and low molecular weight prepolymers are                     
              synthesized in continuous stirred tank reactors, and (b) the                   
              prepolymers are then polymerized to higher molecular weight                    
              polymers in finishing polymerization reactors (often rotating                  
              disc reactors) where large vapor-liquid surface areas are                      
              provided.  The final polymer product properties are mostly                     
              regulated in this finishing polymerization stage, therefore                    
              the optimal design and operation of this reactor is important                  
              and is the objective this research.                                            
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the PI will address the following questions:                     
               (1) What are the major factors that affect the formation of                   
                   polymer films on a rotating disc?  What are the                           
                   quantitative relations between the disc design/operating                  
                   variables and film thickness?                                             
               (2) What is the role of gas bubbles of condensation                           
                   byproducts in the mass transfer process?  How can one                     
                   quantify the effect of gas bubbles on the total vapor-                    
                   liquid mass transfer rate?                                                
               (3) What interactions occur between the neighboring discs and                 
                   what will be the optimal layout of multiple discs on the                  
                   agitator shaft?  What will be the optimal angle of disc                   
                   immersion in the liquid pool?                                             
               (4) What is the overall liquid (polymer melt) flow pattern in                 
                   the reactor?                                                              
               (5) How does the continuous finishing reactor behave under                    
                   various reactor operating conditions and feed conditions                  
                   at steady state and transient state?  What polymer                        
                   properties are most strongly influenced by what reactor                   
                   variables? How should one pair the polymer property                       
                   parameters with reactor operating conditions for the                      
                   design of product quality control systems?                                
              Both experimental work and reactor modeling will be done.***//
