Title       : Neural Plasticity Induced by Early Olfactory Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1992       
File        : a9209929

Award Number: 9209929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Wilson dwilson@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of Dr. Wilson's research is to understand neural                      
              mechanisms of associative learning.  Specifically, the proposed                
              research will investigate the neural substrates of postnatal                   
              olfactory learning in newborn vertebrates.  This early learning is             
              associated with specific changes in neural structure and function              
              in the olfactory bulb, the first central relay for olfactory                   
              information processing.  Dr. Wilson's previous work has                        
              demonstrated the output neurons in the olfactory bulb,                         
              mitral/tufted cells, modify their response patterns to odors                   
              learned during the early postnatal period.  Furthermore, Dr. Wilson            
              has found that mitral/tufted cells receive convergent information              
              about both odor stimuli and reward stimuli.  Importantly, both the             
              behavioral and neural consequences of early learning are                       
              morepinephrine dependent, as is at least one component of                      
              mitral/tufted cell response to reward.  The proposed experiments               
              will examine how mitral/tufted cells are modified during olfactory             
              associative learning and uses a combination of neurophysiological              
              and neuropharmacological techniques to further explore the neural              
              substrates of the descending reward input to the olfactory bulb.               
              Based on his preliminary data, a specific circuit is proposed for              
              convergence of odor and reward information in the bulb involving               
              the primary olfactory nerve and norepinephrine centrifugal inputs              
              to the bulb.  Norepinephrine agonists and antagonists will be                  
              infused into the olfactory bulb during odor-reward associative                 
              conditioning.  Response patterns of mitral/tufted cells to the                 
              conditioned odor will be examined over the course of the training.             
              The results will provide important information regarding the neural            
              pathways and pharmacology involved in a critical form of learning              
              expressed soon after birth in many animals including humans.***//
