Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modelling Territoriality and Stability of Wolf-Deer
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9209737

Award Number: 9209737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Murray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1128,9198,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators study the spatial and temporal dynamics of              
              territory formation for wolves (Canis lupus) and the resulting                 
              impact on the distribution of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus                    
              virginianus).  Their model is based on field studies from                      
              northeastern Minnesota that indicate that adjacent wolf packs                  
              form distinct territories that are separated by "buffer zones"                 
              where packs rarely trespass.  These buffer zones can provide a                 
              spatial refuge for the primary prey species: white-tailed deer.                
              The field studies show that deer density is higher in the                      
              inter-territorial areas (refuges) and is lower near the center of              
              established territories (where deer populations may be subject to              
              intense predation).  The buffer zones may also stabilize                       
              wolf-deer interactions by providing a reservoir of deer that can               
              recolonize areas of wolf territory that have suffered heavy                    
              predation losses.                                                              
                   The mathematical model the investigators develop describes                
              the behavioral wolf-wolf and wolf-deer interactions using a                    
              system of coupled nonlinear partial differential equations, and                
              describes the long-term ecological wolf-deer interactions using a              
              system of coupled nonlinear difference equations.  The analysis                
              of the model equations will employ mathematical and numerical                  
              techniques from areas such as perturbation theory and finite                   
              difference numerical methods.  This should lead to a detailed                  
              quantitative understanding of wolf territorial pattern formation,              
              and an illustration of how territoriality influences the                       
              distribution and abundance of deer.  The research will have a                  
              wider application to the general area of territorial pattern                   
              formation; such patterns provide the basis for social                          
              organization in many mammals and birds.
