Title       : H-infinity Design in Interconnected and Slowly Time-varying Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9209001

Award Number: 9209001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Le Yi Wang lywang@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the problem of                                  
              system design in an Hoo sense for interconnected                               
              and slowly time-varying systems.  The project starts                           
              with the modification of the Hoo method so that the                            
              effect of interaction among coupled subsystems can                             
              be incorporated into the design.  In particular, we                            
              will develop a design strategy which exploits the                              
              available design freedom contained in Hoo method                               
              to achieve coordination of subsystems.                                         
              Furthermore, we will investigate the design tradeoff                           
              and limits on achievable performance in Hoo design                             
              of interconnected systems.  The project continues to                           
              study the problem of stabilization and optimization                            
              in continuous-time slowly time-varying (possibly                               
              unstable) systems containing possibly time-varying                             
              delay terms.  The frozen-time approach will be                                 
              employed to derive practical design procedures, and                            
              will be examined for its limitations.  The local-                              
              global double algebra framework developed by the                               
              Principal Investigator and Zames will be used to                               
              study rigorously the issues of stabilization and                               
              optimization in slowly time-varying systems.  We                               
              will concentrate on the following fundamental issues                           
              in Hoo design problems for slowly time-varying                                 
              systems: (1) the development of analysis tools for                             
              robust stability and performance, (2) the                                      
              construction of feedback controllers, (3) the power                            
              of adaptation as compared with general time-                                   
              varying system design, and (4) the limits of                                   
              achievable performance imposed by plant dynamics.                              
              The project will be of practical importance in                                 
              providing constructive design tools, and of                                    
              theoretical significance in giving a better                                    
              understanding of the limitations of the frozen-time                            
              approach and adaptation, and the relationships                                 
              between modeling and design.
