Title       : Improving the Accessibility of the NBER's Historical Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9209865

Award Number: 9209865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85527              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Miron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Feenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Since its founding in 1920, one of the National Bureau of Economic             
              Research's (NBER's) most important goals has been the accurate                 
              measurement of the aggregate economy.  Especially during its early             
              years, the NBER devoted considerable resources to the collection               
              of data, culling this information from both government and private             
              sources.  These data collection efforts proved extremely valuable              
              to future researchers in both academia and government.  For                    
              example, they led directly to the development of the index of                  
              leading economic indicators.  At the time the data were collected,             
              there was no method available for storing them electronically, so              
              the NBER researchers copied them by hand from the original sources             
              onto data sheets.  In 1978, the Inter-University Consortium for                
              Political and Social Research (ICPSR) in Ann Arbor, Michigan, with             
              funding from the NSF, transferred the data from the NBER's                     
              handwritten sheets to magnetic tape.  This tape is available to the            
              public from the ICPSR.  A number of researchers have used the ICPSR            
              tape.  The contribution of this project comes from converting the              
              ICPSR tape to floppy disks and verifying the accuracy of the data              
              using the NBER's original handwritten sheets.                                  
                                                                                             
              Access to the data will be greatly improved by making it available             
              on floppy disks in a format compatible with common time series                 
              packages for the PC.  At present the use of data on the ICPSR tape             
              requires the cumbersome task of reading the tape on a mainframe and            
              then downloading the data to a PC.  Since there are over 7,500                 
              series on the tape, it is time consuming to download them all.                 
              Additionally, the structure of the tape makes it difficult toe                 
              extract a single series or a small group of series.  Also the                  
              process of transferring the data from the NBER's handwritten sheets            
              to the ICPSR tape introduced a number of mistakes into the data                
              set, and this project will correct these mistakes.
