Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Experimental Studiesof Pulsatile Flow in
               Free Moving Elastic Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1993 
File        : a9209129

Award Number: 9209129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalin Tang dtang@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peder C. Pedersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators develop a two-dimensional (axisymmetric)                
              nonlinear mathematical model of viscous flow in tapered free                   
              moving elastic tubes, a numerical method to solve the model, and               
              an ultrasonic method to measure the movement of vessel walls in                
              an experimental model.  The model is intended to represent blood               
              flow in large arteries with stenoses and atherosclerosis.                      
              Detailed localized numerical solution for the flow in free moving              
              elastic tubes with local hardening, thickening and occlusions is               
              obtained.  Corresponding experiments are made in the lab using                 
              elastic tubes.  The numerical and experimental results are                     
              compared and the mathematical model may be further refined.                    
              Those results are also compared with published results of in vivo              
              measurements to verify the validity of the models and techniques.              
              The numerical results obtained and experimental techniques                     
              developed in this project will lead to better understanding of                 
              blood flow in large arteries and may be of clinical value in the               
              future.                                                                        
                   As is well-known, cardiovascular diseases are the leading                 
              causes of morbidity and mortality in the United States.  Specific              
              diseases are typically atherosclerosis, stenoses, and aneurysms                
              that often remain undetected due to inadequate diagnostic                      
              techniques.  This research aims to provide a valid improved                    
              mathematical model for blood flow in large arteries, an efficient              
              numerical method for mathematical simulations, and an accurate                 
              noninvasive ultrasound measurement technique.  These could be                  
              very useful for the early diagnosis of blood vessel diseases and               
              therefore have the potential to save many lives in the future.                 
              The numerical method developed in this project is also applicable              
              to many other free moving boundary problems and is itself of                   
              significance to applied mathematics.
