Title       : The Timing of Control of Stock Externalities in the Presence of Learning with an
               Application to Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9209943

Award Number: 9209943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Kolstad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              This project has two objectives.  One is to develop a theoretical              
              understanding of a generic environmental problem of which global               
              warming and acid deposition are two examples.  That problem is                 
              the optimal tradeoff between acting to control environmental                   
              externalities versus delaying control when faced with uncertainty              
              coupled with learning.  The second objective is to apply one or                
              more of these theoretical models to the global warming problem,                
              addressing the policy question of the extent to which the U.S.                 
              and other countries should control greenhouse gas emissions now                
              versus waiting until more is known about the problem before                    
              controlling.  This is one of the key issues in the public policy               
              debate on global warming and, thus, results of this project may                
              be very significant.  The two driving features of the models                   
              developed will be learning that occurs over time reducing                      
              uncertainty and the stock feature of externalities such as global              
              warming, whereby the stock causes damage but only the flow can be              
              controlled.  The approach of the theoretical part of the project               
              is to develop a stochastic optimal control problem and to                      
              investigate the comparative static properties of the resulting                 
              model.  The empirical portion of the project will numerically                  
              implement one of the theoretical models to the extent necessary                
              to develop policy conclusions.  This will involve adapting an                  
              empirical model developed elsewhere, perhaps the Nordhaus model,               
              rather than developing a totally new one.
