Title       : Peptides That Influence Aspects of Mosquito Diuresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9209884

Award Number: 9209884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project represents basic research into how small hormonal            
              and neurotransmitter molecules called peptides are used as                     
              messengers between cells and organs. We are attempting to discover             
              how information is written on the structure of these small                     
              molecules and read by the target tissues. What are the rules of                
              this molecular language? This type of basic information has                    
              potential for future application indirectly to the development of              
              new pharmaceuticals for various human and animal diseases, and                 
              directly to the applications in agriculture and the control of                 
              vector-borne disease. Utilizing mosquitos as subjects, we limit the            
              use of vertebrate animals and can economically obtain millions of              
              insect subjects for our experiments. Also, by using mosquito                   
              subjects, we can direct the results of the research toward the                 
              development of a new generation of potential-specific insecticides             
              that have potential for removing harmful effects to humans,                    
              beneficial insects and the environment. Specifically, the project              
              is designed to isolate and determine the structure of peptides that            
              effect a physiological process critical to mosquito survival, water            
              and salt elimination. The structures of these naturally occurring              
              peptides will allow synthetic versions of the native peptides to               
              be prepared for the generation of antibodies and for receptor                  
              investigations. The antibodies will be used to locate sites of                 
              storage and release of the peptides within the mosquito. This                  
              should help determine if each peptide is a neurohormone, a                     
              neurotransmitter or a extraneuronal peptide. Synthetic analogs of              
              the native peptides will be designed to probe the receptor(s)                  
              tissue location, molecular structure, and binding site surface. The            
              interaction between receptors and peptides are a critical and                  
              perhaps the most important single form of intercellular                        
              communication that integrates a collection of cells into an                    
              organism.
