Title       : Ontogeny and Function of Primate Vocal Signatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9209844

Award Number: 9209844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold T. Gouzoules   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Gouzoules  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory Univ Yerkes Reg Pri
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              While there is evidence that learning plays a role in the                      
              development of the correct usage of certain vocalizations in                   
              several species of monkeys and apes, there are few studies that                
              have demonstrated such plasticity in the production of calls.                  
              The present research investigates developmental complexity in                  
              primate vocal communication.  Behavioral data, tape-recordings,                
              and computer-aided spectrography will be used to study the                     
              acquisition and significance of pigtail macaque (Macaca                        
              nemestrina) vocal "signatures."  The project focuses on                        
              recruitment screams, vocalizations that have been found to                     
              designate events and objects in the animals' external environment              
              and that thus are rudimentarily semantic.  Calls used in the                   
              recruitment of allies during fights require knowledge of kinship               
              and dominance relationships in the group and are therefore ideal               
              to test hypotheses that learning may be involved in the                        
              development of nonhuman primate vocal behavior.  These calls have              
              "signature" information in their acoustic structure that may                   
              serve to identify kin groups.  Foster-reared infants will be                   
              studied for evidence that they acquire the signature of their                  
              adoptive matriline.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The long-term aim of this research on the vocal communication of               
              monkeys is to explore cognitive dimensions of primate behavior                 
              that may ultimately provide insights into the evolutionary                     
              origins of human language.  Results should also contribute to a                
              better understanding of the criteria for appropriate primate                   
              models for studies of language acquisition.
