Title       : Signalling at a Sensory-Motor Reflex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9209769

Award Number: 9209769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Muller kmuller@mednet.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A basic property of sensory systems is the opponent, center-surround           
              organization of individual receptive fields of neurons. This                   
              organization results from the convergence of inputs from separate              
              sensory cells, some of which contribute excitation, and others                 
              contribute inhibition.  A single sensory cell in the leech synapses            
              with a motoneuron involved in a simple reflex. This sensory cell               
              generates an opponent receptive field in the motor neuron by means             
              of conduction block and an inhibitory interneuron.  Experiments                
              being conducted under this award use electrophysiological recording            
              and stimulation, marking of cells with intracellular tracers, laser            
              microsurgery and electron microscopy to characterize the                       
              distribution and nature of synaptic contacts involved in the reflex            
              connection and to analyze integration of those inputs by                       
              postsynaptic neurons.                                                          
                                                                                             
              These experiments should reveal activity-dependent mechanisms that             
              influence qualitative properties of the mechanosensory receptive               
              field and the reflex connections of which it is a part.  They will             
              also help understand how postsynaptic cells such as motor neurons              
              integrate sensory signals to reach threshold for firing action                 
              potentials and provide insight into the mechanisms by which cell               
              geometry, particularly axonal and dendritic branching, influence               
              neural signalling.
