Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Limit Problems in Algebraic K-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9209714

Award Number: 9209714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunnar E. Carlsson gunnar@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project will study two important constructions in                    
              algebraic K-theory.  The first is the assembly map for the K-theory            
              and L-theory of group rings.  The method will be homotopy-                     
              theoretic, using the bounded K-theory of Pedersen and Weibel.  The             
              investigator hopes to complete his study of the surjectivity                   
              question for cocompact, discrete, torsion-free subgroups of Lie                
              groups, and to generalize the approach to include more general                 
              groups with finite classifying space.  The second object of study              
              will be the descent spectral sequence for the algebraic K-theory of            
              a field F.  He will study a homotopy colimit construction for the              
              K-theory of the algebraic closure of F, in the case where the                  
              absolute Galois group is topologically cyclic.  The component                  
              pieces in the colimit construction will be copies of the K-theory              
              of the field F.                                                                
                   The details of these parts vary, but each is concerned with               
              reducing geometric information to a subject for calculation or to              
              perfecting the algebraic machinery used for the calculations.  The             
              nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of the                
              difficulty.  While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes,            
              and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is            
              far different with what are known as topological properties of                 
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or how            
              to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these               
              have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been             
              reduced to matters of calculation, and two of the principal tools              
              for this are homotopy theory and K-theory.
