Title       : Nonlinear Actuator Design Using Nonlinear System Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9209123

Award Number: 9209123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur R. Bergen                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89983              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Torrey torred@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research supported by this proposal will                                   
              establish a scientific framework which gives insight                           
              into the design of nonlinear actuators.  This will be                          
              accomplished through the expansion of nonlinear                                
              system theory and the proper formulation of                                    
              nonlinear models for electromagnetic actuators,                                
              allowing for their deterministic optimal design.                               
              Additional contributions are expected in the fields                            
              of nonlinear system theory and electromechanical                               
              interactions.  This work will develop the necessary                            
              expansions to nonlinear system theory so that a                                
              linearization and decoupling between performance                               
              measures and design parameters may be achieved                                 
              for electromagnetic actuators.  The design                                     
              parameters could include the number of stator and                              
              rotor poles, the stator and rotor pole arcs, the                               
              active radius, the axial length, etc.  The                                     
              performance measures could include the average                                 
              torque as a function  of speed, the torque-ripple,                             
              inertia, etc.  The running example to be used                                  
              throughout this work is the design of the variable-                            
              reluctance motor.  This motor has already has                                  
              nonlinear control techniques applied to it, and it is                          
              a difficult motor to design because of its spatial and                         
              magnetic nonlinearities.  The work proposed here is                            
              significantly different from applying linearizing                              
              control laws.  In this project, the system theory                              
              would be exploited to yield a closed form optimal                              
              design.  This is a natural extension of previous                               
              modeling work and will directly address important                              
              design issues.  In addition, the incorporation of                              
              nonlinear system theory represents a departure                                 
              from all documented design work and if successful,                             
              could completely reorient the way the design                                   
              problem is viewed.  Further, the design process                                
              would benefit from the discipline the system theory                            
              approach would impose on it.
