Title       : Collaborative Research on Campaign Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9209342

Award Number: 9209342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde Wilcox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Political parties, political action committees, and individuals who            
              make large contributions comprise the most important sources of                
              money in congressional election campaigns.  These actors have                  
              improved their institutional resources and increased their campaign            
              activities since the passage of the Federal Election Campaign Act              
              of 1971 and its amendments.  Nevertheless, political scientists                
              know relatively little about how the development of these actors               
              has influenced their contribution stragegies in elections for the              
              U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate.                             
              One school of thought holds that those who invest large sums of                
              money in federal elections adapt gradually to their environment and            
              are therefore slow to change their contribution strategies.  This              
              body of theory would predict that PACs, parties and individuals                
              would have difficulty departing from established patterns of                   
              behavior, even under radically different circumstances.  A second              
              school of thought maintains that campaign contributors are                     
              strategic actors who constantly survey the political environment               
              in order to take advantage of opportunities created by political               
              change.  This theory would predict that parties, PACs, and                     
              individuals would rapidly adjust their contribution behavior in                
              response to an altered political environment.                                  
              The 1992 election cycle promises to be radically different from                
              those held during the last 12 years because of a confluence of                 
              factors, including redistricting, a large number of congressional              
              retirements, a presidential election, and political scandals.                  
              These factors will lead to an election cycle characterized by many             
              highly qualified candidates competing for a limited reservoir of               
              money.  The unusual qualities of the 1992 elections provide the                
              research team with a unique opportunity to assess the two schools              
              of thought.                                                                    
              This investigation will examine changes in patterns of party, PAC,             
              and individual contributions to incumbents, challengers, open-seat             
              contestants, Democrats, and Republicans over the course of the 1978            
              through 1992 election cycles.  It will assess the impact of                    
              national political conditions, such as the state of the economy,               
              the popularity of the president, and political scandals, on the                
              strategies of these contributors.  It will evaluate how                        
              organizational development and learning have affected their                    
              campaign decision making.  It will also evaluate the impact that               
              Washington-based organizations, such as national party committees              
              and lead PACs, have on the contributions of individuals and other              
              organized contributors.                                                        
              The project will culminate in a unique and comprehensive set of                
              campaign finance data.  It will lead to the development of several             
              generalizations about the organizational evolution of political                
              parties and PACs.  It will also enhance our understanding of how               
              these organizations and individuals interact in the context of                 
              congressional election campaigns.
