Title       : Basic and Applied Statistical Inference and Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9209994

Award Number: 9209994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Gastwirth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   During the last twenty years statistical data and inference               
              have played an increasing role in establishing basic facts used in             
              determining public policy,  e.g.,  estimating the prevalence of HIV            
              infection,  evaluating the risk of cancer from occupational or                 
              environmental exposures,  assessing changes in the income                      
              distribution and in the legal environmental setting,  especially               
              in cases concerning employment discrimination and school                       
              segregation.  The purpose of the project is to study statistical               
              problems arising in these contexts and to develop appropriate                  
              probability models and statistical methodology for their solution.             
              Robust methods which lead to statistically valid inferences when               
              several scientifically plausible models may underlie the data or               
              when a few observations may be erroneous are emphasized.  Different            
              approaches for assessing the potential effect of an omitted factor             
              and measurement errors on inferences drawn from otherwise valid                
              studies will be developed.                                                     
                                                                                             
                   The completion of this project should establish the                       
              applicability of group testing to the identification,  quality                 
              control and confidential estimation of the prevalence of a trait               
              (such as the HIV virus) in a population or workforce.  The                     
              successful completion of the second task of the project,  namely,              
              the development of methods for assessing the statistical bias                  
              resulting from omitted factors and misclassification in surveys,               
              could have a very important impact in the legal and public policy              
              setting as courts have claimed that even one error can justify                 
              criticism of a statistical study.  The principal investigator has              
              already made significant progress in unifying approaches used in               
              various areas of application and in assessing the seriousness of               
              the possible error on the conclusions drawn from a study.
