Title       : Feature Group Utility in Model-Based 3D Object Recognition Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9209212

Award Number: 9209212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Flynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 One of the most demanding applications in computer vision is                
              model-based 3D object recognition.  Such systems often use                     
              correspondence techniques to identify objects in an image; sets                
              of bindings are formed between groups of scene features (e.g.,                 
              points, curves, surfaces, or volumes) and compatible groups of                 
              model features.  The discrimination ability ( or utility) of                   
              individual features (e.g. points, curves, surfaces, or volumes)                
              and compatible groups of model features.  The discrimination                   
              ability (or utility) of individual feature groups in these                     
              systems is a challenging and important problem in computer vision              
              research.  When recognition systems are expected to select the                 
              correct model(s) out of a database of hundreds or thousands,                   
              indexing methods (which quickly reject a subset of the model                   
              database from further consideration by the system) are useful or               
              often essential if objects are to be recognized efficiently, and               
              the use of feature groups offers a promising technique for                     
              performing this indexing task.                                                 
                   This research investigates two facets of the feature group                
              utility concept:  saliency of feature groups extracted from the                
              input image, and symmetric arrangements of features arising from               
              inherent symmetries of the object models in the database.                      
              Preliminary experimental results are also described.  Specific                 
              goals of the proposed research are to (a) place both the saliency              
              and symmetry concepts on a firm theoretical basis, (b) generalize              
              existing techniques for identifying salient and symmetric feature              
              groups out of their current domain (of polyhedral or quadric                   
              surfaces into more expressive and generic classes of features,                 
              and (c) expand a current database of over 100 object models to                 
              include  additional, more realistic objects.
