Title       : Research Initiation Award: Scan Welding; Process Modeling and Adaptive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1992    
File        : a9209141

Award Number: 9209141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charalabos C. Doumanidis cdoumani@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Traditional welding methods with a sequentially moving,                   
              localized heat input, offer limited simultaneous control over the              
              multiple features of weld quality and productivity.  This research             
              will focus on the invention of a novel parallel technique, scan                
              welding, implemented by fast repetitive cycling of the torch along             
              the weld surface to provide a regulated continuous heat                        
              distribution.  This new method will produce the full bead length               
              simultaneously, and yield longitudinally uniform thermal properties            
              of the weld.  The dynamics of scan welding will be studied by                  
              analytical and numerical modeling of its temperature, phase and                
              stress-strain field.  On this basis, a distributed adaptive control            
              system with in-process parameter identification will be designed               
              to modulate the torch power and motion, so as to obtain the                    
              specified thermal field.  Scan welding will also be implemented on             
              a robotic plasma welding system with thermal feedback from an                  
              infrared pyrometer, and experiments will be performed for model                
              verification and comparison of scan welding to conventional                    
              techniques.                                                                    
                   The expected advantages include high process speed and                    
              efficiency, elimination of preheat and annealing requirements, and             
              close simultaneous control of weld bead geometry, material                     
              microstructure and properties, and residual stresses and                       
              distortions of the joint.  These benefits provide the potential for            
              optimization of the welding productivity and quality, especially               
              in critical and highly demanding applications.
