Title       : Central Equatorial Pacific Experiment (CEPEX); An Airborne Experiment to Address
               Issues Concerning the Role of Cloud-Radiation Feedbacks in El-Nino and Global
               Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1992  
File        : a9209665

Award Number: 9209665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Veerabhadran Ramanathan ram@fiji.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The "thermostat hypothesis" depends upon three postulates.                
              First, a super-greenhouse effect exists.  Satellite data reveal                
              that the atmosphere over the warmest oceans is very humid, causing             
              it to trap a significant fraction of the infrared energy emitted by            
              the ocean.  Furthermore, the infrared trapping - known as the                  
              greenhouse effect - increases very sharply with increasing SST in              
              regions of convection.  This creates an instability which requires             
              some sort of negative feedback (e.g. thermostat) in order to keep              
              the ocean and atmosphere in their present, stable state.  Second,              
              there is a threshold temperature above which deep convection                   
              begins.  Third, bright cirrus anvils, which reach altitudes of 16              
              km (55,000 ft.) and extend over tens of thousands of square                    
              kilometers, reflect significant amounts of solar energy back to                
              space so that the sea surface cools down, hence, the thermostat.               
                                                                                             
                   The goal of CEPEX is to test the thermostat hypothesis and                
              thus understand the role of the water vapor greenhouse effect,                 
              cloud-radiative interactions and evaporation in regulating SSTs.               
                                                                                             
                   Three aircraft will be deployed in CEPEX:  A high altitude                
              aircraft - flying above the anvil clouds at altitudes of 55,000 -              
              60,000 feet - to collect data on solar energy reflected by clouds,             
              infrared energy radiated by the surface-atmosphere system, and the             
              top and bottom altitudes of the cirrus anvils; an intermediate                 
              aircraft - flying below the anvils at 35,000 - 40,000 feet - to                
              measure the super-greenhouse effect, the energy regulation by anvil            
              clouds, and the vertical distributions of water vapor and                      
              temperature; and a low altitude aircraft to measure the evaporation            
              and heat release from the ocean to the atmosphere from an altitude             
              of about 150 feet.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   Since the central objective is to measure the impact of SST               
              differences, flight plans will span the central equatorial Pacific,            
              about 700 nautical miles to either side of the date line.  This                
              region encompasses the desired SST range, with frequent convection             
              west and south of the date line, but little to the east.  The                  
              flights measuring radiant energy will originate from Fiji island               
              (17oS, 178oE).  The region between Fiji and the equator also                   
              contains large SST gradients in the desired range between 27oC and             
              30oC.  Evaporation measurements will be made along the equator                 
              between Nauru Island and Christmas Island.                                     
                                                                                             
                   The high altitude measurements will be made over a one month              
              period beginning approximately March 1, 1993.  The high and                    
              intermediate aircraft will fly about every other day for a total of            
              100 flight hours each.  Surface evaporation measurements will be               
              taken by the low-level aircraft during the first half of the                   
              experiment.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                   The question of how tropical SSTs are regulated is important              
              to understanding the regulation of the Earth's climate in general;             
              in particular, the atmospheric behavior in the warm pool region may            
              become more widespread in the event of anticipated global warming.
