Title       : Socialization and Temperament in the Development of Conscience in Early
               Childhood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9209559

Award Number: 9209559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grazyna Kochanska grazyna-kochanska@uiowa.edu   or        blagrawy@uiamvs  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1332,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  The development of conscience is an ultimate hallmark and                 
              goal of socialization.  Conscience assures that we adhere to                   
              standards of conduct and restrain antisocial impulses even in the              
              absence of surveillance.  In the second year of life, parents                  
              begin to lay foundations for children's conscience by setting and              
              enforcing standards of desired behavior.  Different child rearing              
              patterns have been associated with varying outcomes in children's              
              conscience development.  However, children's individual                        
              temperamental characteristics, such as vulnerability to anxiety                
              and fearfulness, and impulsivity and inhibitory control may                    
              affect their ability to experience guilt and remorse and the                   
              capacity to suppress forbidden impulses.  Thus, they may be                    
              strongly related to aspects of conscience development, and they                
              may also moderate the effects of parental socialization.                       
              Nevertheless, individual differences have been almost entirely                 
              neglected in the developmental research on conscience.  This                   
              short term cross-sectional/follow-up study will examine maternal               
              socialization and child temperament as contributors to the early               
              formation of conscience at two points critical for its                         
              development; at Time 1, at 29.40 months (recently proposed as the              
              period of the emergence of the "moral self") and at Time 2, at                 
              45-55 months (on the verge of the transition to broad social                   
              systems, when internal standards of conduct take on a particular               
              developmental significance).  Specifically, mothers' disciplinary              
              styles, children's fearfulness/anxiety and impulsivity/inhibitory              
              control, and apsects of children's conscience development will be              
              measured at both times of assessment with a rich combination of                
              methods; naturalistic behavioral observations in multiple                      
              context, standardized laboratory procedures, parental reports,                 
              and semi-projective measures.  The study will provide unique                   
              insights into the complex interplay of socialization and                       
              temperament in the early development of conscience.
