Title       : A Refined Age for the Manson Impact Structure by Means of Detailed 40Ar/39Ar
               Thermochronology of Shocked Microclines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9209043

Award Number: 9209043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39013              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Zeitler pkz0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The object of this study is to reevaluate the dating of the               
              Manson Impact Structure, which has been suggested to be one of the             
              sites where a large asteroid or comet struck the earth some 65                 
              million years ago, causing one of the larger mass extinctions                  
              experienced on this planet.  It is important to determine with the             
              best possible resolution if the Manson structure is the same age               
              as other impact sites nominated to be responsible for events at the            
              Cretaceous/Tertiary (K/T) boundary, and if Manson and the other                
              impact sites are the same age as the paleontologically defined                 
              boundary seen in the rock record.  Up to this point, the only date             
              on the Manson structure has come from innovative application of the            
              40Ar/39Ar dating method to samples of partially reset feldspars which          
              were taken from the basement rock shocked and heated by the impact             
              itself.  New dating of melt glasses recovered by the current                   
              drilling program at the Manson site may provide an additional age              
              estimate, but further analysis of shocked feldspars offers at least            
              as promising a means of improving the precision and accuracy of                
              the age of the Manson of feldspar analysis and interpretation, it              
              should be possible to bring the precision and accuracy of the age              
              of the Manson structure.  Currently, this age estimate is 65.7+1               
              Ma.  With the application of current techniques of feldspar                    
              analysis and interpretation, it should be possible to bring the                
              precision to ~0.2 Ma or better; preliminary "thermochronological"              
              analysis of previously published data also suggests that the most              
              likely age may actually be at least 0.7 m.y. lower, putting the age            
              of the Manson impactor much closer to estimates of the K/T boundary            
              and the Caribbean impactor of some 64.7 Ma.  Additional benefits               
              from careful thermochronological analysis of Manson-site feldspars             
              will include an understanding of how robust age estimates from                 
              these feldspars actually are, and also, a constraint on the post-              
              impact thermal history of the impact site.
