Title       : The Visual System: Modulation of NMDA Receptor Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9209651

Award Number: 9209651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190816             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Debski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ability to correctly perceive the physical world around us is              
              to a large part dependent on hooking the eye up to the brain in a              
              very precise fashion.  Dr. Debski's goal is to understand the                  
              process whereby the neurons from the eye choose the cells in a                 
              target structure with which to connect.  In order to study the                 
              problem of how the eye connects to the brain, Dr. Debski will use              
              the visual system of a amphibian model system.  In this system, the            
              eye connects to the optic tectum, the main visual area of the                  
              animal.  There the neurons from the eye form a map of the visual               
              space.  This brain structure is similar to the visual maps found               
              in mammals and primates.  One of the distinct advantages of the                
              amphibian is that development of the visual system occurs during               
              a stage when it is readily accessible.  Therefore the developmental            
              processes which lead to the formation of these maps can be studied.            
              Dr. Debski's study will focus on the NMDA receptor, a type of                  
              receptor found on some neurons.  This receptor is known to play as             
              role in determining where the optic tectum neurons from the eye                
              connect.  She will determine whether the activity of this receptor             
              can be modulated by the neurotransmitters glycine, serotonin and               
              VIP and to what extent the latter two of these transmitters are                
              found in the visual system and therefore are likely to provide such            
              modulation in the intact animal.  Dr. Debski will also determine               
              the degree to which the developing system changes with respect to              
              NMDA receptor activity and serotonin- and VIP-like immunoreactive              
              neurons as it matures.  The results from these studies will allow              
              us to better understand how to modulate NMDA receptor activity as              
              a means to correct error in visual connectivity when they occur.***//
