Title       : Modeling and Characterization of Chain Polymerization Reactions for
               Multifunctional Monomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9209899

Award Number: 9209899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher N. Bowman bowmanc@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The formation of highly crosslinked polymers from                              
              multifunctional monomers is typically accompanied by                           
              heterogeneity of the polymer structure, autoacceleration and                   
                                                                                             
              autodeceleration of the reaction kinetics, formation of a                      
              glassy polymer, a delay in volume shrinkage with respect of                    
                                                                                             
              equilibrium, and the attainment of a maximum functional group                  
                                                                                             
              conversion.  Polymers of multifunctional monomers afford a                     
              number of advantages in that they form a highly crosslinked                    
                                                                                             
              polymer with high mechanical and thermal integrity as well as                  
                                                                                             
              low solvent (i.e. moisture) absorption.  Many of these                         
              materials are also transparent to light over a large                           
              wavelength range.  These polymer properties make these                         
              materials desirable for applications as optical fiber coating,                 
                                                                                             
              laser video disc coatings, aspherical lenses, dental                           
              materials, printing inks, and nonlinear optical materials.                     
                                                                                             
              This work addresses, from both a theoretical and an                            
              experimental basis, the relationship between cure conditions                   
                                                                                             
              such as temperature, monomer functionality and type, and                       
              initiation rate and type to the final properties of the                        
              polymer after curing.  Because the polymer behavior is                         
              strongly dependent on the polymer structure and properties,                    
                                                                                             
              models will be developed to provide a framework, applicable to                 
                                                                                             
              curing processes involving chain polymerization.  This                         
              framework will predict the effect of reaction conditions such                  
                                                                                             
              as temperature, initiation rate and type, and monomer                          
              characteristics and functionality on the reaction and on the                   
                                                                                             
              polymer structure and properties.  Current models coupling the                 
                                                                                             
              volume relaxation and reaction kinetics will be modified to                    
                                                                                             
              predict temperature dependence, depolymerization, ionic                        
              polymerizations, and termination by reaction diffusion.  A                     
              kinetic gelation simulation will be developed and used to                      
              predict the polymer structure including the molecular weight                   
                                                                                             
              distribution, the gel point conversion, the cyclization                        
              tendency, and the heterogeneity as a function of the reaction                  
                                                                                             
              conditions.  Finally, experimental characterization of the                     
              reaction progress and the polymer structure will be done using                 
                                                                                             
              free radical polymerizations of multi(meth)acrylates initiated                 
                                                                                             
              both thermally and by ultraviolet radiation.  In this way the                  
                                                                                             
              models will be verified.
