Title       : Processor Allocation in Partitionable Parallel Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1994       
File        : a9209345

Award Number: 9209345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhagirath Narahari narahari@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  A partitionable parallel architecture allows the simultaneous              
              execution of a number of tasks, where each task can be executed on a           
              number of processors.  This model introduces the problem of how many           
              processors to allocate to each task.  The processor allocation                 
              process must (1) determine the number of processors required to                
              process each task and (2) allocate and schedule these tasks on the             
              processors in the system.  The objective is to minimize the time to            
              complete all the tasks.  In most cases at the current time, the number         
              of processors assigned to each task is determined manually thereby             
              leading to under-utilization of the processors.  This project                  
              considers the design of efficient processor allocation algorithms for          
              a large class of partitionable parallel architectures.  The                    
              conventional scheduling problems, where each job runs on one                   
              processor, differ significantly from the processor allocation problem          
              and thus their solutions cannot be expected to perform adequately for          
              this processor allocation problem.  The objectives of this project are         
              to study the processor allocation problem, under different computation         
              and architecture models, and design and evaluate algorithms for                
              processor assignment and processor scheduling.  These algorithms are           
              tested, through both a simulation and their application to real                
              problems.  The performance gains made by the algorithms, and the               
              overheads incurred by the operating system, are measured through               
              experiments performed on different parallel architectures.  The                
              results from this research are expected to provide a definite step             
              forward in understanding resource allocation and scheduling problems           
              in partitionable architectures, and consequently lead to a better              
              utilization of parallel architectures.
