Title       : Systematic Methods for the Design and Scheduling of Flexible Multiproduct
               Continuous Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1994    
File        : a9209671

Award Number: 9209671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignacio E. Grossmann ig0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A trend in the chemical industry is the design of smaller                      
              flexible multiproduct plants that are located close to the                     
              markets of consumption.  The motivation in building such                       
              plants lies not only in the reduction of transportation and                    
              inventory costs, but also for increasing the capability to                     
              provide a steady supply of products, and for responding more                   
              quickly to demand changes in each market.  Thus, flexible                      
              multiproduct plants offer the possibility of improving the                     
              competitiveness of chemical companies.                                         
                                                                                             
              Multiproduct plants can operate in batch or continuous mode,                   
              or with a combination of the two.  Typical examples of the                     
              former include plants for manufacturing pharmaceuticals, food                  
              and specialty chemicals; examples of the latter include plants                 
              for manufacturing a number of polymer products, paper mills                    
              and petroleum refineries.  The main difference that arises in                  
              multiproduct plants compared to large scale dedicated                          
              continuous plants is that scheduling and production planning                   
              play a major role in the operation of these plants.  Another                   
              issue is that uncertainties and fluctuations in the product                    
              demands tend to be much greater in multiproduct plants.                        
                                                                                             
              This research deals with the development of systematic methods                 
              for the design and scheduling of various types of flexible                     
              multiproduct chemical processes that operate in the continuous                 
              mode.  The work involves the development of models and                         
              solution techniques for the simultaneous design and scheduling                 
              of plants that consist of a sequence of stages and that are                    
              interconnected by intermediate inventory tanks.  The basic                     
              objective is to determine optimal trade-offs arising from the                  
              selection of design variables, operating conditions,                           
              sequencing of operations, length of production cycles and                      
              inventory levels.  Both rigorous and simplified models will be                 
              investigated, as well as methods for assessing and optimizing                  
              the flexibility of the designs in the face of uncertain                        
              demands.
