Title       : Cytoplasmic Imcompatibility in Flour Beetles: A Model of Host-Parasite
               Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1995 
File        : a9209695

Award Number: 9209695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori Stevens lori.stevens@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Tierney  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Parasites are ubiquitous and can exert powerful long-term selection            
              on hosts.  Host-parasite interactions may promote species                      
              diversity, alter host behavior, contribute to speciation and                   
              perhaps foster and maintain sex.  My research uses a common                    
              arthropod parasite to investigate host-parasite coevolution.  The              
              parasite is a cytoplasmically transmitted bacterium that causes                
              reproductive incompatability.  Crosses between infected males and              
              uninfected females are sterile.  By "sterilizing" females not                  
              transmitting the parasite, infected males increase the frequency of            
              infection and the parasite should spread until all individuals are             
              infected.  Two questions about host-parasite coevolution are                   
              addressed.  Is there genetic variation for parasite-induced affects            
              on host reproductive success?  A genetic analysis measures the                 
              heritability of the parasite's effect on the host reproductive                 
              success.  The response to selection (R) depends on selection (S)               
              and heritability (h2), R=S*h2.  Thus this experiment elucidates the            
              potential of the host-parasite system to evolve.  The second                   
              question is:  How does parasite virulence evolve?  Novel parasite              
              strains will be introduced into different host genetic backgrounds.            
              The parasite's effects on the host will be measured over long and              
              short term.  This experiment is an important test of models of                 
              parasite virulance.  Together, these experiments provide important             
              information on host-parasite coevolution.
