Title       : Technology Transitions with Network Externalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1993   
File        : a9209509

Award Number: 9209509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Shapiro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Many important technologies share two features: they are embodied              
              in durable goods and training, and they are subject to network                 
              externalities where each user's benefit from using the system                  
              increases with the number of other users adopting compatible                   
              systems.  Often, it is not easy to introduce new, improved                     
              technology while retaining full compatibility with the installed               
              base without compromising performance.   Frequently, at issue is               
              when should society switch from an established technology to an                
              incompatible, but superior alternative; and how if it all, should              
              the transition be managed.  Examples of such transitions include               
              the shift from LPs to compact disks, the change from DOS to OS/2               
              or Unix in personal computers, the change from black and white to              
              color TV, and the impending transition to high definition TV.                  
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to analyze the transition from                 
              one generation of technology to the next in markets where network              
              externalities make it desirable or essential for users to                      
              coordinate and adopt products that are compatible.  The research               
              focuses on the problems faced in making a centralized choice of a              
              new technology.  Such centralized choice may be made by                        
              government or a voluntary standard-setting organization, as is                 
              frequently the case.  For a given mew technology, the                          
              investigators will analyze the path of consumer adoption                       
              following standard-setting, the effects of granting strong or                  
              weak intellectual property protection, and the timing of                       
              standard-setting and technology introduction.  In addition, the                
              principles involved in choosing among competing systems will be                
              analyzed in light of uncertainty about improvements likely to be               
              achieved over time and the ultimate cost of rival systems.
