Title       : Early Fantasy and the Child's Theory of Mind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9209318

Award Number: 9209318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the preschool years, children begin to learn that what they             
              believe or what they see may not always be true.  This insight                 
              provides the basis for understanding many kinds of behavior.  For              
              example, understanding that a person might have a belief that is               
              false (e.g., believing her coat is in the closet when actually it              
              is on the bed), that people may be confused by misleading                      
              appearances, and that two people viewing the same event may                    
              interpret it in different ways all require children to realize that            
              mental representations do not always correspond to the actual state            
              of the world.  This research will explore the possibility that                 
              children first master the distinction between mental                           
              representations and reality in the domain of pretense.  Children's             
              ability to maintain a boundary between what is real and what is                
              pretend will be investigated in three experiments in which 3- and              
              4-year-old children will be asked to imagine a variety of objects              
              under different conditions.  In addition, 150 children aged 3 years            
              6 months, four years, and four years six months will be given tasks            
              assessing their ability and inclination to engage in pretense and              
              their implicit knowledge about mental life.  Children who are                  
              particularly inclined to engage in pretense are expected to be                 
              better able to make a clear distinction between what is imagined               
              and what is real and to be advanced in the development of insight              
              about the mind (e.g., an earlier understanding that people may have            
              false beliefs).  Children will also be asked questions about their             
              fantasy lives, including the existence and characteristics of                  
              imaginary companions.  Thus, in addition to investigating how early            
              fantasy is related to cognitive development, this research will                
              provide descriptive information about a spontaneous form of                    
              elaborate pretense that is common (65% of preschool children have              
              imaginary companions), but is not well understood.
