Title       : Cellular and Molecular Studies on Plasmodemata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9209530

Award Number: 9209530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger N. Beachy   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Lucas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will integrate biophysical, biochemical,                         
              cellular, physiological and genetic studies on plasmodesmata (pd)              
              to establish an appropriate framework that will then allow an                  
              investigation of the cellular processes by which the plant                     
              regulates its cell-to-cell communication system.  Biophysical                  
              studies will be performed on a simple cellular system in order to              
              determine the unitary pd conductance.  Such measurements are                   
              essential for a further sub-structural analysis of the pd, as well             
              as to provide a rigorous foundation for detailed studies on the                
              cellular controls that orchestrate cell-to-cell size exclusion                 
              limits.  Physiological studies on the role of pd in solute fluxes              
              will also be performed.  Since pd are likely to be an important                
              determinant of organ development, an experimental system will be               
              established that will permit identification of the processes that              
              control secondary pd formation.  In this ongoing collaboration                 
              (between Beachy and Dr. William Lucas of the University of                     
              California, Davis), it has been established that transgenic tobacco            
              plants in which the 30 kDa movement protein (MP) of TMV is                     
              expressed have pd whose size exclusion limits are up-regulated to              
              sizes in excess of 9.4 kDa.  The mode by which the 30 kDa TMV-MP               
              effects this change will be further explored.  It is hypothesized              
              that this protein interacts directly with the plasmodesma.  Based              
              on this concept, biochemical isolation and purification of pd                  
              proteins are proposed.  A genetic system in Arabidopsis will be                
              developed to permit the identification and isolation of genes                  
              involved in virus movement and pd function.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Plasmodesmata are microscopic channels between individual plant                
              cells.  Intercellular communication by passage of molecules through            
              these channels is critical for the normal development and                      
              physiological function of the entire plant.  In certain plant viral            
              infections, the virus gains access to the cell interior at a                   
              localized site and passes from cell to cell through the                        
              plasmodesmata throughout the plant.  Passage of the virus through              
              plasmodesmata is facilitated by a virally encoded protein which                
              effectively enlarges the plasmodesmatal channel.  This research                
              will take advantage of the viral protein to identify and study the             
              components of the plant plasmodesmata.  Knowledge of the components            
              of plasmodesmata will facilitate further studies of the formation              
              of plasmodesmata and the mechanisms by which molecular traffic                 
              through the plasmodesmata is regulated.  The results of this                   
              research will be important contributions to basic knowledge of cell            
              to cell communication in plants.
