Title       : Interactions Between Neurons and Merkel Cells in vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9209649

Award Number: 9209649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall N. Pittman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A pivotal issue in developmental neuroscience is how nerve cells               
              choose the appropriate target.  This issue will be investigated in             
              a culture system of Merkel cells, the mechanosensory cells of the              
              rat snout.  These cells are normally innervated by sensory neurons             
              of the trigeminal ganglion.  The investigator has observed that, in            
              culture, sensory neurons selectively grow onto islands of Merkel               
              cells and establish territories that exclude neurites from other               
              sensory neurons, while sympathetic neurons actively avoid Merkel               
              cells.  Studies will be done to examine the hypothesis that sensory            
              neurons specifically recognize and respond to molecules on the                 
              surface of Merkel cells, and that sympathetic neurons actively                 
              avoid Merkel cells as the result of molecules on the surface of                
              Merkel cells that induce neurite retraction.  Classes of cell                  
              surface molecules involved in the interactions between Merkel cells            
              and neurons will be identified.  Time lapse videomicroscopy will be            
              used to investigate the dynamic events involved in the formation of            
              neuronal territories on Merkel cells.  The role of nerve growth                
              factor in formation and maintenance of neuronal territories on                 
              Merkel cells will be studied.  These studies promise to provide                
              information on molecules important to the formation of neuronal                
              specificity.
