Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Neuropeptide Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9209244

Award Number: 9209244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Taghert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neuropeptides are signals that are released by nerve cells to                  
              transmit information to other nerve cells and to other cells in the            
              body, like muscle, glands and skin.  Very often within a single                
              neuron, neuropeptides are released along with specific                         
              neurotransmitters and modulate their subsequent action.  Indeed,               
              the nervous system is designed to received and transmit information            
              and neuropeptides are central to those basic processes.  While it              
              is estimated that 100's of neuropeptides are made by nerve cells,              
              only 1% of all nerve cells express a given neuropeptide gene.  Dr.             
              Taghert will use an innovative molecular genetic approach to                   
              examine the fundamental mechanisms underlying the expression and               
              release of neuropeptides.  He will create and recover                          
              loss-of-function mutations in a specific gene for a precursor                  
              protein that encodes 13 related neuropeptides.  By studying                    
              individuals that are chronically deficient in the production of                
              these molecules, Dr. Taghert will determine  function and whether              
              other neuropeptides share overlapping roles.  In addition, he has              
              developed methodology to put genes back and thus, will assess the              
              specific capacity of subsets of encoded neuropeptides to restore               
              lost functions.  These experiments will lead to a better                       
              understanding of the roles played by the neuropeptide gene in                  
              individual neurons.  Since Drosophila is used as the model system,             
              demonstrating the lethal nature of mutations in the neuropeptide               
              encoding gene may help stimulate research into insecticides that               
              act by inhibiting neuropeptide synthesis or neuropeptide stimulated            
              neurotransmission.
