Title       : The Impact of Affective States on Persuasion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9209995

Award Number: 9209995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Mackie mackie@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This research will assess the impact of the motivational and                   
              cognitive consequences of affect on the processes underlying                   
              effective persuasion.  From a processing perspective, persuasion               
              can be modelled as an information processing sequence that                     
              culminates in an attitude judgment.  That judgment is determined               
              by subprocesses that encode, elaborate on, and integrate some                  
              subset of the attitude-relevant information available.  From the               
              processing approach, affective states have cognitive and                       
              motivational consequences that influence the extent and valence                
              of encoding, elaboration; and integration, and thus of                         
              persuasion.  Past research in this domain is extended in three                 
              directions:  (a) the impact of affective states on reception and               
              integration processes as well as on elaboration is investigated,               
              (b) specific tests of the role of cognitive and motivational                   
              variables as mediators of the relationship between affective                   
              states, persuasion subprocesses, and persuasion are performed and              
              (c) the processing perspective is extended to the investigation                
              of the impact of negative (sad) affect.  The first set of                      
              proposed experiments assesses the impact of affect on the nature               
              and extent of reception, and its concomitant effect on attitude                
              change.  Experiments in Set 2 examine the motivational and                     
              cognitive mechanisms through which affect influences elaboration               
              and thus persuasion.  The experiments in Set 3 begin to explore                
              the impact of affective states on integration processes in                     
              attitudinal judgments.  This research will add to our                          
              understanding of the impact of affect on persuasion.
