Title       : Bringing the Senate Election Study to Completion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9209410

Award Number: 9209410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren E. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Kinder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Rosenstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Beginning in 1978, with the support of the National Science                    
              Foundation, the National Election Studies (NES) launched a series              
              of large scale and ambitious studies of elections to the U.S. House            
              of Representatives.  It is no exaggeration to say that these                   
              studies have revolutionized our understanding of voting in House               
              contests, and have energized the analysis of the House of                      
              Representatives as an institution as well.  But in the meantime,               
              our understanding of Senate elections languished.  How voters                  
              choose their Senators, how and how well Senators represent the                 
              interest of their constitutents, what kinds of campaigns Senators              
              and their opponents wage:  on such basic questions as these, we had            
              little to say.  The problem was not that Senate elections are                  
              theoretically innocuous; the study of Senate elections provides an             
              excellent and in some respects optimal entree to fundamental                   
              questions for American democratic politics.  Nor was it a case of              
              indifference on the part of the research community:  there was in              
              fact considerable and growing interest in the study of Senate                  
              elections.  The problem, rather, was the absence of suitable data.             
              The important theoretical and substantive questions occasioned by              
              Senate elections could not be resolved with the evidence at hand.              
              With this problem in mind, and with the support of the National                
              Science Foundation, the Principal Investigators and the NES Board              
              of Overseers initiated in 1988 and 1990 the first two parts of a               
              three-part study of Senate elections.  The current project supports            
              completing the Senate election study in 1992.  The justification               
              for completing the study rests on the substantive and theoretical              
              advances that the 1992 study makes possible, for four themes                   
              especially: (1) political representation, of interest not least                
              because contrary to original intentions, the contemporary Senate               
              appears to be more responsive to popular sentiment than the House;             
              (2) divided government, now the norm in the American system of                 
              separated powers, one that may menace coherent legislation and                 
              erode political accountability; (3) the nature and consequences of             
              political campaigns, motivated by the recognition that Senate                  
              elections provide an opportunity to examine the interplay among                
              candidates, the political institutions governing elections, and                
              voters in a particularly powerful way; and (4) the "simple act of              
              voting," developing and testing comparative theories of voter                  
              choice.                                                                        
              Provisional analysis of the first two phases of the NES Senate                 
              election Study suggest that the complete study proposed here will              
              trigger the same kind of explosion of research that the 1978                   
              National Election Study set off for our understanding of the House.            
              Indeed, the gains are likely to be greater here.  The Senate                   
              Election study builds upon research on House and Presidential                  
              elections, and is carefully coordinated, theoretically and                     
              operationally, with ongoing NES studies.  The research is                      
              comparative, contributing broadly to theories of voting,                       
              representation, campaigns, and, ultimately to our understanding of             
              American electoral institutions.
