Title       : Collaborative Research: The Design of Bankruptcy Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9209317

Award Number: 9209317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Artur Raviv   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A key factor in determining investment policy, liquidation policy,             
              and the consequences of financial distress is the set of rules                 
              governing bankruptcy.  Bankruptcy rules affect firms in financial              
              distress in two ways.  First, it is obvious that they affect the               
              outcome of the bankruptcy proceeding.  Second, they establish the              
              alternative to an out-of-bankruptcy settlement and so affect the               
              nature of such settlements.  The likely outcomes of both informal              
              bargaining and formal bankruptcy, in turn, affect the availability             
              of funds for investment and the types of investments equity holders            
              will pursue.  More specifically, poorly conceived bankruptcy rules             
              may make it impossible for investors to earn a fair return, even               
              in situations where the investment is economically viable.  Also,              
              bankruptcy rules may encourage or discourage inefficient                       
              investments.  Finally the bankruptcy regime affects the extent to              
              which firms are forced to liquidate assets even when the "going                
              concern" value of the assets is higher than the outstanding debt.              
              The purpose of the research is to guide the policy debate                      
              surrounding bankruptcy by suggesting some features of an optimal               
              bankruptcy law based on these considerations.                                  
                                                                                             
              The research method is novel in how it regards optimal bankruptcy              
              law as one element in the broader problem of designing optimal                 
              financial contracts.  Such contracts specify how resources are to              
              be allocated between investors and firms.  Actual financial                    
              contracts usually stipulate only (possibly contingent) payments to             
              investors.  The rules governing the breach of stipulated promises              
              are, in fact, typically not specified in the contract explicitly.              
              They are generally contained in the legal system and are implicitly            
              a part of every contract.  For example, debt contracts specify the             
              debtholder's investment, the specific payments to which he is                  
              entitled, and covenants restricting the debtor's behavior.                     
              Bankruptcy law provides a procedure to be followed if the promised             
              payments are not made or if the covenants are violated.  In view               
              of this concern, security design will be examined as including both            
              explicit promises and the procedures to be followed in case of                 
              breach, and optimal bankruptcy rules will be derived as part of an             
              overall contract design problem.
