Title       : Financial Intermediation: The Case of German Credit Cooperatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1992    
File        : a9209685

Award Number: 9209685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Guinnane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Financial intermediation is crucial to the growth of any economy.              
              Without some mechanism to match savers to investors, an economy                
              lacks the ability to channel surplus resources to productive                   
              ends.  In historical and modern economies alike, however,                      
              information and other problems have sometimes limited the ability              
              of financial institutions to play their role in the allocation of              
              capital.  The purpose of this research is to analyze a type of                 
              financial intermediary that was extremely successful in an                     
              environment inhospitable to the methods of conventional banks;                 
              the German agricultural credit cooperatives formed during the                  
              nineteenth century.  The project is designed to exploit                        
              historical sources and draw on modern economic theory to                       
              understand why these credit cooperatives were able to perform                  
              financial intermediation services for those too poor to be                     
              desirable customers for banks.  This research is important                     
              because the understanding of the evolution of capital market                   
              institutions is critical to any understanding of long term                     
              economic growth and development.  Also, a better understanding of              
              the efficiency of agricultural credit co-ops may have useful                   
              implications for current policy regarding developing countries.
