Title       : Investigations in Robust Analysis of Variance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9209709

Award Number: 9209709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Mosteller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1333,
Abstract    :
                   Designed experiments in the social and behavioral sciences                
              (and other fields as well) customarily are handled by techniques               
              associated with the analysis of variance (ANOVA).  When the data               
              may not be well behaved,  applied statisticians and other                      
              practitioners should be able to obtain robust estimates of                     
              individual effects,  accompanied by suitable summaries and                     
              aggregate measures of variability.  By adding substantially to                 
              the limited number of available small-sample results that apply                
              to the summaries and aggregates required for robust ANOVA,  this               
              project aims to provide the basis (including critical tables) for              
              a unified body of basic inferential techniques for one-way and                 
              two-way layouts.                                                               
                   For data that fail to satisfy the standard assumptions (for               
              example,  by containing some anomalous observations or by having               
              heavy tails),  ANOVA-like procedures are needed that perform well              
              across a broad range of underlying distributions.  A number of                 
              proposed robust procedures for the more general class of linear                
              models,  which also includes regression,  may be applied in ANOVA              
              situations,  but evidence on their performance in small samples                
              is still too limited to permit choice of a preferred technique or              
              to make the necessary components (including estimates of effects               
              and their standard errors,  corresponding tests of hypotheses,                 
              and detailed critical tables) available for statistical                        
              applications.  The proposed research will investigate several                  
              procedures for robust ANOVA,  mainly based on M-estimation,                    
              using large-sample results and Monte Carlo to establish their                  
              properties in small samples.  The work will  at first emphasize                
              the most widely used designs:  two-way and one-way layouts.                    
              Previous work by Bickel,  Draper, Fellner,  Hampel,                            
              Hettmansperger,  Hoaglin,  Huber,  Johnson,  Kafadar,  Lehmann,                
              Mosteller,  Rocke,  Ronchetti, Rousseeuw,  Schrader,  Stahel,                  
              Tukey,  Yohai,  and Zamar will provide the main starting points.               
                   The research proposed by Mosteller and his associates will                
              continue a line of work long supported by the Division of Social               
              and Economic Science that has over the years produced many of the              
              most innovative developments in statistical methods for making                 
              sense of social science data.  The Principal Investigator has a                
              most distinguished reputation among both social scientists and                 
              statisticians because of remarkable production of both technical               
              and more accessible textbook materials describing and                          
              illustrating methods that continue to be developed.
