Title       : Socioendocrinology of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9209528

Award Number: 9209528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. French jfrench@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The relationship between hormones and behavior is no longer                    
              viewed as a simple unidirectional effect of hormones on behavior.              
              Rather, the view emerging from studies on animals observed in                  
              complex physical and social situations is that there is a                      
              sophisticated interplay between social contexts and hormonal                   
              status in the production of behavioral interactions.  The present              
              studies will further illuminate these relationships in                         
              callitrichid primates (marmosets and tamarins).  Dr. French has                
              previously shown that social relationships within mated pairs are              
              extremely important in regulating the influence of hormones on                 
              behavior.  The current studies will evaluate the effects of other              
              social factors in modulating hormones effects on behavior.                     
              Specifically, Dr. French will assess whether or not responses of               
              tamarins to unfamiliar intruders differ as a function of the                   
              intruding or resident female's reproductive status, will assess                
              whether or not reproductively suppressed subordinate females are               
              capable of expressing patterns of reproductive behavior when                   
              removed from the social context that produces suppression, and                 
              will evaluate the influence of visual access to unfamiliar pairs               
              on patterns of reproductive behavior across the ovarian cycle.                 
                                                                                             
              These studies are important in a number of ways.  First, the work              
              is relevant to propagation of endangered species.  All marmosets               
              and tamarins are considered threatened or endangered, and for                  
              some species (e.g., lion tamarins) there are more individuals in               
              captivity than in the wild.  It is highly likely that information              
              critical for the enhancement of the propagation of these species               
              in captivity will be the direct result of these studies.  Hence,               
              this research may have a profound impact on the maintenance of                 
              the biodiversity of tropical animals.  Second,these studies will               
              show how complex social settings can influence (reduce or                      
              magnify) the effects of internal physiological functions on                    
              behavior.  These findings as a whole will contribute to a more                 
              complex and realistic view of hormones and behavior.  Finally,                 
              these studies will evaluate hormone-behavior relationships in                  
              species of primates that have a social system with many common                 
              features of human societies (e.g., high degree of cooperative                  
              behavior, joint rearing of offspring, residence of older                       
              offspring in family or social groups).
