Title       : Cell-Cell Influences on the Form of an Identified Motor Neuron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9209497

Award Number: 9209497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karla S. Kent kentka@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study is designed to determine whether interactions between               
              different types of neurons direct or influence the structural and              
              functional reorganization that takes place in the nervous system               
              during postembryonic development.  In both vertebrates and                     
              invertebrates motor circuits undergo structural and functional                 
              changes after birth or hatching.  Cell-cell interactions, as well              
              as humoral signals, such as steriod hormones, have been implicated             
              in influencing these postembryonic changes, but the respective                 
              contributions of hormonal signals and cell-cell interactions to                
              neuronal differentiations in hormonally-sensitive systems have not             
              been well-defined.  This study will utilize an insect in order to              
              examine the influence of cell-cell interactions at the level of                
              individual neurons during hormonally-controlled metamorphosis.  The            
              study will be centered around a previously identified motor neuron             
              that is present at both larval and adult stages but undergoes                  
              extensive remodeling of its dendritic processes during                         
              memtamorphosis.  Dr. Kent's objectives are to identify the                     
              interactions that differentially affect the motor neuron in                    
              specific regions of its dendritic arbor.  Surgical manipulations               
              and the use of mutant phenotypes will help identify the specific               
              classes of neurons that shape or regulate dendritic growth.                    
              Electrophysiological and anatomical methods will be employed to                
              identify and characterize individual neurons that influence                    
              dendritic morphology of the identified motor neuron.  Information              
              gained by these studies will not only increase our understanding               
              of the relative contributions of cell-cell interactions and                    
              hormonal siganls to dendritic changes in a hormonally-sensitive                
              system, but will contribute in a broader sense to an understanding             
              of basic developmental mechanisms.
