Title       : Slow Excitatory Phenomena - Interaction of Excitatory Amino Acids and
               Neuropeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9209462

Award Number: 9209462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190816             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mirjana Randic cervin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The perception of pain requires excitatory synaptic transmission               
              from primary afferent sensory fibers to secondary projection                   
              neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.  Two groups of                  
              neurotransmitter candidates are thought to mediate this initial                
              excitatory step in the pain pathway: one being excitatory amino                
              acids (EAA:  glutamate, asparate), and another are peptides                    
              (including tachykinins such as substance P and neurokinin A).                  
              These peptides may be colocalized with an excitatory amino acid(s)             
              in the same neurons.  Chemical signal transfer via such neurons                
              presents new aspects and complexities of presynaptic (synaptic                 
              efficacy) and postsynaptic (membrane excitability) regulation which            
              have not previously been considered and may have important                     
              implications for the performance of the somatosensory, especially              
              of pain pathways.  Dr. Randic has recently found that substance P              
              and excitatory amino acids interact to produce neurophysiological              
              signs of hyperalgesia i.e. a prolonged enhancement of responses to             
              excitatory manipulation.  However, the sites and the molecular                 
              mechanisms by which the peptide signals produce enhanced EAA                   
              responses have yet to be elucidated.  Dr. Randic will examine the              
              hypothesis that the activation of distinct neurokinin receptors                
              causes modulation of the responses of freshly isolated spinal                  
              dorsal horn neurons to EAAs, especially to N-methyl-D-aspartic-                
              acid (NMDA).  To gain understanding of molecular mechanism(s)                  
              underlying interactions between EAAs, and tachykinins possible                 
              involvement of glycine allosteric site of NMDA receptor channel                
              complex, guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G-proteins) or change            
              in Ca++-sensitive second messenger systems, will be investigated.              
              Whole-cell voltage-clamp recording of EAA responses will be                    
              utilized in this study.  Delineating the cellular mechanism(s) of              
              peptide actions on dorsal horn neurons is an important step toward             
              understanding anatomical and neurochemical organization of the                 
              spinal dorsal horn.***//
