Title       : Integrated Framework for Power System Security Assessment Using Energy Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9209570

Award Number: 9209570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chanan Singh                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Overbye overbye@ece.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              As electrical power high voltage transmission                                  
              systems become more heavily loaded due to                                      
              increased electric loads and larger transfers of                               
              power between utilities, efficient system operation                            
              is becoming threatened due to static security,                                 
              transient stability, and more recently voltage                                 
              stability constraints.  The objective of the research                          
              proposed here is to use energy function methods to                             
              develop a unified measure of power system security.                            
              To date energy functions techniques have been                                  
              applied successfully to the transient stability and                            
              maximum stable loadability problems; however,                                  
              little work has been done to access dynamic voltage                            
              stability.  Such a measure of system voltage security                          
              is essential for economic and reliable operations.                             
              Research is to be performed in four areas.  The                                
              first area will be an investigation of the modeling                            
              detail required to adequately capture the dynamics                             
              associated with voltage instability.  More detailed                            
              models are anticipated for generators, loads,                                  
              transformers and static var compensators (SVCs).                               
              Second, research will be done on the development                               
              of integrated energy function security framework,                              
              which will require a modified energy function, along                           
              with a new paradigm to incorporate the varying                                 
              time scales of the voltage dynamics (from seconds                              
              to tens of minutes).  Third, the relationship of the                           
              voltage stability unstable equilibrium points (UEPs)                           
              with the transient stability UEPs will be                                      
              investigated; also work on the efficient calculation                           
              of the UEPs will also be done.  Lastly, integration                            
              of energy methods into existing control center                                 
              applications will be explored.
