Title       : Use of Direct Numerical Simulation and Lagrangian Methods inTurbulent Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9209877

Award Number: 9209877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Hanratty hanratty@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1414,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposal is aimed at obtaining a unified treatment of                      
              turbulent mixing and of turbulent transfer to a wall of                        
              molecular species, and of spherical particles.  Theory in this                 
              area has not advanced significantly over the past forty years.                 
              However, the recent availability of direct numerical                           
              simulations opens the possibility of making considerable                       
              progress.  A main objective of this proposal is to exploit                     
              this opportunity.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Results on the simultaneous three-dimensional time-dependent                   
              velocity and temperature fields will be obtained for a wide                    
              range of Prandtl numbers for turbulent flow in a channel and                   
              for turbulent Couette flow.  Present theories will be                          
              evaluated.  However, special emphasis will be placed on the                    
              relation of the structure of the temperature field to the                      
              structure of the velocity field and on how turbulent transport                 
              is modified by molecular transport.  Lagrangian methods will                   
              be explored as a means to obtained better physical                             
              understanding.  The temperature field is viewed as resulting                   
              from a distribution of wall sources.  The exploitation of this                 
              approach has been opened up because of the possibility of                      
              studying, on the computer, the behavior of wall sources.  The                  
              transport of spherical particles differs from transport of                     
              molecular species because of extraneous contributions to                       
              transport by gravity, turbophoresis and lift.  These effects                   
              will be studied both in computer and in laboratory                             
              experiments.  Particular attention will be given to obtaining                  
              much needed information about inertial free flight to the                      
              wall.  We will also continue recent work in which we exploit                   
              Lagrangian methods to analyze sediment transport.
