Title       : Vertical Clingers and Leapers - A Biomechanical and Allometric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9209061

Award Number: 9209061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigitte Demes bdemes@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Fleagle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jungers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary goal of this research is to better understand the                  
              relationships between locomotor behavior, body size and the                    
              structural adaptations of the musculoskeletal system in a group of             
              highly endangered primates.  The investigators will study a unique             
              positional behavior of prosimians, "vertical clinging and leaping."            
              It is characterized by clinging postures on and progression by                 
              leaps from vertical substrates. Over the years, a great                        
              morphological diversity has been demonstrated within the locomotor             
              category -- much of which appears to be size related. Corresponding            
              behavioral differences remain to be explored, in large part because            
              adequate data on the larger-bodied representatives are not                     
              available. This project will analyze locomotion and postures of                
              larger-bodied vertical clingers and leapers.  Data collection will             
              include videotaping and "force pole" recordings of take-off and                
              landing forces. A theoretical biomechanical framework will serve to            
              elucidate the form-function interface and generate testable                    
              hypotheses about morphological adaptations of different-sized                  
              animals to this locomotor mode. We expect the study to contribute              
              to a better understanding of the morphological diversity within the            
              locomotor category, including the fossil record of locomotor                   
              design.
