Title       : On the Foundation of Interactive Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9209277

Award Number: 9209277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68422              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mordecai Kurz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Formal knowledge theory for a single person has been extensively               
              developed starting some thirty years ago.  During the last ten to              
              fifteen years it has become increasingly clear that these issues               
              are of great importance to the interactive social sciences and in              
              related areas; and that when there is more than one person, new                
              problems arise which require treatment going beyond the one-                   
              person treatment.  Roughly, these problems have to do with what                
              the protagonists know about each other's knowledge and about the               
              system as a whole, and what can and cannot be said about these                 
              matters within the system.  These problems manifest themselves in              
              various ways, depending on the formal model being used.  For                   
              example within the standard "partition" model of knowledge, the                
              problem is usually posed by asking, where do the particular                    
              partitions that are assumed come from, and does each player                    
              "know" the partitions of the others.  This project explores these              
              matters systematically and in detail.  The concepts of subjective              
              probability and rationality in multi-person contexts will also be              
              treated.  Applications to the foundations of interactive decision              
              making, game theory, computer science and biology will be                      
              considered.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will be presented in a monograph.                 
              The monograph will be divided into three or four parts.  The                   
              first part is devoted to the partition model of interactive                    
              knowledge theory.  A syntactical or propositional approach to                  
              knowledge partitions is adopted by the investigator in contrast                
              to the usual hierarchical method.  The second part applies the                 
              same approach used for pure knowledge systems to probablistic                  
              "belief" systems.  In addition to elementary propositions,                     
              propositional connectives, and knowledge operators, probability                
              operators will be used.  The rest of the monograph includes the                
              following: irrationality, and/or lack of common knowledge of                   
              rationality; applications to equilibrium analysis in normal as                 
              well as extensive form games; games played by Turing machines;                 
              and applications to computer systems and biological systems,                   
              where the term "knowledge" needs to be properly interpreted.
