Title       : Chemistry of Three-Coordinate Nickel Complexes containing Nickel-Ligand Multiple
               Bonds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0244239

Award Number: 0244239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Hillhouse gh15@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Gregory L. Hillhouse, Chemistry Department, University of Chicago, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Chemistry Division for research into the chemistry of three-coordinate
              nickel complexes containing nickel-ligand multiple bonds. There are three parts
              of the project.  The first will concentrate on studies of the bonding and
              reactivity of imido, phosphinidene, and carbene complexes of Ni. This work will
              be aimed at defining the fundamental nature of Ni-ligand multiple bonds. The
              second part involves Ni(I) and emphasizes the preparation  of derivatives with
              a range of ancillary ligands for reactivity  studies  and  spectroscopic
              characterization, which will prove useful  in detecting and characterizing
              Ni(I)  intermediates. Elucidation of the organometallic chemistry of
              Ni(I)-alkyl complexes  will also  be  a focus.  These studies also will help to
              better define the Ni(I)/Ni(II) redox couple and  assess  its  implications  for
               reactivity. The third part involves studies of the unusual, 3-coordinate
              Ni(II) complex cations, which are proving  to possess  exceptional reactivity. 
                

  This research will provide a solid understanding of the chemistry of
              nickel(I), a rare oxidation state, but one of emerging  importance in  the
              biological chemistry of nickel, especially in nickel-containing  enzymes. 
              Additionally, these studies will have impact in applied inorganic chemistry and
              catalysis, specifically in areas relating to polymerization reactions effected
              by nickel(II) cations,  such as olefin polymerization and CO/olefin 
              copolymerizations, and  organic synthesis, such as metal-catalyzed 
              cyclopropanations and aziridinations.  In addition to the scientific
              contributions, this project will contribute to human resource development and
              the training of the next generation of scientists and teachers. Both
              undergraduates and high school students will be integral parts of the research
              team. Participation of underrepresented minorities, which in the past have
              included Hispanic, African- American, and women coworkers, will be actively
              encouraged. 

