Title       : Phase Behavior of Block and Graft Styrene Copolymers in Near Critical and
               Supercritical Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0244388

Award Number: 0244388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej Radosz radosz@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Maciej Radosz
University of Wyoming

"Phase Behavior of Block and Graft
              Styrene Copolymers in Near Critical and Supercritical Solvents."

The overall
              goal of this research is to understand the phase behavior of block and graft
              styrene copolymers in compressible fluids, such as near critical- and
              supercritical solvents and monomers. Such understanding is needed not only to
              improve existing manufacturing processes, but also to develop new polymeric
              materials and new polymer processing approaches that are more efficient and
              more environmentally acceptable.

This research is a synthesis of experiment
              and thermodynamic modeling. The approach would be to:  1) synthesize novel
              graft and block copolymers, such as polyisobutene-g-polystyrene (PIBg-PS),
              polybutadiene-g-polystyrene (PBD-g-PS), and polybutadiene-b-polystyrene
              (PBDb-PS) from atom transfer radical polymerization and living anionic
              polymerization followed by partial or complete hydrogenation (for polymers
              containing polybutadiene); 2) characterize these polymers upon microphase
              separation and bulk phase transitions (fluid-liquid and fluid solid) in
              high-pressure experiments; and
3) develop equation-of-state-based
              thermodynamic models that can explicitly account for and predict the phase
              behavior of graft and block copolymers.

The research builds on a current
              NSF-funded project on fluid-solid equilibria in solutions of crystallizable
              polymers, and on a series of preliminary but promising seed experiments and
              computer simulations using recent versions of Statistical Associating Fluid
              Theory (SAFT), such as SAFT1, and a recent Lennard-Jones equation of state with
              self-consistent theoretical framework for vapor, liquid, and solid
              phases.

This research could enhance our understanding of how the
              macromolecular structure affects the phase behavior of copolymers with complex
              backbone architecture. Such understanding could provide a basis for future
              research on phase equilibria for other polymers with even more complex
              architecture, such as triblock copolymers and graft copolymers with double
              branches (centipede), and more predictive thermodynamic models. In addition to
              building a knowledge base in this area, and seeding future research, the
              project could have a broader impact on the existing and future commercial
              polymer technology. For example, the theoretical model can be used to provide
              rapid predictions of cloud points, micelle formation, crystallization, and
              melting of graft or block copolymers in supercritical fluids. Such predictions
              are needed to control desirable and undesirable phase transitions in production
              lines. The model itself can also be used to optimize advanced polymerization
              schemes in supercritical fluids, such as ATRP and living anionic
              polymerization. This may lead to unique products and
              efficient,
environmentally benign processes. Other examples of a broader
              social impact include
contributions to education (graduate students and
              post-doctoral researchers) and to broadening participation of underrepresented
              groups.



