Title       : A Unified Approach to Analyze Vibration of Rotating Flexible Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0244116

Award Number: 0244116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186753             (Estimated)
Investigator: I-Yeu Shen ishen@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Title: A Unified Approach to Analyze Vibration of Rotating Flexible
              Structures
Rotating machines appear everywhere in our daily life. They could
              range from high-tech
applications (e.g., jet engines) to ordinary household
              appliances (e.g., washing machines). For
the past decade, rapid technology
              advances in various industries call for more accurate vibration
analysis for
              rotating machines. For example, high-speed, high-density hard disk drives
              (HDD)
require accurate geometric design of rotors and housings to meet
              stringent vibration specs.
The purpose of this project is to develop a unified
              approach to analyze vibration of rotating
machines with arbitrary geometry,
              complexity, and axisymmetry of the rotors and the stators.
The proposed
              research consists of three parts. The first part is mathematical development of
              the
unified approach integrating finite element analysis and gyroscopic
              effects. The second part is to
verify the unified formulation experimentally
              for axisymmetric and asymmetric rotors. The third
part is to extend the
              unified formulation to systems that employ multiple rotating components,
such
              as multi-stage turbines and network storage devices hosting dozens of
              HDD.
This research is novel and revolutionary, because it applies to rotating
              machines with
arbitrary geometry and complexity. For the society, this
              research will help many industries
produce faster and quieter rotating
              machines with higher reliability and efficiency. Also, this
research will
              enhance education through an informal intern program, an effective
              technology
transfer through industrial short courses, active participation of
              underrepresented students, and
improved research infrastructure (e.g.,
              disclosure of software tools, patents, and test facilities).
