Title       : Collaborative Research: Stochastic and Multiscale Structure Associated with the
               Navier Stokes Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0244485

Award Number: 0244485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23583              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabindra N. Bhattacharya rabi@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project will develop the theory of the motion of fluids as embodied by the
              Navier-Stokes equations using new probabilistic methods that exploit the power
              of stochastic calculus and probabilistic limit theory. Although the
              Navier-Stokes equations are essentially deterministic, the approach used in
              this work will build on a representation of the equations as a functional of an
              underlying branching random walk. This representation, which was recently
              discovered by LeJan and Sznitman in France, is clearly intrinsic to the
              structure of the Navier-Stokes equations. While this is not the first attempt
              to use stochastic methods in connection with the flows associated with the
              Navier-Stokes equations, it does represent an entirely new direction which has
              the potential to transcend much of existing theory. Specific problems
              considered in this proposal seek to provide a better understanding of the role
              of spatial dimensions, boundary conditions, multi-scaling exponents and
              singularities, viscosity, homogeneity, isotropy and rotational accelerations,
              stationary flows and long-time evolution.
	The Navier-Stokes equations
              describe the basic physics governing the motion of fluid in its various forms
              of air, water, oil, etc. As such these equations play a fundamental role in
              science and engineering through the modeling of all varieties of fluid flow,
              from atmospheric and oceanic circulation to the flow of water beneath the
              earth's surface. Improved understanding of these equations and their solutions
              is essential to applications which range from tracking climate change and
              dispersion of contaminants in the Earth's environment, to more stable aerospace
              and sea vessel designs. The nonlinearity inherent in these equations makes
              explicit solutions possible only for the simplest of flows. Consequently the
              development of a more complete understanding of these equations at all physical
              length scales ranks among the most important outstanding problems of
              contemporary mathematical physics

