Title       : Electronic Transport in Thin Film Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0244570

Award Number: 0244570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanno H. Weitering hanno@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,1682,7203,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the proposed research is the investigation of quantum
              electrical transport in thin film nanostructures on silicon substrates. The
              project focuses on atomic-wire arrays and on atomically smooth metal films.
              Under certain growth conditions, individual metal atoms "self-assemble" into
              macroscopic domains of parallel "atom wires" with equal but tunable spacing
              between the wires. These arrays are ideal for studying the fundamentals of
              quantum electrical transport a function of system dimensionality and Fermi
              surface topology using nanoscopic probes such as a four-tip Scanning Tunneling
              Microscope, as well as macroscopic measurement probes such as electron- or
              laser beams. Atomically smooth metal films will be synthesized via a novel
              self-assembly mechanism that is driven by the quantum-size effect, which allows
              for a systematic investigation of the conductivity in relation to quantum
              interference, quantum confinement, and classical size effects. These studies
              will allow researchers to extract the key characteristics that are relevant for
              the operation of future nanoscale devices. The proposed science and supporting
              infrastructure at The University of Tennessee and nearby Center for Nanophase
              Materials Sciences provide an excellent setting for the education and training
              of internationally competitive students and postdocs. These young people will
              take their place in the highly skilled workforce that will continue to drive
              innovation and prosperity in today's high-tech society.

Quantum electrical
              transport is at the heart of nanoscience. The idea of assembling single atoms
              or molecules and small chemical groups into much faster and powerful electronic
              devices no longer belongs to the realm of science fiction. Recently,
              researchers wired up their first molecular-scale electronic circuits, an
              achievement Science Magazine selected as the "Breakthrough of 2001".
              Researchers now face the daunting task of taking this new technology from basic
              electronic components to complex integrated circuits that can rival silicon's
              low cost performance and reliability. Reaching that level of complexity
              requires several scientific breakthroughs besides the obviously needed
              revolution in chip fabrication and design. In this project, researchers will
              align individual metal atoms into "atomic wires" or arrange the atoms into a
              perfectly smooth film that is only a few atom layers thick. These
              nanostructured materials are ideal model systems that will allow researchers to
              explore the fundamentals and key characteristics of electrical currents in
              nanophase materials. Quantum transport marries the most fundamental laws of
              nature, namely quantum mechanics, with applied electrical engineering and
              emerging materials technologies. The proposed science and supporting
              infrastructure at The University of Tennessee and the nearby Center for
              Nanophase Materials Sciences of the Department of Energy provide an excellent
              setting for the education and training of internationally competitive students
              and postdocs using specialized national research facilities. These young people
              will take their place in the highly skilled workforce that will continue to
              drive innovation and prosperity in today's high-tech society.

