Title       : REU:Conservation Biology in the Southeastern US
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0244113

Award Number: 0244113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giselle Thibaudeau giselle@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This REU Site program (Conservation Biology in the Southeastern United States)
              will introduce students from undergraduate institutions and historically black
              colleges and universities to natural sciences research opportunities.  The
              program will involve eight undergraduate students each summer for a ten-week
              program which will begin with a four-day orientation session at the Crow's Neck
              Environmental Center, located on the Tennessee-Tombigbee waterway in northeast
              Mississippi.  During the orientation, participants will gain general knowledge
              of ecology, conservation, and ecosystems specific to the southeastern United
              States.  Activities will also orient students to faculty mentors' research
              projects and emphasize cooperation and team building among the REU
              participants. 

Although students will be actively recruited from
              undergraduate institutions and historically black colleges and universities in
              Mississippi and neighboring states, informational materials will be distributed
              nationally in an effort to increase the regional diversity of participants. 
              Student researchers will be selected based on a combination of a submitted
              statement of interest, letters of recommendation, and educational background. 
              Each student will work with one or two faculty mentors, based on
              student-faculty interests, on a conservation-based research project in ecology
              or evolution.  Specific areas of faculty research interests include: Aquatic &
              Wetlands Ecology, Plant Systematics and Evolution, and Vertebrate Ecology. 
              

Interaction between students, mentors, and other scientists will be
              provided and encouraged through organized formal and informal seminars, poster
              sessions, and social activities.  A number of these meetings will consist of a
              student-oriented journal club/seminar series in which the integration of areas
              of ecology, conservation and evolution is stressed.  A more formal set of
              meetings will also be held to discuss topics such as ethics in science, grant
              writing, scientific publication and presentation, career options, and
              strategies for choosing a graduate school.  The ten-week session will conclude
              with a mini-symposium of student research projects that will be open to faculty
              and students from Mississippi State University and neighboring colleges and
              universities.  For more information, contact Giselle Thibaudeau, at 662-325-
              7572 or giselle@biology.msstate.edu.  Application materials will be accessible
              through the MSU Department of Biological Sciences web site
              (http://www.msstate.edu/dept/biosciences/bio.html).

