Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: New Stereoregular Polymers from 4-Membered
               Carbocyclic Monomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0244260

Award Number: 0244260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22428              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry K. Hall hkh@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne B. Padias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Barfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0244260
Hall

This award supports a two-year international collaborative
              research project.  The principal investigator for the project is Henry Hall at
              the University of Arizona and the Japanese collaborator is Tatsuki Kitayama at
              Osaka University in Japan.  They will be undertaking research on new
              stereoregular polymers from 4-membered carbocyclic monomers.  These polymers
              readily undergo polymerization with radical or anionic initiators.  They also
              copolymerize with vinyl monomers.  New polymerization techniques such as ATRP
              and Lewis acid assisted anionic polymerization will be applied to these
              strained monomers.  The polymers will be evaluated as high temperature polymer
              optical fibers, unzipper-jamming components, lenses, chiral resolving columns,
              etc.  Polymers with more controlled structures will lead to enhanced
              properties, and therefore more sophisticated uses.  In addition, they possess
              highly desirable physical properties including optical clarity, high glass
              transition temperatures and should be useful for high-tech applications.
              Detailed NMR studies of these polymers will provide information about the
              effect of specific polymerization conditions on the molecular polymer
              structure.  
    

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The
              U. S. researchers have expertise in controlled radical polymerization and the
              Japanese are experts at controlled anionic polymerization and they also have
              high expertise in the field of structure analysis of polymers using NMR
              spectroscopy.  These joint efforts should lead to a variety of novel polymers
              processing properties and to increased understanding of both free radical and
              anionic polymerization.  The project advances international human resources
              through the participation of a postdoc and an undergraduate student.  Through
              the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
              basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation. 
              Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in
              scientific journals.  


