Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0244177

Award Number: 0244177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rod M. Feddersen fedde001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Poppele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The University of Minnesota sponsors the Life Sciences Summer Undergraduate
              Research Program (LSSURP) through the College of Biological Sciences.  This
              program offers undergraduates an opportunity to gain research experience in
              Neuroscience consisting of an intensive 3-week course in basic neurobiological
              research principles and a 7-week mentored research experience.  The 3-credit
              course takes place at a remote biology field station attended by a diverse
              collection of students and abundant faculty, offering opportunities for unique
              scientific interactions.  Following the course, students return to the Twin
              Cities campus to begin their research experience with a faculty mentor.  The
              neuroscience students attend weekly research and information seminars specific
              to their discipline and gather with all LSSURP participants (80-100) for a
              program orientation weekend, weekly research presentations among peers,
              interactive career and bioethics workshops and evening/weekend social
              activities.  The program culminates with a campus-wide research conference
              including a poster session and farewell banquet.  Students are encouraged to
              take their research presentations to national meetings.  The Neuroscience
              program provides many opportunities for participant interaction with current
              graduate students (~60), faculty (~90) and associated personnel.  Funds are
              available for the participation of 8 students.  To enhance the experience of
              each participant, recruiting efforts seek to include a broad spectrum of
              students across geographic, ethnic, gender and college/university backgrounds. 
              Students from institutions with limited research opportunities are especially
              well served in the LSSURP programs.  Students receive a stipend, tuition for
              the Neurobiology course, housing on the Medical school campus, travel
              accommodations and expenses and insurance coverage for accidents and emergency
              illness.  Neurobiology course and summer program evaluations are completed by
              students to continually enhance this fifteen year-old University of Minnesota
              program.
