Title       : Growth of Rosette Ice Crystals and Impact on Cirrus Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0244505

Award Number: 0244505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pao-Kuan Wang pao@windy.meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Clouds are the most important atmospheric constituent for determining the
              earth's albedo.  Many clouds are composed of ice crystals.  The life of such
              clouds and their effect on solar and terrestrial radiation depend on the sizes,
              shapes, and concentration of the ice crystals, and their growth and
              evaporation.  This project is a theoretical study of certain microphysical
              properties of rosette-shaped ice crystals, which are a common constituent of
              cirrus clouds.  In particular, the work focuses on developing an accurate
              formulation of the growth and evaporation of rosette crystals by the
              condensation-diffusion process.  The rate of growth of an ice crystal in a
              given environment is determined by the size and shape of the crystal and the
              excess vapor pressure over the equilibrium value for ice.  The conventional
              theory that describes these effects makes use of an analogy between the
              equation for the diffusion of water vapor in air and the equation in
              electrostatics that describes the distribution of potential around a charged
              conductor.  Using this analogy, the shape is described in terms of the
              electrical capacitance of a conductor having the same shape as the ice crystal.
               This provides a great simplification in the theory of crystal growth.  A
              single parameter, the capacitance, is used instead of solving for the rate of
              vapor deposition point-by-point over the complex surface of the crystal. 
              Values of the capacitance are known for simple crystal forms such as plates,
              columns, and needles, but not for rosettes, which are the predominant form at
              temperatures colder than about -40C.  In the first part of this study,
              mathematical approximations will be formulated to describe the shapes of
              rosette crystals of various thickness, lengths, and numbers of branches.  For
              those that closely approximate the crystals that have been observed in cirrus
              clouds, the capacitance will be computed using finite element numerical
              techniques.  In the second part of the study, the capacitance values will be
              employed in an existing numerical model of cirrus clouds to establish accurate
              parameterizations of rosette growth rates.  Simulated clouds including crystals
              of various forms will then be employed with existing radiative transfer codes
              to determine the effects of cirrus clouds through their life cycles on solar
              and terrestrial radiation.  Sensitivity studies will produce useful information
              for the broad scientific community to access the influence of cirrus clouds on
              the global climate process.
