Title       : Information Infrastructure for the Ocean Research Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0244317

Award Number: 0244317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theresa Paluszkiewicz                   
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Abbott mark@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Information Infrastructure for the Ocean Research Community
M. R.
              Abbott OSU
T. M. Powell

The Information Technology Infrastructure  (ITI)
              Plan to Advance Ocean Sciences report was completed in January 2002 as the
              result of a community planning process sponsored by NSF and the Office of Naval
              Research (ONR).  The report focused primarily on the needs for computing to
              support the modeling, data analysis and visualization needs of ocean
              researchers.  The report also noted the long-term needs for access to local ITI
              at ocean research institutions.  Recent community meetings have emphasized the
              continuing needs for high performance computing services that can be delivered
              through local, distributed sources in addition to centralized systems such as
              supercomputer centers.  Several activities are proposed to complete the ITI
              planning for ocean sciences.  The first activity will be a 25-35-person
              workshop to focus on the local, distributed facilities needs and to suggest
              innovative solutions. These findings are a compliment and extension to the
              existing report.  The second activity will institute a Scientific Steering
              Committee (SSC) to initiate further planning for implementation of the
              recommendations in the report.  The SSC will work in conjunction with federal
              agency initiatives, especially at NSF, to insure that infrastructure
              recommendations are science-driven.  To facilitate the above activities, a
              small planning group will be formed to organize the workshop and to select the
              initial members of the SSC; once the SSC is functional the planning groups
              duties will be assumed by the SSC.


