Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Theoretical Studies of Intermetallic
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0244191

Award Number: 0244191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Talat S. Rahman rahman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0244191
Rahman

Description: This project supports a collaborative research
              project between Dr. Talat S. Rahman, Professor of Physics, Kansas State
              University, Manhattan, Kansas and Dr. Sondan Durukanoglu, Department of
              Physics, Istanbul Technical University in Istanbul, Turkey.  These scientists
              plan to conduct a systematic study of the electronic structure, dynamics and
              thermodynamics of the surfaces of a prototype intermettalic, NiAl, using a
              hierarchy of computational techniques of varying sophistication and
              feasibility.  They plan to develop a multiscale approach for NiAl alloys, and
              conduct a complementary study of atomistic, TB, and DFT simulations.  The first
              goal is to study the structure and dynamics of flat and stepped surfaces of
              NiAl, using first principles electronic structures calculations. These will be
              extended to study the chemically important processes of nitration and oxidation
              of NiAl surfaces.  The second goal is to develop the framework for linking
              these initial methods to those feasible for systems with longer length and time
              scales.

Scope: This project enables the two scientists and their students to
              participate in research in an area in which they have complementary skills. 
              The project will provide useful research results on metal interactions, an area
              that is relevant for applications research.  Although the work is theoretical,
              it is grounded in specific materials with specific verifiable predictions of
              properties.  NiAl is a good choice for the study because it is structurally
              simple, making the theoretical calculations simpler and the results, with
              certain modifications, may be used for other more complicated system. The
              results may be applied to the study of metal nano-particles and their catalytic
              activities.  Both investigators are well acquainted with the problem.  The
              project involves training of graduate students from both countries, and
              reciprocal visits.   The project is supported jointly by the Office of
              International Science and Engineering and by the Division of Chemistry. 

