Title       : Midwest Photosynthesis Meeting--Photosynthesis Research in the Post Genomic
               World, 2002 at Turkey Run State Park, Marshall, IN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0244280

Award Number: 0244280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Sherman lsherman@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLECULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the Midwest Photosynthesis meeting on "Photosynthesis
              Research in the Post Genomic World" that will be held at the Turkey Run State
              Park, Marshall, IN from October 27-29, 2002. The intent of this meeting has
              been to foster interaction and cooperation among laboratories in the midwest
              involved with photosynthesis research and to provide a forum for oral and
              poster presentations by graduate students and post-doctoral scholars. In this
              regard, the annual meeting has been exquisitely successful and a large number
              of the students and post docs have gone on to successful scientific careers.
              Many have continued research in photosynthesis and have established
              laboratories around the country. Traditionally this meeting has emphasized
              biochemistry, biophysics, plant physiology and bioenergetics. This support will
              allow development of a meeting around new technologies inherent in genomics and
              structural biology and new approaches in systems biology. By bringing together
              photosynthetic researchers from around the country who are utilizing high
              throughput technologies and computational analyses for the study of
              photosynthesis or related topics, this forward looking meeting that will expose
              the participants to post-genomic systems biology. This support will broaden the
              range of participants and provide travel and living expenses for undergraduate
              students and will enhance the diversity of the participants.
