Title       : SGER: Identification of Spores of Bacillus Anthracis and Other Species With
               Optical Sizing and Fluorescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2002  
File        : a0244196

Award Number: 0244196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Buford Price bprice@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Westphal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports careful investigation of some physical properties of spores
              and lyophilized cells of bacteria in the genus bacillus.  Relationships between
              the size and shape of spores, including the effects of species identity,
              humidity and method of preparation, will be determined. The planned work builds
              on preliminary results indicating that these properties may provide the basis
              for rapid and accurate determination of the presence of spores in the
              environment and of their species identity.  In this new project, an automated
              microscope system and associated image analysis software will be used to
              compare spores and lyophilized cells of different species of bacillus, and to
              study response of spores and cells to step-function changes in relative
              humidity (R.H.). Powders of talc, kaolinite, salt, and other nonbacterial
              particles will be measured for comparison.  Spores to be examined, including
              those of an avirulent strain of B.anthracis, will be obtained from a larger
              number of bacillus species than examined previously.  To compare the response
              time to changes in R.H., a computer-controlled micromanipulator will be used to
              transfer spores and cells to a microscope slide inside a micro-chamber. Past
              work with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques has shown that much of
              the water in spores is layered, due to orientation of water dipoles in
              proximity to charged protein molecules. The microscopic method can detect
              particle size changes within a few seconds of a change in R.H.; the results
              should provide new insight into how and where the water inside spores is
              structured.  The results may also provide insight into the restricted
              effectiveness of gas decontaminants such as chlorine dioxide at R.H. below 70
              to 80%.  In addition to the investigation of spore size, the intensity and
              emission spectrum of autofluorescence by bacillus spores will be examined. 
              These properties also appear to vary by species and may complement sizing and
              response to humidity changes as a diagnostic tool for the presence of spores.
              The autofluorescence of spores is thought to be influenced by the makeup of the
              spore exosporium, which includes a cross-linked, collagen-like protein called
              BclA absent in vegetative cells. 


