Title       : Summer Research Institute in Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0244632

Award Number: 0244632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182556             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin K. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon C. Baylis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Wedell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of South Carolina Summer Research Institute in Experimental
              Psychology has provided and will continue to provide a mechanism for educating
              undergraduate students about the field of experimental psychology. Many
              students, including students from underrepresented minorities, are drawn to
              applied psychology programs. The intent of the Institute, in contrast, is to
              focus student interest and enthusiasm on the basic science areas of psychology.
              The eight-week USC Summer Research Institute will permit well-qualified
              minority and non-minority undergraduate students majoring in a behavioral
              science an experience in graduate-level research, including an opportunity to
              formulate and conduct an experiment with individual guidance from an energetic
              and supportive research faculty mentor. The student will participate in major
              phases of experimental research, including literature review, hypothesis
              generation, data collection, data organization, statistical analysis and report
              writing in the style of American Psychological Association journals. Student
              experiences will be enriched by weekly research seminars, in which assigned
              readings will be discussed, and by weekly sessions on problems of research
              design and statistics in experimental psychology. Students will receive gratis
              course credit for their work. This program emphasis is much needed, as the U.S.
              is perceived to be the leader in the field of experimental psychology, and our
              universities must be able to motivate and train the best students for future
              careers in vital areas of behavioral science. This Summer Institute will
              continue to provide one vehicle to enhance these goals. 

This award
              contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
              into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences. 

