Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Habitat Effects on Positional Behavior and Fine
               Branch Use in Arboreal Cercopithecid Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0244773

Award Number: 0244773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Watts david.watts@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biologists and anthropologists interested in anatomy, evolution, and behavior
              rely on the interrelationship of these elements to interpret both living and
              extinct primate morphological and behavioral adaptations.  However, the complex
              interaction of phylogenetic history, current behavioral specializations, and
              habitat characteristics makes this exercise difficult.  More specifically,
              debate exists on whether primate positional behavior and support use are
              canalized and fixed based on phylogenetic constraints, or are highly flexible
              and context specific.  The lack of studies investigating variation in
              positional behavior and support use across habitats and seasons leads to
              assumptions concerning primate adaptations and the use of a given habitat. 
              These issues challenge morphologists and ecologists engaged in constructing
              "typical" profiles of positional behavior for primate species, which are
              ultimately used to reconstruct evolutionary history.  These questions have
              become particularly relevant in the study of African arboreal cercopithecid
              monkeys. Results of comparative studies of multiple taxa between two sites (Tai
              Forest, Ivory Coast, and Kibale Forest, Uganda) vary in certain aspects of
              positional behavior and support use, especially for the red colobus monkey
              (Piliocolobus badius), which was studied at both sites.  This suggests that the
              influence of habitat on positional behavior and support use requires further
              study.
Mr. Aronsen's research would contribute to this debate by comparing
              positional behavior, support use, and habitat preferences in three arboreal
              monkeys (red colobus, Piliocolobus badius; redtailed monkeys, Cercopithecus
              ascanius; and grey-cheeked mangabeys, Lophocebus albigena) at Ngogo, located
              within the Kibale National Park of Uganda.  Mr. Aronsen will record data on
              positional behavior and support use using continuous focal sampling and group
              scans of highly habituated groups in each species.  Habitat structure and
              patterns of use will be measured using daily follows, transects, and
              phenological surveys.  Primary focus will be placed on fine branch use in all
              taxa, as these smallest available supports represent a key area for foraging;
              they are also the most difficult to navigate, thus indicating varying
              positional and support preferences across taxa and body sizes.  These data will
              then be compared to similar data available from neighboring Kanyawara (for all
              three species) and the Tai forest (for P. badius).
Mr. Aronsen's research has
              broad implications beyond the study of Kibale monkeys.  While his study will
              examine a significant problem in primate evolutionary biology, it will also
              inform decisions regarding conservation of primates and their habitats.  By
              examining how flexible or static their behavior is given forest disturbance or
              logging, one can evaluate the potential impact humans may have on a primate
              population's overall health and survival.  He will also collaborate with
              Ugandan researchers and field assistants, and share his results and methods to
              increase knowledge of these issues.  This research will also allow him to train
              and educate students to further study nonhuman primates in their native
              habitat.  Finally, his conclusions will be made available for other researchers
              to compare other primate species and habitats beyond Africa, thus developing a
              more comprehensive portrait of primate biology, behavior, and evolution.

