Title       : Collaborative Research: Imaging Auroral Radio Emissions: Multi-technique
               Investigations Employing Optical, Radar, and Satellite Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0244171

Award Number: 0244171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60022              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hughes hughesj@gi.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vikas S. Sonwalkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The auroras are characterized not only be a variety of active optical emissions,
              but by a wide variety of radio emissions as well.  The relationship between
              different optical features and different radio features, however, is poorly
              understood.  Wave phenomena in the auroral regions play an important role in
              the energy flow between the magnetosphere and the ionosphere.  In order to
              understand the relationships between optical and radio phenomena in the auroral
              region it is necessary to monitor the region with a variety of instruments. 
              This project will utilize data from optical imaging instruments, radar
              backscatter from auroral features, and plasma wave, electric field, magnetic
              field and particle measurements from satellites crossing the auroral regions. 
              Satellites which will be used in the study include the defense department DMSP
              satellites, NASA's FAST, WIND, POLAR, SAMPEX, and IMAGE satellites, and the
              European CLUSTER mission.  A ground-based radio imaging system will be used to
              locate the regions producing auroral Medium Frequency (MF) radio emissions. 
              The investigation will also contribute to studies of the timing and location of
              magnetic substorm onsets.  The radio imaging instruments will be deployed at
              existing facilities in Alaska and Greenland.  The data will be made available
              to all researchers, including those using the Alaska and Greenland facilities. 
              The research project will also be integrated with educational activities being
              carried out by the three collaborating institutions (Dartmouth College, Siena
              College, and the Univ. of Alaska).  In particular the educational effort at
              Dartmouth will include a focus toward the Dartmouth Women-in Science-Program
              (WISP).  Students will be involved with both the engineering aspects of the new
              instrumentation as well as the analysis of the resulting scientific data.
