Title       : NSF-Europe: Nanoparticle Sintering Under the Influence of External Electrical
               Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0244162

Award Number: 0244162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna R. Groza jrgroza@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,5936,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is a joint study with Fraunhofer Institute Silicatforschung (ISC)
              in Germany on sintering nanoparticles under the influence of an external
              electrical field. The final goal is to understand the fundamentals and exploit
              the benefits of field-assisted sintering to enable the processing and
              manufacture of bulk nanomaterials. Field-assisted processing has emerged as a
              topic of current interest due to new phenomena, which occur upon field exposure
              such as microdischarges, with resultant surface effects and electrodiffusion.
              Technologically, electrical field application has distinct benefits: enhanced
              sintering rates, control and production of novel microstructures, and flexible
              manufacturing capabilities (near net shape, modulated structures). Laboratory
              experiments at UC Davis have succeeded in processing difficult-to-sinter
              materials by a field assisted sintering technique (FAST) equally applicable to
              ceramics and metals, to composites and nanometer size powders. ISC has
              developed a microwave processing (MWP) facility capable to control the MW
              energy and heat flow. The system also enables the application of extremely high
              heating rates, which are known to suppress grain growth during powder
              sintering. A high sensitivity thermo-optical measuring (TOM) technique at ISC
              is capable of monitoring neck formation, changes of the chemistry of contact
              points, and densification of powders. The objective of this proposed research
              is to study the operative mechanisms in the early stages of sintering of
              nanopowders and to quantify their interaction with the externally applied
              fields. 

Building the partnership with Germany will bring benefits to the
              scientific community by advancing the knowledge and predictive capability for
              processing of nanopowders. The quantification of field effects possible due to
              this partnership is critical to the advancement of field-activated processing
              and is valuable for both research and teaching. The new perspectives opened by
              this collaborative work will better prepare graduate students to work in an
              increasingly interdependent world economy and motivate undergraduate students
              to pursue doctoral studies.   This NSF project is co-funded by the Division of
              Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation and the International Office
              (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the
              NSF and Europe (NSF 02-135).  This project is being carried out in
              collaboration with the Fraunhofer Institute Silicatforschung (ISC), Wuertzburg,
              Germany. 


