Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research: Confirming an Upper Paleolithic Occupation of
               the Central Tibetan Plateau
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0244327

Award Number: 0244327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Aldenderfer m.aldenderfer@ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Despite more than 40 years of research, very little is known of the antiquity of
              the human presence on the Tibetan plateau, one of the world's highest and most
              complex environments. Although some archaeologists have argued for an early
              occupation, one that perhaps began 50,000 years ago, the only securely dated
              sites are 5,000 years old. The recent discovery of the Chusang site in central
              Tibet near Lhasa may bring new insights to this problem. First discovered in
              1995, but only recently published, the site is said to have human hand and
              footprints in a calcified mud deposit that dates to approximately 21,000 years
              ago. Should this date be accurate, this site would radically change our
              thinking about the occupation of the plateau. However, the site has never been
              examined in detail by archaeologists, and consequently, the scientific
              community is awaiting a more comprehensive study of the site before accepting
              these findings. 

At the invitation of Chinese scholars, Dr. Mark Aldenderfer
              and a multidisciplinary team of American, Chinese, and Tibetan archaeologists,
              geologists, geomorphologists, and dating specialists will study Chusang and
              attempt to verify this early human presence. Their work will involve a complete
              mapping of the site, a thorough review of its geological context with the goal
              of recovering new samples of datable materials in direct association with the
              hand and footprints, the examination of the region around the site to see if
              other traces of an early human presence can be located, and the preservation of
              the prints by making casts.

The evaluation of the Chusang site and the
              confirmation of its antiquity will be of importance to more than just
              archaeology. For much of the 20th century, geologists thought that the entire
              Tibetan plateau was covered with a thick sheet of ice throughout much of the
              glacial epoch. Should Chusang date to 21,000 years ago, this finding would be
              of value to the growing body of scholars that believe the plateau was not
              covered with this ice sheet. Another question that this project may help to
              provide insight into is the nature of human adaptations to high-elevation
              environments. Physical anthropologists have remarked on the striking
              differences between Tibetans and Andean highlanders in the ways in which they
              have developed physiological responses to the rigors of life at high
              elevations. Why this is the case is unknown, with some arguing that the
              difference is simply that indigenous Andean peoples have not lived at high
              elevation as long as have Tibetans, while others suggest that these differences
              are not time dependent, but instead reflect two distinct evolutionary pathways
              that solve the same problem. Confirming the age of Chusang will help to
              evaluate these arguments.

One major benefit of the project is that it will
              provide an ideal multi-national, multi-disciplinary learning environment for
              American, Chinese, and Tibetan graduate students. As the first western
              archaeologist permitted to work on the central plateau, Dr. Aldenderfer
              believes that the project will encourage similar collaborative projects in
              Tibet.

