Title       : Research Experiences in Plant Science at the Danforth Center/REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0244155

Award Number: 0244155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwen R. Ericson gericson@danforthcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karel R. Schubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Danforth Plant Sci Center
	      975 N. Warson Rd.
	      St. Louis, MO  63132    314/587-1048

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the summer REU program at the Danforth Center is simple: to provide
              an opportunity for a student to mature into a young scientist.  To do this, we
              have created a program that gives students experience with all aspects of
              modern scientific research, from design to implementation to reporting, while
              providing insight into the personal qualities of a good researcher, the steps
              to take on the road to becoming a scientist, and the broader implications of
              scientific discovery.  The Danforth Center is an independent, non-profit
              research institute newly established in St. Louis, Missouri.  It is devoted to
              fundamental research in plant science leading to discoveries for the benefit of
              human health and nutrition and agricultural sustainability.  Students in all
              life science fields, not just those interested in plant science, can benefit
              from the program.

The Danforth Center provides a welcoming atmosphere in a
              small, friendly institution and at the same time exposes students to a rich
              research environment because of the wide range of expertise present, including
              cell biology, molecular biology, structural biology, biochemistry,
              microbiology, chemistry, computational biology, bioinformatics, developmental
              biology, genetics, genomics, nematology, and plant pathology.  During the
              eleven-week summer program, the student will 1) design and conduct a laboratory
              research project in collaboration with a faculty mentor, present findings in a
              final symposium, and prepare a written report summarizing the research; 2)
              learn the application of a wide variety of instrumentation and the latest
              techniques in life science research; 3) learn about potential career pathways
              and strategies; 4) discuss the ethical, social, and political issues
              surrounding current plant science research, including exploring the potential
              of genetic engineering and challenges for improving agriculture in developing
              countries through biotechnology.

Students interested in applying to the
              program should visit the web site www.danforthcenter.org/internship.  An
              application is available for download and information is available on research
              areas at the Center.  Students will be matched with research areas that best
              suit their interests and experience.  Students who are members of groups
              under-represented in the sciences are especially encouraged to apply.

