Title       : ASSURED - Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education &
               Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0244179

Award Number: 0244179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bosland pbosland@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Danise Coon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Agricultural Science Summer Undergraduate Research Education and Development
              (ASSURED) Program will be held at New Mexico State University's (NMSU) Chile
              Pepper Institute during an eight-week period throughout each summer.  The Chile
              Pepper Institute (CPI), which is housed in the Department of Agronomy and
              Horticulture in NMSU's College of Agriculture and Home Economics, is directly
              connected with both the College's capsicum teaching and research programs, and
              includes over twenty-five faculty and thirty graduate students.  To compliment
              the research-rich collaborative atmosphere of this program, a handful of
              minority education programs across campus and across local communities are
              committed to assisting the ASSURED program with student recruitment,
              instructional support, curricula development, weekend events, parental
              involvement, and program follow-up.  Ten students per year will experience
              laboratory research and ownership of research projects, ethical conduct in the
              research environment, development of defensible scientific methods,
              presentation and poster development of research results, peer-mentor
              interactions with international and national graduate students, collaborations
              with faculty, exposure to research careers, college and career skill
              development.

Educators nationwide are concerned that ethnic and language
              minorities and female students are not being served adequately by existing
              science education programs.  NMSU's Chile Pepper Institute is concerned that
              for many migrant farm children who are 'settling in' to border communities,
              very few know about the existence of, or access to, career opportunities in
              agricultural sciences beyond field work.  The program's goal is to work with
              underrepresented first generation college students from immigrant farm labor
              families to expand their appreciation of agricultural science in a university,
              research-rich context.  This two year pilot program is being designed in
              concert with an NMSU institution-wide commitment to increase minority
              participation in higher education.  Targeting this audience provides academic
              and economic alternatives and pathways toward the future stability and
              well-being of migrant families.  

The ASSURED Program REU will have two
              additional features: 1) Provide students with an opportunity in learning while
              getting compensated. 2) Provide students with campus housing and compensation
              for meals.   For more information contact Dr. Paul Bosland or Ms. Danise Coon
              at the Chile Pepper Institute, (505)646-3028, hotchile@nmsu.edu, or Box 30003
              MSC 3Q, Las Cruces, NM 88003.

