Title       : FRG: Collaborative Research: Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations
               of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0244487

Award Number: 0244487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth J. Shaw                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dehua Wang dwang@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

FRG: Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations
     of
              Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems
     in Hyperbolic Conservation
              Laws

Historically, fluid and solid mechanics study the motion
              of
incompressible and compressible materials, with or without
              internal
dissipation. For gases and solids with internal dissipation as
              a
secondary effect, the gross wave dynamics is governed by inviscid,
thermal
              diffusionless, dynamics. Within these categories, compressible
motion for
              solids corresponds to the study of elastic waves and their
propagation;
              compressible motion for fluids is usually associated with
inviscid  gas
              dynamics. Furthermore both compressible solids and 
fluids exhibit shock waves
              and hence we must search for discontinous 
solutions to the underlying
              equations of motion.
Incompressible motion on the other hand concerns
itself
              with the motion of denser fluids where the idealization of
incompressibility
              is useful, e.g. water or oil,  as well as the motion of
certain solids like
              rubber. While there are still many important
mathematical issues to be
              resolved for incompressible fluids, for example,
the well-posedness of the
              Navier-Stokes equations in three space
dimensions, the mathematical study of
              compressible
solids (as represented by the equations of nonlinear
              elastodynamics) and
fluids (as represented by the Euler equations of inviscid
              flows)
in two and three space dimensions is even less developed.
This
              provides the motivation to the proposers to collaborate in a
three year effort
              to advance the mathematical understanding of the
multi-dimensional equations
              of inviscid compressible fluid dynamics
and related problems in
              elastodynamics.
The core of our plan is to arrange a sustained interaction
              between and
around the members of the group,  who will
(1) collaborate
              scientifically, focusing on the advancement of the
analysis of
              multi-dimensional compressible flows by developing new
theoretical techniques
              and by using and designing effective, robust and
reliable numerical
              methods;
(2) work together over the next several years to create the
              environment
and manpower necessary for the research on multi-dimensional
              compressible
Euler equations and related problems to flourish; and in the
              meantime,
(3) share the responsibility of training graduate students
              and
postdoctoral fellows.

The project is devoted to a mathematical study of
              the Euler equations
governing the motion of an inviscid compressible fluid and
              related
problems. Compressible fluids occur all around us in nature, e.g.
              gases
and plasmas, whose study is crucial to understanding
              aerodyanmics,
atmospheric sciences, thermodynamics, etc.
While the
              one-dimensional fluid flows are rather well understood, the
general theory for
              multi-dimensional flows is comparatively mathematically
underdeveloped. The
              proposers will collaborate in a three
year effort to advance the mathematical
              understanding of the
multi-dimensional equations of inviscid compressible
              fluid dynamics.
Success in this project will advance knowledge of this
              fundamental area of
mathematics and mechanics and will introduce a new
              generation of
researchers to the outstanding problems in the field.

