Title       : Implications of Near Solar Source Pickup Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0244307

Award Number: 0244307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 31,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan A. Schwadron nschwadron@swri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study major heliospheric pickup ion sources in the solar
              wind, their propagation and acceleration.  Pickup ions are generated from
              neutral atoms when they become ionized and begin to gyrate in a plasma's
              magnetic field.  In the case of the solar wind, pickup ions born from slowly
              moving neutrals acquire an initial speed nearly equal to the solar wind speed
              as they are transported out with the solar wind's magnetic field.  The pickup
              process thereby creates a more energetic and therefore more easily observed
              population of ions that may be used to infer properties of the neutral
              environment from which they were created.  In the heliosphere, there are three
              main populations of pickup ions: interstellar pickup ions from interstellar
              neutrals, inner source pickup ions created by interactions between
              interplanetary dust and the solar wind, and discrete source pickup ions from
              comets, planets, and other discrete sources.  The investigators will
              characterize near-solar pickup ion sources by modeling distribution functions
              and hydrodynamic properties of pickup ions produced from near-solar and
              interstellar sources.  They will also study the relative significance of
              near-solar source pickup ions, interstellar source pickup ions, and solar wind
              particles as seed populations for energetic particles and anomalous cosmic
              rays.

