Title       : Representation Theory and Invariant Means on C*-algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0244807

Award Number: 0244807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118226             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathanial P. Brown nbrown@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will study a number of problems which, roughly speaking, belong
              to representation theory.  The questions, however, differ from the classical
              theory (e.g. classification of irreducible representations).  The goal is to a)
              better understand finite factor representations of certain quasidiagonal
              C*-algebras, b) study approximation properties of traces and c) work on
              applications of the previous two topics to various open questions in operator
              algebras.  At this point, our hope is that this work will shed light on
              Elliott's classification program and Connes' embedding problem.  However, there
              may be more as we have recently noticed that these ideas have K-homological
              implications, can be used to prove a general existence result for the finite
              section method (from numerical analysis) and we would not be surprised if
              connections with geometric group theory were soon worked out.  Though these
              ideas are certainly in their infancy, they have solid historical foundations
              (e.g. Connes' uniqueness theorem for finite injective factors) and we believe
              the theory shows promise. 

One very successful idea in mathematics is that
              problems about complicated objects can sometimes be solved using approximations
              by simpler objects.  For example, in calculus we teach students that to compute
              the area under a curve one should first approximate by rectangles since the
              area of a rectangle is easy to compute.  Operator algebras are (usually)
              infinite dimensional objects which provide the natural framework for many
              questions in quantum physics.  Moreover, deep and unexpected connections with
              other areas of mathematics such as geometry, topology and probability were
              discovered over the years.  As such, a solid understanding of the structure of
              operator algebras is important.  The general philosophy of using approximations
              by simpler objects becomes especially relevant here since the objects of
              interest are infinite dimensional.  The investigator will continue an
              established tradition of trying to use finite dimensional approximations to
              better understand some fundamental infinite dimensional objects. 
