Title       : REU: Environmental Science Summer Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0244221

Award Number: 0244221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Foust richard.foust@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Molly S. Costanza-Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Northern Arizona University will partner with three local tribal colleges (Dine'
              College, Crownpoint Institute of Technology, and the Southwestern Indian
              Polytechnic Institute) to host an NSF-REU site focusing on environmental
              science research.  Recruitment will focus on tribal colleges and community
              colleges in northern Arizona and New Mexico that are known to have large Native
              American and Hispanic enrollments.  We will utilize existing agreements with
              these colleges to identify the students who will most likely continue their
              education in a science field.  Students for the program will be selected based
              on their performance in science classes and their demonstrated interest in
              pursuing a scientific career.

Eight students will be selected to participate
              in the 10-week research program which will coincide with NAU's 10 week summer
              school session.  In addition to opportunities for undergraduate research, NAU's
              REU program will include components on scientific writing, data analysis and
              interpretation, communication skills, scientific reasoning and ethics.  A
              social program will foster ongoing personal relationships among the students
              and with their mentors.  Because the majority of the students recruited for the
              program are currently enrolled in either tribal colleges or community colleges,
              which do not offer Bachelor's degrees, it is likely that the researchers will
              continue their education at Northern Arizona University.  The research mentors
              have significant external research funding; therefore, it is anticipated that
              the REU students will be able to continue their research activities in the
              academic year, after completion of the summer REU program.  Moreover, because
              the research mentors are well established, it is anticipated that a significant
              number of participants will become co-authors on scientific
              publications.

Based on the success of similar programs at NAU, we believe
              that NAU's summer REU program will significantly increase the number of Native
              Americans entering science careers.  Point-of-contact for the NAU Summer REU
              Program is Dr. Richard D. Foust, Jr., at 928-523-7077 or
              Richard.Foust@nau.edu.

