Title       : The Nature of Molecular Association and Solvation of Aliphatic and
               Perfluorinated Aliphatic Carboxylic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0244795

Award Number: 0244795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoonkook Park parky@tuskegee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ram B. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher B. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Yoonkook Park
Tuskegee University

The Nature of Molecular Association and
              Solvation of Aliphatic and Perfluorinated Aliphatic Carboxylic Acids 
              

Carboxylic acids are of significant importance in industry due to numerous
              uses as raw materials for other chemicals, as solvents, and in the drug, dye,
              textile and foodstuffs industries.  In addition, carboxylic acids play an
              important role in biological applications. For example, short-chain fatty acids
              (SCFAs) such as acetic, propionic, iso- and n-butyric and iso- and n-valeric
              acids, serve as an indicator of bacterial activity.  Hence, analysis of SCFAs
              is of importance in studies of health and disease in the intestinal tract. 
              Fundamental molecular understanding of these acids can help in rational design
              of processes and products with desired properties.  In light of the need to
              improve the green engineering of processes involving these species, this
              proposal will focus on understanding the molecular behavior of carboxylic acids
              in supercritical fluids.

Formic acid and SCFAs represent an interesting
              series of molecules that provide the opportunity to study and correlate
              molecular structure with the tendency for these molecules to self-associate. 
              However, solvation can have a tremendous impact on carboxylic acid
              self-association even in the case of carboxylic acids with modestly different
              alkyl groups.  The influence of solvents on dimerization of some carboxylic
              acids has been investigated by several research groups. 
  
In earlier work,
              the PI and co-PIs used Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and a
              modified lattice-fluid hydrogen-bonding (MLFHB) model to examine the effect of
              solvent density and solvation in formic acid association in both supercritical
              (SC) CO2 and C2H6. The results obtained indicated that in the presence of SC
              CO2 solvent, the association of formic acid decreased linearly with increases
              in solvent density.    The interaction of CO2 (solvent) with formic acid
              monomer (solute) has a marked effect on the dimer formation compared to that
              when ethane was employed as the solvent.  As a result of weaker solvent-solute
              interactions in ethane, the association constant of formic acid in C2H6 is thus
              an order of magnitude larger than that in CO2.  The strong interactions of CO2
              and carboxylic acid monomers has a tremendous effect on the equilibrium
              behavior.  In addition, this behavior has been successfully modeled by using
              the MLFHB model.  

Specific Aims:  SC CO2 can interact strongly with certain
              molecules, particularly, those with electron donating functional groups.  In
              this study, the PIs will investigate the nature of molecular association and
              solvation of carboxylic acids. This study is comprised of three main areas.
              

1) The association equilibrium constant (KA) of carboxylic acids at various
              densities in a variety of solvents (e.g. SCF CO2 and C2H6) will be determined
              using FTIR spectroscopy. Dr. Park and his Tuskegee University undergraduate
              students will work with Dr. Roberts and his full-time Auburn Ph.D. student to
              collect the experimental data in the Roberts' lab.  

2) The specific
              interaction between CO2 and aliphatic (and fluorinated aliphatic)
carboxylic
              acids in an "inert" solvent, such as pentane, will also be investigated in the
              Roberts' lab as well as the Tuskegee laboratories.  Dr. Park and his students
              will identify the most probable interaction site between CO2 and aliphatic (and
              fluorinated aliphatic) carboxylic acids theoretically.  The experimentally
              obtained binding energies will be compared to those obtained 
from model
              potentials.   

3) Molecular modeling of these systems will be carried out in
              Dr. Gupta's lab to improve 
our fundamental understanding of the experimental
              results and to guide the experimental studies. 
Both ab initio and equation of
              state approaches will be utilized.  

Broader Impact: These studies will be
              important in improving our understanding of solvent effects on carboxylic acid
              interactions in SCFs.  Understanding the fundamental molecular 
attributes of
              CO2 plays a role in rational design of inexpensive and green CO2-based
              processes.  
Information about the specific interaction between CO2 and
              aliphatic (and fluorinated aliphatic) 
carboxylic acids will provide a
              guideline as to which factors should be considered to improve overall
              CO2-philicity.  The proposed research program presents multiple opportunities
              to develop students in the areas of molecular thermodynamics and green
              chemistry and engineering. The mechanisms for this development include Ph.D.
              student and undergraduate student training, as well as incorporation of our
              findings and aspects of this ever important field of green chemistry within our
              molecular thermodynamics courses at both Tuskegee University and Auburn
              University. 


