Title       : Control and Diagnosis of Discrete-event Systems with Temporal Logic
               Specifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0244732

Award Number: 0244732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 16,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ratnesh Kumar rkumar@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal is motivated from a comprehensive and formal study of control and
              diagnosis of discrete event systems with temporal logic specifications. The
              supervisory control theory provides a formalism or synthesizing controllers for
              event-driven systems in order to  enforce desired qualitative specifications.
              Such specifications  are traditionally expressed as formal languages or
              equivalently as  state machines. It is more practical, however, to express
              specifications in a language close to a natural spoken language. Temporal logic
              is an attempt to bridge the gap between formal and natural languages. It is our
              intent to develop techniques for  control and diagnosis of discrete event
              systems when the  specifications are expressed in temporal logic. We choose the
               temporal logics of CTL (computational tree logic) and LTL (linear time logic)
              proposed by Clarke-Emerson-Sitsla for which automated techniques exist for
              verifying system properties. The proposed research complements that work by
              developing automated techniques for synthesizing controllers and diagnosers.
              Several problems in this context have been proposed including, control under
              complete observation, control under partial observation, modular
              control,
failure modeling and diagnosis, and computation using the symbolic
              method. Our initial work shows that with the usage of temporal  logic, there is
              no loss of computational complexity, yet there is surely a gain of
              expressibility and user-friendliness.


