Title       : Order Parameter Structure in Thin Films and Disordered Superfluid 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0244099

Award Number: 0244099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Halperin w-halperin@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the influence of disorder on superfluid 3He, one
              of an important class of quantum fluids that includes ruthenate
              superconductors, heavy fermion superconductors, and high temperature
              superconductors.  These unconventional systems are formed from pairs of
              fermions in BCS states.  They all have the common important characteristic of
              spontaneously broken symmetries beyond gauge symmetry.  As such they are
              particularly sensitive to impurity effects, which must be investigated if the
              underlying behavior of these systems is to be understood and if the potential
              for their application is to be realized.  The proposed research will bring
              precise experimental tools, transverse high frequency acoustics, heat capacity,
              and thin film methods, that are available for 3He in aerogel glass, to
              determine order parameter suppression and the density of low-lying excitations
              and to compare with recent theoretical predictions for gapless
              superconductivity.  The results will have broad implications for unconventional
              superconductors, Bose-Einstein condensation, and exotic vortex matter.  The
              participation of graduate students in this work will provide them with
              technical training relevant to basic research and industrial interests. 
              Undergraduate projects on acoustics will give opportunities for learning
              complementary to, but outside, the classroom. 

This project will investigate
              the influence of disorder on superfluid 3He, one of an important class of
              quantum fluids that includes high temperature superconductors.  These systems
              exhibit a high degree of fragility, that is, they have extreme sensitivity to
              all forms of imperfection and impurities.  Investigation of disorder is crucial
              to their basic understanding and to a realization of their potential for
              applications.  3He is an ideal choice to study such effects since its pure
              state is well understood.  This is in contrast to many superconductors which
              have physical and chemical complexity that is difficult to control.  The
              proposed research includes, thermodynamic and acoustic measurements while
              systematically controlling disorder introduced with highly porous silica
              aerogel.  The work is relevant to theoretical models for neutron star matter,
              quark Cooper pairs, and exotic vortex states for which 3He is often a reference
              point.  Undergraduate students will participate in the proposed research using
              phase modulation acoustics and second sound propagation.  Training of graduate
              students in the technically sophisticated areas of magnetic resonance,
              low-temperature methods, and high frequency acoustics will prepare them for a
              range of professional career opportunities with a significant potential impact
              to our society.

