Title       : Nonlinear Control Problems for Rest-to-Rest Maneuvers of Multi-Body Vehicles
               using Prismatic Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0244977

Award Number: 0244977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathaniel H. McClamroch nhm@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
Page A
This proposal describes a novel research program on
              nonlinear control of multi-body
vehicles operating under the action of
              gravitational forces and control forces generated
by prismatic actuators.
              Multi-body vehicles are mechanical systems consisting of a rigid
base body
              that can translate and rotate in three dimensions and auxiliary bodies that
              are
constrained to move relative to the base body and to one another. The
              multi-body vehicles
are controlled using prismatic actuator devices, mounted
              on the base body. These are
linear electromechanical actuators that move a
              proof mass along a track fixed to the base
body. This is a novel actuation
              technology that has great potential for providing new
maneuvering
              capabilities, namely precision translation and global attitude maneuvers,
              for
multi-body vehicles. On the other hand, the design and operation of such
              multi-body
vehicles present many challenges since they are not fully actuated
              in the sense that there
are fewer control inputs than there are degrees of
              freedom to be controlled. Key aspects
of the proposed research, from which
              arise the major research challenges, are: (1) the
presence of controlled
              mechanical symmetries and their associated integrals of motion and
(2) the
              objective of achieving arbitrary rest to rest maneuvers for the
              multi-body
vehicles.
Although some nonlinear control problems for multi-body
              mechanical systems are relatively
simple, the problems posed in this research
              can not be adequately handled based on the
current state of knowledge. The
              proposed research is the culmination of the NSF supported
research of the
              principal investigator over the last fourteen years. It represents
              an
extension of his previous research on nonlinear control of constrained and
              underactuated
mechanical systems to new problems that have not previously been
              amenable to study using
traditional nonlinear control methods. The expected
              contributions of the proposed
research are: (1) the development of nonlinear
              control theory for the class of multi-body
vehicles studied, (2) the
              development of innovative new system design and control
strategies for
              multi-body vehicles, and (3) educational impacts through student
participation
              in the research. The research concepts are to be applied to
              maneuvering
vehicles operating in space or under water, and they are ideally
              suited for small-scale
intelligent autonomous sensor systems operating in
              space or under water. The proposed
research has the potential to provide new
              and enhanced maneuvering capabilities for
multi-body vehicles, thereby
              contributing to the overall engineering infrastructure in
transportation,
              exploration, remote sensing, and surveillance.
