Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates and Teachers at the University of
               Rochester: REU Site with RET Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0244012

Award Number: 0244012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Krugh Thomas.Krugh@rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1986      UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS IN CHEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1359,7202,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
PI: Krugh					

Institution: University of Rochester

The award supports a
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site integrated with a Research
              Experience for Teachers (RET) program at the University of Rochester for the
              summers of 2003-2005.  Thomas R. Krugh is the site director.  Eight students
              will carry out research each summer over a ten-week period.  Six high school
              teachers will also participate in research at this site under the program,
              Research Experience for Teachers.   Recruitment will be targeted at
              undergraduate colleges and give special emphasis to participation of women,
              underrepresented minorities and lower division students.  Secondary school
              teachers will be recruited from a national pool.  All participants will carry
              out research under the supervision of faculty in the chemistry department. The
              faculty are involved in interdisciplinary research which extends the
              intellectual scope of summer research to fields such as optics, biology,
              medicine and dentistry, pharmacy, engineering, physics and earth sciences. 
              Research group seminars and REU/RET group meetings during the summer will
              enhance training.  A mini-course on photoinduced charge transfer will be given.
               Panel discussions will be organized to focus on career opportunities. 
              Students will report on their work subsequently at their colleges and at
              regional and national professional meetings.  The teachers remain in contact
              with the REU site through an STM (scanning tunnel microscope) project which
              encourages them to borrow the instrument for high school use.  They also
              maintain web pages on a server in the PIs lab.  The REU/RET site is funded by
              the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs in the
              Mathematics and Physical Science Directorate.
