Title       : Nonlinear partial differential equations and applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0244787

Award Number: 0244787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis E. Souganidis souganid@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Takis Souganidis, University of Texas,
              Austin
DMS-0244787

ABSTRACT

The PI proposes to continue his program to
              develop methods to study nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic,
              deterministic and stochastic partial differential equations (pde) arising as
              models in areas like continuum and statistical physics, biology, ecology,
              engineering, etc. The emphasis of this proposal is on the development of
              (rigorous) theories for (i) weak (stochastic viscosity) solutions of fully
              nonlinear, (degenerate) parabolic stochastic partial differential equations,
              and
(ii) homogenization (averaging) of nonlinear, parabolic/elliptic and
              hyperbolic partial differential equations in spatio-temporal randomly
              heterogeneous media. The randomness is typically associated with singular
              dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness. Overcoming both
              issues requires the development of new methods and tools.

Nonlinear
              stochastic pde are very often used to model complex phenomena, like turbulent
              combustion, nucleations, phase transitions at low temperature, etc., It is
              therefore self-evident that there is a pressing need for the development of a
              mathematical theory for such equations. The theory of stochastic viscosity
              solutions, which is been developed by the PI and Lions, is of fundamental
              importance, since it allows for the study of a completely new and, at the same
              time, very rich class of nonlinear stochastic pde arising in many of the
              aforementioned contexts. As this theory becomes more available, known and
              developed, it is expected that it will play an important role also in
              applications, since it will provide the necessary tools to analyze previously
              intractable models.

The mathematical modeling of phenomena with many scales
              at the microscopic level, like turbulence, front propagation in phase
              transitions, spatial ecology, polymer growth, composite and perforated
              materials in mechanics, often necessitates the use of random pde with
              oscillating random parameters. At the macroscopic level these parameters
              "average out" and the phenomena are then described by an averaged (homogenized)
              equation. This leads naturally to questions of homogenization of nonlinear pde
              in spatio-temporal stationary ergodic settings, which, roughly speaking, are
              the most general settings where "self-averaging" is to be expected.


