Title       : Investigation of Field Effects in Combustion Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0244832

Award Number: 0244832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zuhair A. Munir zamunir@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 7237,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

This is an investigation of the effect of electric fields on
              self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) reactions using experimental
              and modeling studies.  It has three general thrusts:  (a) the role of the field
              in mass transport enhancement through electromigration (electron wind effect)
              and point defect (vacancy) generation, (b) the effect of the field on the
              structure and properties of functional materials, and (c) the modeling of
              electrically ignited SHS reactions. The research provides an assessment of the
              effect of the field on such processes as mass transport, product evolution, and
              structural and microstructural development during combustion synthesis
              reactions.  It separates the thermal (extrinsic) effects from the intrinsic
              effects (e.g., electromigration, vacancy generation) of the field on these
              reactions. The technological implications of the work include (a) the ability
              to synthesize many materials systems which could not be prepared by unactivated
              SHS, (b) the modification of the nature and properties of SHS products by
              influencing composition and crystallite size (including nanomaterials), (c) the
              modification of interfacial interactions in such applications as (layered)
              functionally graded materials (FGMs) and thermal and chemical barrier coatings
              (TBCs and CBCs), and (d) the energy savings available from a one-step synthesis
              and densification of materials. Another relevant example is the recent
              demonstration that dense nanometric materials can be synthesized by field
              activation.

Broader impacts

This is an investigation of the role of an
              electric field (current) in combustion synthesis reactions.  The work has both
              scientific and practical implications.  From a fundamental point of view, it
              aims at understanding the nature of both the thermal and non-thermal
              contributions of a field to self-propagating and other types of combustion
              reactions. From a practical point of view, the research can lead to the use of
              a field as a processing parameter in the synthesis of monolithic, composite,
              and functionally-graded materials. That the field has a marked influence on the
              synthesis reactions of such materials has been amply demonstrated by past work 
               The field has been shown to have a significant influence on the dynamics of
              wave propagation and on the mechanism of synthesis, dictating the nature of the
              product phases and their homogeneity and microstructure.  Through the use of
              combined mechanical and field activation, it has been shown that the synthesis
              of dense nanostructured materials is feasible.

