Title       : Collaborative Research FRG: Phase Transitions in Stochastics Dynamics and
               Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0244479

Award Number: 0244479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $795000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuval Peres peres@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Aldous  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alistair Sinclair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0244479
Peres
	Stochastic dynamics for spin systems have been investigated for
              decades by physicists as a means for simulating Gibbs measures. In the last
              decade, computer scientists and probabilists have brought new perspectives and
              methods to this study and showed its applicability to approximately uniform
              sampling, and approximate counting of combinatorial structures. The key factor
              controlling the running time of such sampling schemes is the mixing time of the
              dynamics, which can change dramatically when the underlying stationary measure
              undergoes a phase transition. A central aim of this FRG project is to explore
              systematically the connections between information theory, large deviations,
              and mixing times for Markov chains. Certain fundamental optimization and search
              problems (e.g., k-satisfiability with random clauses) exhibit a radical change
              as the ratio between the input size and the number of unknown parameters is
              tuned. Understanding these thresholds quantitatively is another focus of the
              project.
	A system undergoes a "phase transition" when a small change in its
              input has a profound, qualitative effect on its behavior. Examples of phase
              transitions have been studied for decades in physics; more recently, this
              notion has become important in other areas, notably in connection with the
              performance of search and optimization techniques. Further progress on the hard
              problems of the subject requires long-term cooperation of researchers in
              probability and algorithms, as well as consultation with experts in the
              adjoining areas of combinatorics and statistical physics. The project is
              expected to have an impact on the design and analysis of randomized algorithms
              and provide insight on key scheduling and optimization problems. Significant
              effects on graduate training of students in discrete probability and computer
              science are expected, as they learn the language and tools of the different
              disciplines involved. 

