Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Study of Sociopolitical Change
               in Siin (Senegal), AD 1000-1900
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0244774

Award Number: 0244774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3503               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. DeCorse crdecors@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the supervision of Dr. Christopher DeCorse, Francois Richard will conduct
              his doctoral research in the Siin, a historic province located in west-central
              Senegal. Growing out of preliminary work begun in 2001 and 2002, the research
              will collect archaeological materials to examine the formation and development
              of political systems in the Siin during the past millennium. The AD 1000-1900
              period was a time of considerable changes in Senegambia, as the region became
              gradually immersed into the trans-Saharan economy, the Atlantic system, and the
              French colonial empire. Despite its modest scale, Siin is depicted in oral
              traditions and later historical documents as a vibrant cultural crossroads, a
              haven for migrant populations, and an active player in regional politics. These
              sources, however, shed little light on long-term social changes, and much
              remains to be learned about the timing of population movements, the nature of
              political organization, and the consequences of European expansion for local
              societies. 
	
Archaeology is ideally suited to address these questions,
              because the distribution of material vestiges in the landscape provides very
              concrete traces of the transformations which past human societies have
              experienced. In Siin, a number of target areas will be surveyed to locate
              habitation sites and plot their geographic position. A preliminary ceramic
              sequence, which documents time-sensitive shifts in pottery styles, will be used
              to date surface deposits and place sites in a chronological framework. It is
              then possible to create maps showing how settlement patterns and sociopolitical
              organization evolved over time, and begin to question the historical forces
              responsible for these developments. Limited excavations will help to fine-tune
              the chronology and deepen understanding of regional history at a few selected
              sites.
	
For many years, archaeologists and anthropologists have portrayed
              Africa as a backwater, mostly because its societies did not conform to
              'accepted' canons of social evolution. In viewing political development as a
              linear drive from 'simple' to 'complex,' however, traditional evolutionary
              models were not only inaccurate, but largely failed to explain the diversity of
              social courses which human societies worldwide have traveled. Recent research
              has stressed the potential of African case studies to assist in the development
              of new theories of social complexity that are mindful of human creativity in
              adapting to changing conditions. Such work can also help rescue Africa from its
              position at the margins of history, to document the complex historical factors
              that have shaped the continent. The Siin provides an excellent environment to
              pursue these goals, because of the wide array of political systems it has
              nurtured over the past millennium. The research will likely illustrate how
              Senegambian societies never lived in isolation but partook at an early time in
              vast systems of exchange, involving people, goods, and ideas. In addition to
              making a contribution to the comparative study of social evolution, Mr.
              Richard's project will also further our understanding of the effects of global
              developments (Saharan trade, the rise of the capitalist world-system, colonial
              conquest) on Senegambian societies. Lastly, in collaboration with local
              communities, the project will ensure the archaeological training of several
              Senegalese students, while assisting in the professional growth of Mr. Richard
              himself.

