Title       : Signature Sequencing for Quantitative Expression Analysis and Gene Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0244435

Award Number: 0244435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blake C. Meyers meyers@dbi.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1329,1684,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The primary goal of this project is to demonstrate the utility of a novel
              technology called 'massively parallel signature sequencing' (MPSS) for the
              quantification of gene expression in plants. MPSS is a rapid method to produce
              17 base pair sequence tags that are precisely representative of the population
              of messenger RNAs in a given tissue. Approximately eight libraries from diverse
              plant tissues will be sequenced by MPSS, generating ~500,000 tags per library,
              for a total of four million tags. The 17-bp tag is derived from the 3' end of a
              messenger RNA or 'transcript' and provides a virtually unique, experimentally
              derived identifier for each expressed gene. The number of identical tags in a
              library for a given gene is precisely indicative of the level of expression of
              that gene. The MPSS sequence data provide quantitative or 'digital' expression
              information for the entire 'transcriptome', avoiding problems inherent in
              microarray analysis such as cross-hybridization, pre-selection of probe
              sequences and low signal. Statistical methods for the analysis of quantitative
              expression data have demonstrated that these data are robust. In comparison to
              the limited sets of data derived by the EST and SAGE techniques, these data
              will be the first large-scale quantitative expression data for plants in the
              public domain. 

The MPSS sequence data is most informative when the tags are
              compared to either a completely sequenced genome or to large collections of
              ESTs. To take full advantage of the MPSS technology, the initial libraries will
              be generated from the model plant Arabidopsis (ecotype Columbia) and the MPSS
              tags compared to the complete genomic sequence. This comparison identifies the
              individual genes from which the tags are derived. These data then will be used
              to: quantify and experimentally confirm gene expression and mRNA transcripts in
              diverse wildtype and treated plant tissues (including shoot, root,
              inflorescence, silique, anthers, callus); estimate the frequency of alternative
              polyadenylation in plant tissues; study co-regulated gene pairs and estimate
              promoter strength and tissue specificity; assess global transcriptional changes
              in the disease resistance response. 

Sequence tags generated through this
              project will be accessible via the web, and the interface will provide tools
              for data analyses. These data also will be placed in public expression
              databases (such as those at the National Center for Biotechnology Information,
              'NCBI') for comparison to microarray data, facilitating the expression analysis
              of either any single gene or all genes present in these libraries. These
              experiments constitute a proof of concept for massively parallel signature
              sequencing in plants for the global analysis of gene
              expression.

Deliverables

The deliverables for this project are available
              electronically at:
<a href=http://www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss>
              http://www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss </a> 


