Title       : Coulomb Drag between One-Dimensional Electron Systems: Probing the Luttinger
               Liquid State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0244489

Award Number: 0244489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Newrock richard.newrock@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe Debray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award supports an investigation of the behavior of
              electrons confined in one-dimensional wires.  The project consists of a
              comprehensive experimental investigation of Coulomb drag between interacting
              quantum wires in the ballistic transport regime.  This relatively unexplored
              phenomenon will be used as a tool to experimentally probe the Luttinger liquid
              (LL) behavior of interacting, strongly correlated, one-dimensional electron
              systems. The Coulomb drag resistance and the shot noise will be measured as a
              function of a number of sample and environmental parameters, such as sample
              length, inter-wire separation, Fermi energy, temperature, applied magnetic
              field, etc. The dual-wire samples will be fabricated from high-mobility
              AlGaAs/GaAs heterostructures and quantum wells using high-resolution, electron
              beam lithography.  The work is expected to lead to new and important results,
              proving that the LL state exists in condensed matter and establishing the
              applicability boundaries of the Fermi liquid theory.  The project involves
              training graduate students in nanoscience and nanotechnology.  It includes the
              participation of undergraduate students in the research.  It brings together
              researchers, educators, and students, leading to an integration of research,
              learning, and training.  In addition, a strong commitment to educational
              outreach K-16 and teacher programs is integrated into the research agenda.
              

This individual investigator award supports an investigation of the
              behavior of electrons confined to very narrow, essentially one-dimensional
              wires.  The project consists of a comprehensive experimental investigation,
              supported by theoretical analysis, of the interaction forces between two
              closely spaced and interacting one-dimensional wires in a regime where very
              little scattering of the electrons occurs.  These relatively unexplored
              interactions can be used as a tool to probe the behavior of confined
              interacting electron systems. The resistance and electronic noise will be
              measured as a function of a number of sample and environmental parameters, such
              as sample length, inter-wire separation, energy, temperature, applied magnetic
              field, etc.  The behavior of electron systems in one dimension is an important
              issue in condensed matter physics.  As the dimensions of technological interest
              become smaller, it becomes more important to understand such systems.  This
              research is expected to lead to a better understanding of such small systems.
              This project involves the training of graduate student researchers in
              nanoscience and nanotechnology as well as the participation of undergraduate
              students in the research.  It brings together researchers, educators, and
              students, leading to an integration of research, learning, and training.  In
              addition, a strong commitment to educational outreach K-16 and teacher programs
              is integrated into the research agenda. 

