Title       : CAREER: Improving the Performance of Quantum-dot Cellular Automata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0244269

Award Number: 0244269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 16,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314829             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Lusth lusth@csce.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Quantum-dot cellular automata (QCA) are a method of computing via quantum
              effects. QCA are arrays of quantum-dot cells with each cell containing a
              regular arrangement of quantum dots and a limited number of electrons. The
              electrons are allowed to tunnel between dots. The particular arrangement of
              cells reflects the computational problem, while the lowest energy distribution
              of electrons reflects the computational result. QCA have garnered much
              attention because they seem to be physically realizable with slight
              improvements in current fabrication techniques. Advantages include faster
              computation, denser circuits, and extremely low power consumption.
In a QCA
              circuit composed of primitive QCA logic devices, the state of downstream
              devices can adversely affect the state of upstream devices. A partial solution
              stems from redesigning the primitive elements. One aspect of this work is to
              quantify the cost of redesigned elements, to devise more cost-effective
              solutions, and to determine the risks of using uncorrected devices. The second
              aspect involves designing QCA for higher operational temperatures via
              architectural changes. The third aspect concerns investigation of QCA-like
              devices with smoother energy spaces for eliminating meta-stable states.
The
              education plan includes the development of a new CS/EE graduate course,
              entitled New Architectures for Computing. The course will feature theory and
              practice concerning QCA, pure quantum computing, DNA computing, and other novel
              architectures. The theory portion will include modules stemming from portions
              of the research plan. Students will chose a topic, perform a small but
              significant amount of original research, and submit a paper to an appropriate
              venue.

