Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates Site in Molecular Biology and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0244087

Award Number: 0244087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves V. Brun   (Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam E. Zolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the last 3 years, with funding from NSF, the members of the our Program have
              introduced 30 undergraduate students, mostly from small colleges, to the
              fascinating world of scientific research by allowing them to participate in
              research at the frontiers of molecular biology and genetics.  We are able to
              continue this successful Undergraduate Research Program to benefit students
              mainly from groups traditionally under-represented in research and students
              from regional undergraduate institutions.  Ten students will conduct research
              in laboratories that use molecular biology and genetic techniques to study
              problems including the regulation of gene expression, the mechanisms of cell
              differentiation and development, host-parasite interaction and disease
              resistance in plants, gene evolution, signal transduction, DNA repair, and
              virus infection and replication.  This program is designed to develop both the
              technical and the intellectual abilities of the participants.  Our philosophy
              is that one learns how to do research by doing it but that this only occurs
              under the appropriate guidance.  We will emphasize the "doing it" aspect of
              research by involving the students in a research project under close
              supervision.  Students will learn about the different stages and aspects of
              scientific investigation by interaction with their mentors and in sessions on
              scientific writing and research ethics.  Students will also be exposed to the
              research conducted in the other host laboratories during weekly lunchtime
              seminars given by faculty mentors.
