Title       : US-India Planning Visit: Data Gaps and Needs for Assessing Productivity, N2
               Fixation, and Elemental Cycling in the Indian Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0244805

Award Number: 0244805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret R. Mulholland   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Donat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0244805
Mulholland 

This award supports a planning visit for US PI Margaret
              Mulholland, and co-PIs Donat and Edwards from Old Dominion University (ODU) to
              meet with counterparts at the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Goa,
              India to finalize a collaboration on nitrogen (N2) fixation and nitrogen (N)
              cycling in the Indian Ocean.  They will identify data gaps, evaluate existing
              data, and ascertain future research needs on this important topic.  In spite of
              the substantial marine resources in coastal areas, this topic is not well
              understood due to the lack investigations at coastal tropical sites.  The
              nearshore waters along the west coast of India are an ideal natural laboratory
              for studying marine nitrogen fixation and cycling.  Both the abundance of
              Trichodesmium blooms and the proximity to the National Institute of
              Oceanography, India's premier oceanographic research institute, make feasible
              the proposed process-oriented studies that are required for fully understanding
              marine nitrogen fixation and cycling by Trichodesmium. 

The US team will
              establish collaborations with NIO investigators, leverage institutional
              support, access a superb laboratory facility, and establish guidelines for
              future research efforts and data exchange.   Additionally, they will explore
              the logistics for a cooperative educational program at ODU and NIO with courses
              team taught by the binational investigator team.  This will be a unique
              opportunity to train the next generation of scientists at both institutions to
              work in interdisciplinary/ intercultural environments.  This award is jointly
              supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
              Division of Ocean Sciences.      


