Title       : Intense Energy, Vorticity, and Strain Focusing in Nonlinear Fluid Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0244581

Award Number: 0244581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Lathrop dpl@complex.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research explores extreme events in three nonlinear fluid flows:
              Turbulence, the pinch-off of pendant drops, and braking surface waves. 
              Precision experiments examine each of these nonlinear systems to characterize
              and predict the occurrence of locally intense events which focus vorticity,
              dissipation, or energy in each system.  The goal of this project is to
              characterize the causal mechanisms for these events and to use that knowledge
              to benchmark simulations and stimulate applied mathematical advances.  The
              fundamental research should impact our ability to predict and numerically
              simulate strongly nonlinear fluid flow.  In addition, the work has technical
              applications in the fields of mechanical engineering, geophysics, and applied
              mathematics.  The mentoring and training of young scientists plays an important
              role in the research.  Graduate and undergraduate students are involved in
              every aspect of this exciting research.

This research explores unusually
              strong disturbances that occur in fluid flows: Examples include turbulence and
              braking waves.  Precision measurements will be used to predict the occurrence
              of locally intense events in such as rapid fluid rotation, or vortex formation,
              and large local occurrences of heating or energy dissipation.  The goal is to
              build predictive models for these events and to use that knowledge to test
              computer simulations and to promote mathematical advances in these difficult
              problems.  This research can be applied to the fields of mechanical
              engineering, geophysics, and applied mathematics.  The mentoring and training
              of young scientists plays an important role in the proposed research.  Graduate
              and undergraduate students will be involved in every aspect of this exciting
              research, which prepares them for careers in industry, government, or
              academia.

