Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences in Physiology, Cell and Molecular Biology of
               Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0244007

Award Number: 0244007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis E. Burnett burnettl@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen G. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Fort Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program is a ten-week program
              combining formal classroom work with independent research in areas of crucial
              concern for marine biologists today.  The program is designed to provide
              undergraduate students with a modern research experience employing
              physiological, cellular and molecular techniques to address questions in areas
              such as species diversity, mechanisms of adaptation to environmental change,
              environmental bioindicators and microbial ecology.  The College of Charleston
              serves as primary host institution for the program, but research mentors and
              course instructors are drawn from among more than 100 Ph.D. scientists whose
              primary appointments lie in the Medical University of South Carolina, the
              National Institute of Standards and Technology, the National Ocean Service and
              the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources.  Working side-by-side with
              graduate students, technicians, and mentors at Fort Johnson, South Carolina,
              student participants are exposed to a broad range of career opportunities in
              science, making them better prepared to enter the workforce in industry and
              government.  In addition to providing students with an opportunity to conduct
              independent studies guided by a faculty mentor, the objectives of the program
              are (1) to engage students directly in discussing graduate school and career
              options in basic and applied sciences, (2) to show students the
              interdisciplinary nature of science and (3) to teach students to think
              critically.

Undergraduate students are selected to participate in this
              program based on outstanding academic and personal achievement, evidence of
              advanced course work in physiology and cell or molecular biology and on the
              potential benefits of this research experience to the student.  Recruitment
              efforts cast a broad net, with particular emphasis on attracting women and
              minority students.  Participants are required to live on-site in dormitories at
              the Grice Marine Laboratory.  For the first four weeks of the program, students
              participate in a seminar course entitled "Special Topics in the Physiology,
              Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine Organisms."  NSF covers the costs of
              registration and tuition, and students who successfully complete the course
              receive three transferable college credits through the College of Charleston. 
              Also, during the first four weeks, participants begin to work on independent
              research projects under the guidance of individual faculty mentors.  Projects
              are selected for their interdisciplinary and inter-institutional nature, and
              their relationship to current biological, biomedical or environmental concerns.
               During the last six weeks of the summer, participants focus primarily on
              completing their research projects while learning skills for analyzing data and
              communicating the results of their work in oral and written presentations.  The
              program also provides a structured format for discussing issues related to
              graduate school and pursuit of a career in the sciences.  The program takes
              pride in maintaining particularly strong ties with former REU participants in
              order to evaluate the impact of the research experience on career choices. 
              Up-do-date information regarding the program, participants in prior years and
              their research projects, as well as an application form are available on the
              Web at www.cofc.edu/~grice/summer.htm or by contacting the Program Director,
              Dr. Louis E. Burnett, at (843) 953-9200 or burnettl@cofc.edu.

The Fort
              Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program provides a strong and unique
              undergraduate research experience that is generated from the direct involvement
              of scientists from five institutions using interdisciplinary approaches to
              address problems of mutual concern.  Student participants are exposed to the
              most recent and exciting questions and to the latest methodologies in marine
              biology.  Although primarily designed to encourage talented students to pursue
              careers in science, the program has broader impacts as well.  Participants
              learn to think critically, to take interdisciplinary approaches to problems and
              to communicate their ideas to others.  These are skills that benefit all
              citizens in a world that is made ever smaller and more complex by science and
              technology.

