Title       : Groups and Representations Conference; March 25-27, 2004; Eugene, OR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0244651

Award Number: 0244651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2004    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Kleshchev klesh@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Alexander Kleshchev
Proposal Number: DMS-
              0244651
Institution: University of Oregon, Eugene
Title: Groups and
              Representations conference
					
Abstract:

The subject of this meeting
              will be recent developments in the structure theory of simple algebraic and
              finite groups, their representation theory, and the interplay between these
              theories. The meeting will cover three main, inter-related areas. The first is
              the representation theory of simple algebraic groups in defining
              characteristic. There is no known character formula for the irreducible
              modules, but some years ago, Lusztig
proposed a conjectural formula, which has
              become the main focus of attention. While Lusztig's conjecture remains far from
              proved, attempts to prove it have led to spectacular progress in the area in
              recent years. The second area is modular representation theory in non-defining
              characteristic. Here one considers the finite groups of Lie type over a field
              of characteristic p, and studies representations over fields of characteristic
              different from p. One should also include in this area the representation
              theory of Coxeter groups (such as the symmetric groups), which is intimately
              related to that of groups of Lie type. Again there have been spectacular
              developments in recent years. Fundamental conjectures have been formulated by
              Alperin, Dade and Broue, and while these are again nowhere near proved, many
              special cases have been solved, leading to a much deeper general understanding
              of this field. The third area is the structure theory of simple algebraic and
              finite groups, particularly the subgroup structure, and its relationship with
              the representation theory discussed above. Powerful parallel theories for
              subgroups of both the finite and the algebraic simple groups have been
              developed, using representation theory as one of the main tools, via the
              actions of classical groups on their natural modules, and of exceptional groups
              on their adjoint modules.

The symmetry of any system, physical or
              mathematical, abstract or concrete, is encapsulated in its symmetry group.
              Thus, the theory of groups finds many applications, both in mathematics and in
              the physical sciences. Much of group theory is concerned with the study of the
              actions of groups on spaces of various kinds. The study of group actions on
              vector spaces is known as representation theory, and that of group actions on
              sets as permutation group theory, and the focus for this meeting will be on
              these two areas and their applications. The building blocks of all finite
              groups are the so-called simple groups, and most of these arise in a natural
              way from simple algebraic groups (such as SL(n,K), the group of n x n
              determinant 1 matrices over an algebraically closed field K). Consequently,
              most attention is devoted to the representation and permutation group theory of
              these simple groups. These areas are alive with basic conjectures, such as
              those of Lusztig, Alperin, Broue and Dade. While these are all far from proved,
              attempts to prove them have led to spectacular progress in the subject in
              recent years. The meeting will focus on this progress and its applications.
              There is a healthy number of graduate students working in these areas, and one
              of the goals is to stimulate interaction between graduate students, young
              researchers and some of the established leaders in the field.

