Title       : The Carleton College Summer Mathematics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0244538

Award Number: 0244538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426236             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deanna B. Haunsperger dhaunspe@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics faculty from Carleton College will continue their intensive
              four-week summer mathematics program for eighteen talented undergraduate women
              in each of the next three summers.  The program will be staffed by
              mathematicians who are active professionals and outstanding teachers.  The
              students will immerse themselves in mathematics, living and working in a
              supportive community of women scholars (undergraduates, graduates, and
              post-graduates) who are passionate about learning and doing mathematics.  The
              program's intent is to excite these young women about mathematics and
              mathematical careers, to provide them with the tools they will need to succeed
              in a mathematical career, to plug them into a network of fellow female
              mathematicians, and to propel them on to advanced degrees in mathematics.  The
              impact and success of previous Summer Mathematics Programs (formerly known as
              the Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges' Summer Mathematics Program), is measured
              both by the fact that 80% of  the graduates have gone on to advanced degrees or
              careers in mathematics (65% have gone on to graduate school), as well as by the
              participants' post-program evaluations.   

The Program:  Students will
              attend two courses which meet on weekday mornings and are led by female
              instructors and teaching assistants.  In each of the classes, the students will
              be introduced to fields of mathematics beyond calculus that students usually do
              not have the opportunity to study in a standard undergraduate mathematics
              program.  Topics for these courses in the past have included algebraic coding
              theory, graph theory, low-dimensional dynamical systems, and functional
              analysis.  Through these courses, and the homework assigned in them, the
              students will have the opportunity to improve their skills in conjecture and
              proof and written and oral presentation.  Students will not receive course
              credit for, or grades in, these courses.  Each student will receive, at the
              close of the program, written evaluations of her performance and
              accomplishments from her instructors.

Other Activities:  Recreational
              problem solving will be offered each week for those students who want to work
              on solving interesting problems.  Use of the computer for communication and
              computation will be a daily routine during the program.  Each Tuesday afternoon
              there will be a discussion on a topic pertaining to the students' continued
              scholarship:  succeeding as a math major, career options, choosing and
              surviving a graduate program, and being a woman scientist.  Each Tuesday and
              Thursday there will be a colloquium on a stimulating area of mathematics. 
              

The Colleges:  Carleton's $6.5 million Center for Mathematics and Computing
              and her faculty which are recognized for their professional activities and
              commitment to undergraduate education are among the attributes that make
              Northfield an attractive location for this summer program.

