Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0244991

Award Number: 0244991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Jerison jerison@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christina I. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Stroock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: David S. Jerison, MIT
DMS-0244991 

ABSTRACT:

The main goal of this
              project is to understand smoothness (or nonsmoothness) and other quantitative
              properties of level surfaces of solutions to nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
              partial differential equations.  The PI's will consider semilinear equations
              that model flame fronts, free boundary problems that are the singular limits of
              semilinear equations, and other models mentioned in the next paragraph.  The
              regularity for two-dimensional free boundaries in three-space was only recently
              established.  The PI's propose to show that such regularity results extend to a
              broad class of equations in three space dimensions, including as many
              physically motivated examples as possible.  In view of the strong analogy
              between the existence and regularity for free boundaries and the corresponding
              questions about minimal surfaces, it is suspected that regularity will break
              down in higher dimensions, where one expects to find singular energy-minimizing
              solutions, analogous to the celebrated examples of the Simons cone and of
              counterexamples to the Bernstein problem. Finally, the PI's will examine global
              behavior of level sets. For example, consider a Neumann eigenfunction
              corresponding to the smallest, nonzero eigenvalue in a convex planar domain. 
              J. Rauch conjectures that all its level curves touch the boundary.

This
              project focuses on problems in nonlinear differential equations in which the
              boundary is unknown and has to be determined: a so-called free boundary.  The
              classical Stefan problem of melting ice is an example.  In the Stefan problem,
              the question of interest is the location, as a function of time, of the
              interface (``free boundary'') between water and ice. The particular problems to
              which the methods of the present proposal apply also include flame fronts, the
              interface between oil and water in a flow and the profile of the wake of a
              boat. The PI's treat both equilibrium and evolution problems.  Recently PI
              Jerison established that certain equilibrium problems in three dimensions have
              well-behaved solutions, where previously only the two-dimensional case was
              understood.  Because three is the dimension of physical space, this discovery
              opens the door to other physically meaningful mathematical models, such as
              models of compressible fluids and capillarity.  Another kind of free boundary
              problem, one which is not at all physical in origin but to which mathematical
              free boundary theory applies, is the sort that arises in decision theory (PI
              Stroock).  For example, one wants to know when continuing a medical trial is
              likely to cause more harm than good.  Similarly, in a financial context, one
              wants to know when interest rates and stock prices indicate that it would be
              wise to buy or sell a stock option. Such questions arise when one is trying to
              price an American option, that is, an option that can be exercised at any time
              before it expires instead of at a fixed time.


