Title       : Synthesis of Polymer Encapsulated Nano-clay Hybrid via Miniemulsion
               Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0244371

Award Number: 0244371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yulin Deng yulin.deng@ipst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Paper Sci & Tech
	      500 10th Street NW
	      Atlanta, GA  303185794    404/853-9508

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

Polymer-nanoinorganic hybrids are new paper-coating materials that
              could potentially improve the coating smoothness, gloss, printing quality, and
              scratch properties of coated papers.  The basic idea is to combine the
              properties of an inorganic nanoparticle with those of the polymer system in an
              advantageous way, e.g., merging the thermal stability, the mechanical strength,
              or light scattering power of the inorganic nanoparticle with the elasticity and
              the ability of the polymer to form films.

Most polymer-nanoinorganic hybrids
              are available only in bulk form and there are few water-based nanohybrid
              suspensions available.  Water-based suspensions are desirable for environmental
              reasons as well as being required for most paper-coating and some painting
              applications.  The focus of this research is to develop both fundamental
              understanding of the synthesis of water-based and polymer encapsulated
              nanohybrid suspensions, and the technological development of using the
              methodology for paper coating.  Both emulsion and miniemulsion polymerization
              techniques will be tested for polymer encapsulated nanohybrid synthesis. 
              Within these suspension particles, the nanoclay is exfoliated by the polymer
              matrix.  The fundamental understanding of the nanoparticle encapsulation,
              exfoliation, and the physical properties of the final nanohybrids can also be
              used to guide other encapsulation reactions such as ink, toner,
              etc.

Impact:

The PI has an educational plan to establish a program that
              is capable of providing outreach activities to local communities and colleges
              in the Atlanta area.  In addition, developing this environmentally benign
              technology could be of great benefit to the pulp and paper industry.

