Title       : Reverse Mode Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystal Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9161281

Award Number: 9161281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49504              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bao-Gang G. Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytronix Inc
	      805 Alpha Drive
	      Richardson, TX  750812850    214/238-7045

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The proposed work centers on the development of reverse                   
              mode polymer dispersed liquid crystal materials.  These                        
              materials, which will be fabricated either as films or as                      
              encapsulated droplets, are radically different from other liquid               
              crystal devices, including normal mode polymer dispersed systems.              
              The important distinction of reverse mode materials is that they               
              represent an optically transmissive state in the absence of                    
              applied fields and are converted to an opaque light scattering                 
              state when a field is applied.  Their field-off/field-on behavior              
              is exactly opposite to that normally associated with optical                   
              properties of liquid crystal materials, thus giving rise to the                
              reverse mode designation.                                                      
                   There are numerous major and unique commercial opportunities              
              for these reverse mode polymer dispersed liquid crystal                        
              materials.  They include architectural use as "smart windows" for              
              energy savings in commercial and residential buildings; privacy                
              windows in automobiles; and as a new approach to heads-up display              
              technology.  The unique feature of reverse mode materials with                 
              respect to these applications, as contrasted with other liquid                 
              crystal light shutters, centers on the fail-safe aspect in that                
              they are transparent in the absence of an applied field.  Thus,                
              unscheduled power outages will not create hazardous situations.                
              The economic factors in commercialization would be most favorable              
              in that these reverse mode materials are relatively inexpensive                
              to produce.                                                                    
                   The focus of the phase I experimental effort is to improve                
              the overall optical properties of reverse mode polymer dispersed               
              liquid crystal materials.  In particular, systematic studies will              
              be conducted to optimize the percent transmission of these                     
              materials in the transparent field-off state through modification              
              of the shapes and sizes of the liquid crystal microdroplets.
