Title       : KDI: Computational Models and Coordinated Neuroimaging of Learning and Cognitive
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a9873465

Award Number: 9873465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Schneider wws+@imap.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie A. Fiez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research advances the mapping of human brain function and the development
              of computational models of brain structures involved in human cognition. Brain
              imaging, utilizing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), allows task
              and process related tracking of brain activity. Cognitive modeling allows the
              prediction of human behavior in complex intellectual tasks. This project will
              bring together researchers who represent distinct and successful cognitive
              modeling architectures with researchers who are at the forefront of fMRI
              imaging, in an effort to relate cognitive function to human cortical
              dynamics.

A set of complex tasks will be identified which involve various
              aspects of learning, problem solving, and language, and for which models exist
              in one or more architectures. Brain imaging studies will be conducted with
              people performing all of these tasks. The complex tasks will include: rule
              learning, strategy learning, memory retrieval, problem solving, and language
              processing. To provide further constraints, the same people will also be imaged
              as they perform simpler "pure function" tasks. Models will be developed in the
              various cognitive architectures that address both the brain imaging data and
              the behavioral data from these tasks.

The mapping and computational
              understanding of human brain function can have  important implications for
              education, artificial intelligence, and treatment of mental disorders.
              Understanding the brain structures involved in higher level cognition and how
              they interact will provide a better foundation for optimizing human performance
              and duplicating those functions in computers. An understanding of the neural
              basis of complex cognition has the potential for making brain research enhance
              education in the critical areas of skill acquisition and learning. It will also
              assist in the diagnosis and correction of brain dysfunction such as dyslexia
              and learning disabilities.

