Title       : Phonon Heat Transport and Mechanical Oscillations in Mesoscopic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9873573

Award Number: 9873573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Cross mcc@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9873573
Cross
This award supports theoretical research and education that aims
              to investigate the transport of heat by phonons and mechanical oscillations in
              fabricated structures of GaAs and silicon on the 10-100 nm length scale. 
              Recent advances in microfabrication techniques have allowed the construction of
              suspended, free-standing structures of insulating or doped GaAs or silicon. 
              Portions of these structures are isolated from the substrate so that the only
              thermal pathway to the environment is through the suspension "beams."  These
              beams are defined lithographically, so they can be designed to allow
              measurements of thermal transport at the mesoscopic scale.  Thermal pathways of
              rectangular cross-section 200 X 300 nm and length 5m have already been
              constructed, and much smaller widths seem feasible.  The mechanical
              oscillations of these structures can also be studied experimentally.  These
              advances promise the first systematic investigation of heat transport by
              phonons in mesoscopic systems, and further development in the study of
              mechanical oscillations in mesoscopic systems which is poorly understood.  The
              PI proposes a theoretical attack on these problems.  The PI plans to extend
              their recent work based on the Landuaer-Buttiker formalism.  Realistic models
              of phonons that will allow the quantitative prediction of thermal transport
              will be used and the effects of scattering by geometry, surface roughness, and
              material disorder will be included.  Electron-phonon interaction effects, which
              can also be studied in experimental geometries, will be investigated.  At low
              temperatures, the modes containing the thermal energy become the mechanical
              oscillation modes of the suspended structures, so that studies of heat
              transport and dissipation in mechanical oscillators becomes closely related. 
              Thus it is possible to extend the theoretical investigation to mesoscopic
              oscillators, and in particular the Q of such oscillators.
%%%
This award
              supports research and education in an area that is both fundamental science and
              related to MEMS (microelectromechanical systems).  The PI will use state of the
              art techniques to study vibrations and oscillations and the flow of heat in
              mechanical systems fabricated from silicon and other materials on micron and
              sub-micron length scales.
***


