Title       : KDI: Learning, Adaptation and Layered Intelligent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9873451

Award Number: 9873451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjoy K. Mitter mitter@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Berwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Tsitsiklis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873451
Mitter
Our approach to building intelligent systems is based on the
              theoretical ideas of Bayesian statistical signal analysis and control-theoretic
              motion guidance. These theories have achieved major successes in many widely
              used systems. However, it has remained a challenge to create systems that
              integrate the analysis of low-level concrete sensor data and motor control with
              the use of high-level, more abstract representations of perception and action.
              The investigators on our team propose to attack this central issue with a
              variety of approaches. We believe that a very promising tool is the systematic
              study of hierarchical compositional data structures, in which larger scale more
              abstract objects are built up in stages from small-scale concrete objects. This
              compositional approach applies to making decisions as well as to perception:
              subtasks may be composed into larger tasks and reasoned with as units. Doing
              reasoning in such hybrid systems, it is essential that ambiguity and multiple
              alternatives be maintained as long as possible. For example, this means not
              choosing between inconsistent high-level interpretations of a signal until
              larger scale context is available; or replacing a local 'greedy algorithm'
              decision by a dynamic programming-style list of optimal conditional decisions.
              We discuss the role of learning in such hierarchical layered systems.
              Understanding, the interaction between information and control in such layered
              systems is a critical research issue

We plan to concentrate our research on
              the following aspects of layered intelligent systems:
(i) the role of the
              compositional and hierarchical approach in language and speech recognition;
              (ii) hierarchical decision making in layered systems; (iii) learning of
              hierarchical concepts; and (iv) interaction information and control in
              distributed systems. We emphasize that these topics are highly inter-related. 
              
*** 

