Title       : KDI: Universal Information Access: Translingual Retrieval, Summarization,
               Tracking, Detection and Validation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a9873009

Award Number: 9873009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1981973            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yiming Yang yiming@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Nyberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Lafferty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jaime G. Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1337,1338,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a three-year standard award.  The ultimate goal of the Universal
              Information Access project is the full democratization of information and
              knowledge access, by removing -- or greatly lowering -- educational, linguistic
              and socio-economic barriers to effective information access and use.  Progress
              towards this goal requires us to address the following challenges: (1)
              Translingual information retrieval, in order to access documents across
              language barriers, and across same-language jargon barriers, (2) Multi-level
              summarization, customized to the user's profile and information needs, (3)
              Automated hierarchical categorization, via high-dimensionality statistical
              learning methods, (4) Detection and tracking, of new topics and events of
              interest to each user as they unfold, and (5) Information validation as a
              function of source reliability and inter-source consistency.  These
              capabilities will be integrated seamlessly into an information navigator's
              workstation, using a common underlying object model and a user-centric
              interface for visualization and management of information.  These methods will
              be evaluated both with respect to quantitative metrics and with respect to user
              feedback from realistic tasks.  Universal information access requires more than
              search engines and web browsing. For instance, much useful information may
              exist in languages other than English, or may come from sources of unknown
              reliability. Moreover, rapid analysis of information requires customized
              summarization, anti-redundancy filters, and hierarchical organization. 
              Advances in these areas are beneficial to all disciplines which must cope with
              large volumes of rapidly growing information, such as scientific research,
              crisis management, international business, and improving our educational
              infrastructure.  The proposed research, in addition to its clear impact on
              democratizing information access, should provide significant advances in:
              Information Retrieval, Machine Learning, Digital Libraries, and user-centered
              Information Management.


