Title       : KDI: The Role of Experience in Language Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9873450

Award Number: 9873450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Dell gdell@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Garnsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia L. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Kathryn Bock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The ability to speak and understand language is probably the most intricate
              skill that people possess.  It is certainly our most uniquely human ability. 
              This project investigates how such an important skill is acquired and continues
              to develop throughout our lives.  The resulting research findings will have
              applications in three areas: (1) the design of computer systems that can
              recognize and produce language, (2) the teaching of language skills, including
              reading, writing, and foreign language learning, and (3) the remediation of
              language disorders such as aphasia and dyslexia. 

     The skills of
              language production and comprehension together comprise the language processing
              system, a complex system within the brain that turns thoughts into grammatical
              sequences of words and then articulates those words, and also understands the
              speech of others.  The central claim of this project is that the language
              processing system is constantly changing.  It adapts quickly to recent
              experience, while continuing to reflect the accumulated experience of a
              lifetime of speaking, listening, reading, and writing.  Such adaptation, or
              learning, which usually occurs without any awareness, enables us to speak and
              comprehend effortlessly in the face of ever-changing situations. This
              perspective leads to two key research questions: (1) What learning mechanisms
              enable the language processing system to adapt swiftly and effectively to
              experience? (2) How can the study of learning tell us more about how the
              language processing system works?

     The current project addresses these
              questions by investigating the comprehension and production of individual words
              as well as words combined into sentences. The research is multi-disciplinary,
              integrating the work of psychologists, linguists, and computer scientists.  It
              involves experiments that measure how the abilities to speak and understand
              change with experience.  For example, one set of experiments will determine how
              quickly children and adults can recognize a spoken word, as a function of how
              recently they have heard or said the same word before.  More generally, the
              project's experiments involve measurement of the time it takes people to say or
              to recognize words, the kinds of errors that commonly occur during speech, and
              the patterns of eye movements and brain electrical activity that accompany word
              and sentence comprehension.  The research is carried out on normal adults and
              children, and also on individuals with brain damage affecting their abilities
              to learn skills.  The experimental work is combined with the development of
              computer models of the language processor that are capable of learning.  These
              models, some of which will consist of artificial neural networks, will serve
              two functions.  First, the models will instantiate theories of how people
              process language, and second, the models will offer insights into how machines
              can be designed to interact with people through language and speech.

