Title       : The Implementation and Dissemination of an Integrated Curriculum for Science and
               Mathematics at the Interface of Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9873667

Award Number: 9873667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Gentile gentile@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet L. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Cronkite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873667
Gentile

Hope College has been selected as one of ten recipients of
              the National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  The Division of Natural Science at Hope has been recognized by
              Project Kaleidoscope as a "Program that Works" and as a model for other
              institutions.  The mission of the science and mathematics program at Hope
              mirrors that of the entire College to provide an innovative curriculum, which
              intertwines student learning and faculty development.  The institution has
              intentionally structured a curriculum in which students can extend the
              boundaries of departments to study at the interfaces of scientific disciplines
              and also expand the study of science and mathematics to the social sciences,
              humanities and the arts. 

 The College's efforts to integrate research and
              education were designed to revise the entire curriculum in the Division of
              Natural Sciences and to establish collaborations between science faculty and
              other faculty such that course are qualitatively enriched and infused with an
              investigative mode of teaching that enhances student learning.  

Hope
              College is being awarded  $500,000 to advance institutional goals of
              integrating research and education, document and disseminate information of its
              exemplary activities, and expand the integration of research and education by
              conducting outreach activities over the coming three years.  To complement
              effective faculty and student learning and scholarly activities, the College
              will establish a Visiting Scholars Program.  The goal of the program is to
              model integration of research and education at the undergraduate level for
              faculty who have had limited opportunities to work in an environment where this
              integration occurs.  As a result faculty and programs will benefit from the
              insights gained from visiting scientists, thus creating long term
              collaborations between individuals and institutions.


