Title       : RUI: Mate-Sampling Behavior of Female Treefrogs (Hyla gratiosa): An Experimental
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a9873669

Award Number: 9873669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher G. Murphy murphycg@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal Number: 
              9873669
PI:  Murphy, Christopher G.
Title:  RUI:  Mate-Sampling Behavior of
              Female Treefrogs (Hyla gratiosa):  An Experimental Approach

Despite
              considerable interest in this field, we know relatively little about
              mate-sampling behaviors, i.e., how individuals gather information about
              potential partners.  The proposed study will examine the mate-sampling behavior
              of female treefrogs.  Previous results suggest that females listen to only a
              subset of the males in a chorus and that females incorporate into their
              decisions both the distance to the caller, and the call characteristics
              themselves.   The proposed research will test this hypothesis and likely
              alternatives, using artificial choruses of eight speakers.  These speakers will
              be arranged in an array that mimics the spatial distribution of males in
              natural choruses.  The experimental approach of this research will allow a
              conclusive determination of the mate-sampling behavior of females, and
              elucidate how many males a female listens to and the effect of distance on
              partner choice.

This research is novel in that it incorporates environmental
              variables (the distance from the caller) as well as the attributes of the
              caller (his song) in the examination of how females choose mates.  The results
              of this approach will be broadly applicable to the theories regarding mate
              choice in a wide array of species.  Undergraduate students will be closely
              involved in this research.  They will have the opportunity to be involved in
              all aspects of the scientific endeavor. This will increase the likelihood that
              these students will choose to continue working in the biological sciences. 

