Title       : Biotic Interactions of Grassland Plants: Above- and Belowground Linkages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9873654

Award Number: 9873654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219950             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett dchart@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail W. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy C. Todd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hartnett

DEB 9873654

Symbioses between plants and mycorrhizal fungi are
              wide-spread, ecologically important phenomena that are poorly understood. 
              These mutualistic relationships can affect the partners in a variety of ways
              particularly influencing herbivory on the plant hosts.  In grassland ecosystems
              where these relationships are ubiquitous, their influence on herbivory may
              operate by affecting plant tolerance of herbivory rather than simply providing
              defense against it.  This project will integrate considerations of herbivory,
              plant tolerace and mycorrhizal symbiosis in evaluating ineractions between
              herbivores, fungi and host plants.  It tests the general hypotheses that the
              cost/benefit balance of plant/fungal symbioses are altered by the amount of
              herbivory in a habitat and that mycorrhizal fungi influence the tolerance and
              defenses of host plants of herbivores.  It will test these hypotheses in a
              series of tallgrass prairie mesocosm and field experiments that are being
              conducted at the Konza Prairie Research Natural Area to examine the general
              influence of three different potentially limiting resources, light, N and P. 
              This work wil further the understanding of the roles and interactions of
              hervivores, fungal mutualists, and host plants which accomplish important
              biotic interactions in grassland ecosystems.  It will increase the
              understanding of plant-fungal mutualism, particularly by evaluating the
              constraints of a third party, a herbivore, on the stability of the symbioses.

