Title       : KDI: Teachable Agents: Computer Environments for Supporting High Achievement in
               Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2000   
File        : a9873520

Award Number: 9873520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Bransford john.bransford@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Biswas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873520
Bransford

This project combines insights from recent work in
              computer science, psychology and education to create and study "teachable
              agent" (TA) environments in mathematics and science that are motivating to
              students, intuitive to teachers and parents, and lead to high degrees of
              student learning. The hallmark of these environments is that students learn by
              instructing "teachable agents" who then venture forth in simulation-based
              exploratory environments and attempt to solve problems that require knowledge
              relevant to the disciplines of mathematics or science. If the agents have been
              taught properly they solve the problems; otherwise they need to be educated
              further. The simulation-based environments are carefully designed to focus
              attention on important concepts in science and mathematics, and to make
              explicit the errors that occur during problem solving. Students "scout" the
              problem solving requirements of various environments before attempting to teach
              their agents.  Additional help and coaching agents are available to point
              students in the right direction when they make errors or produce sub-optimal
              solutions. The focus of the TA environments is on learning standards-based
              content in science and mathematics, not on learning to program.

One key
              issue to be studied is how student learning is affected by opportunities to
              teach agents to prepare for particular sets of challenges. Also to be studied
              is how learning is influenced by the design of systems that vary in the degree
              to which they let students (a) "scout" to find problems that arise in the
              agents' environments; (b) teach the agents with different representations and
              techniques; (c) measure the successfulness of their teaching by placing their
              agents in mini-assessment environments prior to engaging them in full-blown
              "challenge environments"; (d) receive different degrees and forms of feedback
              when their agents encounter difficulties; and (e) educate the personality, as
              well as the knowledge variables, relevant to learning, problem solving and
              collaboration.

The project requires contributions from, and has important
              implications for, at least three disciplines: computer science, psychology, and
              education. The project has the potential to create new forms of assessment, and
              to transform popular video technologies into environments that help students
              learn important content. The quality and impact of the project will be enhanced
              through its association with the NSF-funded Center for Innovative Learning
              Technologies (CILT), whose mission is to foster collaboration among members of
              the education and technology community.

