Title       : From Natural to Social Sciences: Expanding Opportunities for the Integration of
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9873771

Award Number: 9873771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy H. Kolodny NKolodny@Wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873771
Kolodny

Wellesley College has been selected as one of ten recipients
              of the National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  The College's approach to the integration of research and education
              is established in an environment where young women can thrive in science, and
              is multifaceted, based on research.  Wellesley has developed a comprehensive
              program that promotes a variety of systematic experiences to engage students in
              discovery and communication of knowledge from the very beginning of their
              college careers to their most advanced independent research projects.  Their
              approach incorporates curricular revision and strong student/faculty research
              collaborations. The recently established quantitative reasoning requirement
              helps ensure that students have the skills to begin their study of science and
              to master advanced level courses.  A mandatory writing course in the first year
              and an emphasis throughout the curriculum on oral and written presentation
              skills link effective communications and course work. 

Wellesley College is
              being awarded  $500,000 to advance institutional goals of integrating research
              and education, document and disseminate information of its exemplary
              activities, and expand the integration of research and education by conducting
              outreach activities over the coming three years.  With the success achieved in
              the natural sciences, the institution plans to and is well positioned to expand
              the paradigm of discovery-based learning more broadly to the social sciences. 
              By augmenting successful programs and stimulating further innovations in the
              teaching of the natural and social sciences, Wellesley will continue to attract
              talented women already interested in embarking upon an array of science related
              careers.  In addition, by enhancing gateway skills and making connections
              across disciplines, the College will establish a more expansive and diverse
              student/faculty research community, a true investment in human institutional
              potential.


