Title       : KDI: Multiscale Modeling of Defects in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9873214

Award Number: 9873214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony R. Ingraffea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1337,1339,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9873214
Sethna
The deformation and failure of solids - such as metals and
              metallic alloys used in a wide variety of engineering applications - involve
              the formation and evolution of complex defect structures on a hierarchy of
              length scales. For example, as an airplane wing is buffeted by turbulence
              during flight, complicated changes happen to the internal structure of the
              metal which can lead - in the absence of inspection and maintenance - to its
              failure.  How the atoms in the metal form defect lines (called dislocations),
              how the dislocations form into larger tangles and arrays, how the tangles form
              small gaps or voids, how the tangles and voids lead to the formation of
              microscopic cracks, and how these grow to break the wing: These form the topic
              of the proposed research under the NSF KDI initiative.  The multidisciplinary
              research team will exploit ever-increasing computing power to explicitly model
              the defect dynamics at each scale.  The team will exploit novel software
              techniques to link supercomputer simulations with visualization utilities and a
              suite of analysis tools.  The assembly of these tools will form the Digital
              Material: a virtual laboratory to explore and develop new and elegant theories
              and models of defect dynamics which combine insights from many disciplines, and
              to test and validate those models over a wide range of length scales.  The team
              will exploit emerging internet-based collaboration and control tools not only
              to expedite its own internal multidisciplinary collaborative research, but also
              to help lead and participate in collaborative efforts worldwide by developing
              and sharing open, general purpose, software components.
%%%
The ability to
              better understand and model materials will drive economic and technological
              advances in the next century, in fields including heavy industry,
              transportation, advanced materials design, and microelectronics.  In
              particular, the manner in which materials deform, deteriorate and ultimately
              fail is a decades-old problem which is the focus of this research project.  The
              investigators, with the support of the NSF KDI initiative, will use powerful
              computers, new theoretical ideas and methods, the World Wide Web and other
              emerging technologies to change the way that materials are modeled.  Combining
              new tools will enable the investigators to develop fundamental new insights,
              which are at once intellectually exciting and technologically important.
***

