Title       : KDI: Synergistic and Decentralized Decision Making in Complex Stochastic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9873339

Award Number: 9873339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1162000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Caramanis mcaraman@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis J. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos G. Cassandras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ioannis Paschalidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1339,9146,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873339
Caramanis

The project will use the manufacturing environment as a
              paradigm for modeling and studying problems in distributed and hierarchical
              control under uncertainty.  The primary objective of this project is to
              investigate and propose solutions to computational challenges that are the
              result of the proliferation of technologies which give rise to stochastic
              large-scale systems of unprecedented complexity. The second objective is to
              develop solutions and methodologies that not only meet the needs of the
              manufacturing supply chain coordination problem, but are general enough to be
              able to explore their impact on other areas of science and technology.

The
              manufacturing enterprise is one consisting of multiple, but highly
              interconnected, hierarchical layers.  The size, nonlinearity, and stochasticity
              of manufacturing systems renders effective, let alone optimal, centralized
              decision making intractable. The approach followed in the past has been to
              relate the system's state to a number of variables, e.g., randomness, decision
              vector, cost, and then solve for decoupled components in a decentralized
              decision framework.  This produces tractable, but inefficient, decision rules
              because of the assumptions made to allow solutions.

The goal of this
              research is to achieve systematic coordination of decentralized decision
              entities without compromising tractability of the problem.  The issues involved
              span methodologies ranging from Stochastic
Control and Large Deviations
              Theory, to Discrete Event Dynamic Analysis, Neuro-dynamic Programming, and
              Concurrent Simulation.

Since many of the techniques to be developed  involve
              optimization and stochastic systems, the relevance of the methodological
              research on economics and statistical physics will be also examined.

Strong
              ties with industry will allow deployment, implementation, and testing in an
              actual manufacturing environment to be included  as part of the dissemination
              and transfer plan for the research  approaches developed.


