Title       : Investigative Learning in the Laboratory, the Classroom and the Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9873794

Award Number: 9873794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Dye Nancy_Dye@qmgate.cc.oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873794
Dye

Oberlin College has been selected as one of ten recipients of
              the National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  Recognizing the need to actively involve students in their own
              learning, the College has interwoven and incorporated this ideal into the
              fabric of teaching science at the institution.  Having a strong record of
              supporting the integration of teaching and research, Oberlin is now prepared to
              extend institutionalized initiatives that integrate discovery-rich learning
              into all levels of the curriculum for majors and general audiences. Oberlin
              devotes considerable efforts to assessment, and has developed an assessment
              model that provides accountability at the level of institution, department and
              individual faculty members.  

The College has identified student outcome
              goals, which confirms the institution's mission to help students develop:
              proficiency in a discipline; the ability to formulate and present an argument
              through effective writing; the ability to formulate and present an argument
              through quantitative and analytical reasoning; the ability to integrate
              knowledge across disciplinary boundaries; and appreciate various
              interdisciplinary perspectives, and cultural, linguistic, gender, and ethnic
              perspectives.

Oberlin College is being awarded  $500,000 to advance
              institutional goals of integrating research and education, document and
              disseminate information of its exemplary activities, and expand the integration
              of research and education by conducting outreach activities over the coming
              three years.  To broaden its evaluation efforts and assist other institutions
              with integration of research and education activities, the College plans to
              establish a Committee for Integrating Research and Teaching (CIRT).  CIRT will
              unite two major components of Oberlin's educational mission, providing students
              with a rigorous academic foundation, as they develop community awareness and
              social responsibility. 


