Title       : Using Research to Foster Interdisciplinary Learning in Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9873774

Award Number: 9873774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Swartz swartz@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Voyles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873774
Swartz

Grinnell College has been selected as one of ten recipients
              of the National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  Grinnell has developed and employed successful mechanisms that
              foster curiosity to life long learning, and has built a community in which
              teachers and students define problems and seek solutions together.  The
              institution has implemented a strategy that provides administrative structures,
              curricular and faculty development support, and physical infrastructure to
              encourage academic community growth.

The College's efforts to integrate
              research and education were designed with the following outcomes in mind:
              increasing student opportunities to do research, integrating research and
              discovery-based learning experiences in introductory courses, providing modern
              instrumentation and incorporating new technologies, continuing the College's
              involvement in national forums devoted to science education reform, and
              promoting a sense of community in the sciences.

Grinnell College is being
              awarded $500,000 to advance institutional goals of integrating research and
              education, document and disseminate information of its exemplary activities,
              and expand the integration of research and education by conducting outreach
              activities over the coming three years.  The creation of the New Science
              Project addresses barriers to success that impact students of color, women, and
              first-generation college students.  This activity has grown into a national
              model for institution-wide reform that centers on developing ways to provide
              students with curricular choices that best suit particular learning styles, and
              support systems that enable students to improve their performance in the early
              years.  The success of Grinnell's reform efforts positions the institution to
              become a model for other liberal arts institutions seeking to reshape science
              education for all their students.



