Title       : An Experimental Investigation of Ecological Character Displacement in Polyphenic
               Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9873633

Award Number: 9873633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161131             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Pfennig dpfennig@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9873633
Pfennig
Ecological character displacement occurs when competition
              among coexisting species results in the evolution of greater differences in
              resource use, and in phenotypic features associated with resource use, between
              sympatric populations than between allopatric ones. Despite the prominence of
              character displacement in ecological theory, most examples supporting the
              occurrence of character displacement rest on correlational data. Thus, it is
              often difficult to establish whether and how interspecific competition causes
              character evolution. Organisms that display polyphenism, where alternative
              phenotypes are produced from a single genotype in response to different
              environmental stimuli, are well-suited for studies of character displacement.
              Such systems are ideal, because a causal link between the presence or absence
              of competitors and character change can be unequivocally established if by
              removing or adding competitors the polyphenic species differentiates or not
              into multiple morphs. This research will explore character displacement by
              continuing and developing and ongoing investigation of trophic polyphenism in
              two desert spadefoot toads. The specific goals of the research would be to (1)
              use laboratory experiments to determine whether the presence of heterospecifics
              influences the production of carnivores, and if so, how, (2) employ a common
              garden experiment to determine if there are greater differences between species
              in carnivore morph production in sympatric populations than in allopatric ones,
              and (3) use field experiments to determine the evolutionary cause of character
              displacement by establishing if southern spadefoot toads are competitively
              inferior to plains spadefoot toads. Together, these studies will add to our
              understanding of how resource competition may promote phenotypic divergence.
              Spadefoot toad tadpoles are ideal for investigating how and why alternative
              phenotypes exist, which is among the most challenging issues facing modern
              biologists. 

