Title       : KDI: Learning Through Writing Using Adaptive Tutoring Systems: Modeling
               Knowledge Representations from Open-Ended Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a9873491

Award Number: 9873491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrienne Y. Lee alee@crl.nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Foltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project combines relevant, recent findings from psychology, education,
              artificial intelligence, and computational linguistics in learning and
              knowledge representation and applies them to the development of intelligent
              tutoring systems (ITSs). Learning theory can be extended through the study of
              the evolution of different types of knowledge representations together with
              procedural representations.  Thus, this research will examine learning, the
              change in students' knowledge representations, as they integrate multiple
              sources of information.

Although ITSs have been developed to examine
              learning for well-defined problems requiring a limited set of possi-ble
              responses, ITSs have had problems evaluating open-ended questions that require
              the student to provide natural language responses. However, asking students to
              provide written answers to essay questions can provide a much richer
              representation of student knowledge and also improving students' writing
              abilities. Thus, this research will demonstrate that ITSs can be developed
              which extend beyond simple responses and that these ITSs can adapt more readily
              to provide individualized instruction to students. In order to develop these
              ITSs, this research uses the computational linguistic technique Latent Semantic
              Analysis (LSA) to model student knowledge representations from essay-based
              answers within tutoring systems.

As students' knowledge representations
              change, so too should their essay responses, including more knowledge and
              improving in quality. Therefore such an ITS can provide the necessary feedback
              for student improvement (both in domain knowledge and in writing skill). In
              addition, the ITS can initially assess the students' ability and provide extra
              help to the students with help gradually fading as the student gains more
              knowledge (e.g., scaffold-ing). Thus, by incorporating LSA into an ITS,
              individualized instruction is possible for adjusting both the level of feedback
              provided and the content presented.  The goal of this research is thus to study
              the acquisition of complex skills through incorporating LSA, a method for
              representing students' knowledge representations through their essays, into
              intelligent tutoring systems.

Because this research focuses on complex
              skills from knowledge-rich domains, results from this project extend theories
              of learning in psychology by providing information about how multiple sources
              of knowledge are integrated into students' knowledge representations as they
              are learning . The research also has theoretical implications for educational
              psychology including the systematic examination of scaffolding for two content
              areas. In addition, because LSA is an automatic method for deriving knowledge
              representations, this research has broad implications for developing systems
              for training in any area of content knowledge. 


