Title       : KDI: A Distributed Cognition Approach To Designing Digital Work Materials For
               Collaborative Workplaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9873156

Award Number: 9873156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Hollan hollan@cogsci.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kirsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin Hutchins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1337,1338,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a three-year continuing award. To ensure that new workplaces and digital
              work materials serve human needs requires both a different theoretical base and
              an integration of theory with ethnographic and experimental methods. We propose
              a research framework based on distributed cognition. Distributed cognition
              provides a reorientation of how we think about designing and supporting human
              computer interaction. It permits one to move boundary of the cognitive unit of
              analysis out beyond the skin of the indivdual to include the material and
              social environment as components of a larger cognitive system. This focuses
              attention on the processes by which people take advantage of both internal and
              external resources to organize their actions. For the design of workplaces,
              this means that work materials are more than stimuli for disembodied cognitive
              sytems. Work materials become elements of the cognitive system itself, and
              cognition becomes an emergent property of the interactions among people and
              work materials. We will apply our integrated approach to developing a
              distributed cognition based theory of annotation and explore a range of
              application domains: collaborative scientific research, education, and
              commercial aviation. In each domain, we will conduct ethnographic and
              experimental studies, design and implement digital work materials and analyze
              their effectiveness. In addition, to help us develop and communicate our
              distributed cognition perspective, we are developing: (1) a series of
              prototypes of history-enriched work materials that support collection and
              selective sharing of personnel and group activity histories and annotations,
              (2) annotation facilities to assist collaborations, and (3) information
              visualization facilities to exploit rich histories of interactions and provide
              effective access to annotations.
