Title       : OPAAL: Simulation and Optimization of Casting and Extrusion Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2000   
File        : a9873945

Award Number: 9873945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2198851            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Haber r-haber@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Padua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Process design engineers must simultaneously control the  macroscopic and
              microscopic properties of products to meet the  demands of today's competitive
              marketplace.  Control over material  properties (such as precipitate structure,
              grain size, and residual  stress) in cast and extruded components is as
              essential to product  quality as is control over the product geometry. 
              Ultimately, product  and process design must be treated as a single coupled
              problem,  because the processes that determine a product's shape also 
              determine its material properties.  This research initiative establishes  new
              collaborations among mathematicians, engineers, and computer  scientists to
              enable multiscale simulations of the complex, nonlinear  behavior that
              underlies process and product design. Specifically, the  investigators and
              their colleagues model microstructural  development associated with dendritic
              growth in casting processes  and with recrystallization and the evolution of
              grain-boundary  precipitates in extrusion and quench processes.  These
              multiscale  simulation problems within the context of design optimization lead 
              to very large computational requirements for which parallel solution 
              strategies are essential.  The representation of complex, time-varying 
              geometries --- especially those with evolving topology --- is another 
              significant challenge.  The investigators use a variety of new  methods from
              analysis, computational geometry and computer  science to address these issues.
               They develop advanced error  estimates to drive "smart" mesh generators and
              adaptive procedures,  emphasizing new geometric algorithms backed by rigorous 
              mathematical analysis to ensure accuracy and reliability.  They  design new
              programming environments as well as compile-time and  run-time code optimizers
              to produce portable, high performance  parallel codes.  Gridless level set
              methods, space-time finite element  models, and new methods from computational
              geometry address the  geometric challenges.  The investigators explore new
              solution  techniques for large-scale problems and develop parallel nonlinear 
              programming strategies and advanced design sensitivity analysis  methods to
              optimize processing conditions and tool geometries.

This project advances
              new computational technology to predict and  optimize microstructural material
              properties via macroscopic process  controls.   This work has the potential for
              tremendous economic  impact in the manufacturing sector.  New high-performance 
              materials for civilian and defense applications, lower cost and more 
              environmentally friendly manufacturing processes, improved quality  control,
              and the ability to reduce the time to market via virtual  process and product
              prototyping all become possible.  The new  simulation and design tools help
              engineers and process designers to  move beyond current trial-and-error design
              approaches that are  expensive and often ineffective.  In particular, the
              prospect of  practical, easy-to-use tools for optimal process design promotes
              the  increased use of these techniques in industry.  The new processing 
              capabilities generated by this effort could lead to entirely new  product
              classes, in addition to substantial improvements in existing  product lines. 
              Close collaboration with industrial scientists and  engineers at major U.S.
              manufacturing companies is an essential  component of this work, so effective
              and timely technology transfer  to and from industry is assured.  The
              interdisciplinary structure that  underlies this effort, involving new
              collaborations between  mathematicians, engineers and computer scientists, is
              itself a novel  aspect of the research that has potential for significant
              impact on the  culture of scientific research at U.S. universities.  It
              generates a new  educational model for Ph.D. students and postdocs that
              provides the  multi-disciplinary training required for scientific and technical
               leadership in the coming century.

Funding for this activity will be
              provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, and by DARPA.

