Title       : KDI: Knowledge Networking of Biodiversity Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9873021

Award Number: 9873021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Beach beach@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schnase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Stockwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Krishtalka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Gosz  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510104   Past Carbon Dioxide Level               
Program Ref : 1337,1338,9150,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence initiative will enable 
knowledge
              networking of biological diversity information.  We comprise a 
cross-sector,
              multidisciplinary, intellectual consortium of systematists, ecologists, earth
              systems scientists, natural resource managers and computer scientists.  Our
              research and infrastructure foci are on the quantification, analysis and
              prediction of biodiversity. 

There are several thrust areas (a-g): (a)
              high-performance network access to biological collection and classification
              databases through the implementation of international information retrieval
              protocols and metadata profiles, including a development collaboration with the
              U.S. Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS), and (b) the integration of
              those museum databases with other earth systems sciences data such as terrain
              and climate information, for the predictive modeling and visualization of
              species distributions and related biodiversity phenomena.  We will initiate two
              test bed research projects to assess: (c) the ecosystem function of
              biodiversity; and (d) the pattern and processes governing the decline in
              amphibian populations worldwide. We will also (e) train the next generation of
              biodiversity informatics scientists, and (f) deliver the database access and
              species distribution analysis tools we will produce to students and the public
              on the Internet.  Finally, as part of the above research, we will (g) study the
              process of collaboration and synergistic 
behavior among investigators,
              organizations and communities across the net.

In this project we will deploy
              a research computing architecture for 
accessing, integrating and analyzing
              authoritative biotic and taxonomic 
data associated with the 3 billion
              specimens of animals and plants archived worldwide in biological museums and
              herbaria. This enormous information store, acquired during 300 years of
              biological exploration of the earth, documents the known life of the planet,
              about 1.7 million species--their history, global composition, identity, spatial
              distribution and ecology.  Access to and use of this data are fundamental if we
              are to meet one of the grand challenges for the 21st century: understanding the
              functional relationships of earth's biological 
diversity to global
              environmental systems. The urgent need for this knowledge increases as the
              conversion of natural to human-managed systems accelerates the decline of
              biological diversity.  Knowledge networking of biodiversity information will
              bring the intellectual content of the world's biological collections into
              currency for science and society for achieving a better understanding of
              biological diversity and its role in global environmental systems, and for
              informing global environmental management and policy.

