Title       : Collaborative Research: Higher-Level Relationships Among Microchiropteran Bats
               Based on Mitochondrial Gene Sequences, Morphology and Echolocation Call
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9873663

Award Number: 9873663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Simmons simmons@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Simmons DEB 9873663

Almost one-fifth of living mammal species are
              echolocating bats of the suborder Microchiroptera.  These animals play a
              variety of important ecological roles.  Most species prey on nocturnal insects,
              while others are essential for plant pollination or seed dispersal.  Increasing
              human impact on bat populations and species has serious implications for
              agriculture and pest management.  Despite many previous studies, there is still
              little agreement among biologists concerning relationships among the different
              groups of bats.  Of particular concern are relationships among higher-level bat
              groups (e.g., genera and families).  Without such knowledge, it is difficult to
              interpret the wide ranges of variation in wing architecture, sonar
              capabilities, and ecology seen in different bat groups.  A clear understanding
              of bat diversity, important for setting conservation priorities, also depends
              upon resolving the relationships of bats.  In this study, the problem of bat
              relationships will be addressed through detailed analyses of DNA structure of
              mitochondrial genes, anatomy, and structure of the echolocation calls (sonar
              signals) of a wide variety of bat species.  The objective of these studies will
              be to identify similarities and differences that can be used to evaluate
              historical relationships.  Data collected in this study will be employed in a
              variety of computer-assisted analyses designed to produce testable hypotheses
              of relationships among and within families of microchiropteran bats.  The
              relationships of microchiropteran bats to other mammalian lineages will also be
              investigated.  This study will provide a new framework for understanding the
              structural design, behavior, and ecology of bats.

