Title       : KDI: Neuromorphic Knowledge Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9873463

Award Number: 9873463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leif Finkel leif@jupiter.seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Hopfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kwabena A. Boahen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George L. Gerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873463
Finkel
We Propose an approach to the study of intelligent systems
              based on the modeling and construction of neuromorphic knowledge systems.
              Neuroinorphic systems offer a platform for integrating insights from
              mathematics, neurobiology, and Computer simulation, and represent a new type of
              neural-based computing.  Our approach arises from the premise that the
              traditional components of intelligence (including Sy requires a new technology;
              this technology will be provided by together as an integrated system.  The
              study of such complex learning, recognition, and attention) are Properties of a
              common underlying neural structure, and that these compo ents are best studied
              neuromorphic systems engineering.  Ncuromorphic VLSI chips stems and systems
              use subthreshold analog circuits to model dendritic computation and
              asynchronous digital circuits to model axonal communication . These systems can
              function autonomously or be interfaced with conventional computers. 
              Neuromozphic systems offer the possibility of learning and recognition on
              real-time, real-world problems such as visual search and the recognition of
              biological motion.
Our approach is based on spike-based computation: use of
              the precise timing of ncuronal spikes for representation and computation.
              Spike-based computations underlie some of the most impressive behaviors in
              biology, from bat sonar to human vision.  In particular, we will focus on
              neuronal synchronization and will develop models in which learning, attention,
              and recognition all operate through effects on synchronization.  Such models
              require neural mechanisms for the detection of synchronization (Recognition),
              enhancement of synchronization (Learning), and dynamic modulation of
              synchronization (Attention).
We will use a team approach in which faculty and
              students work together on linked projects.  The four investigators have
              expertise in complementary areas: neuromorphic chip design (Boahen), cellular
              biophysics and neural network simulation (Finkel), physiological data analysis
              and modeling (Gerstein), theoretical analysis of learning and spikebascd
              computation (Hopficid).  Together we %ill investigate mechanisms for the
              control of synchronization based on changes in neuromodulation, on selective
              modification of
AMPA/NMDA conductance ratios, on temporallyasyminetric
              synaptic plasticity, and on synaptic delay and spike-frequency adaptation. 
              These simulations @l be tied to analysis of synchronization in spike-train
              recordings from awake, behaving animals engaged in learning, attention, or
              recognition tasks.  Analysis of physiological and psychophysical data will
              motivate development of theoretical models of spike-based computation.  Most
              critically, development of a series of neuromorphic chips will be carried out
              as a means of scaling up the simulations to systems containing over 200,000
              spiking neurons each making thousands of connections.  To facilitate
              development and sharing of ideas, we will develop a common simulation
              environment for analysis of spiking neurons that will allow an interface
              between large-scale network simulation, neuromorphic chip design, and analysis
              and prediction of physiological recordings.  This enviroranent will be made
              available (via the Web) for widcr use by physiologists and modelers, and as an
              educational tool.
Our current retina-based neuromorphic chips (Boahen, 1998)
              outperform CCD technology as a result of ncurally-derived mechanisms.  These
              chips incorporate biological mechanisms for local gain control and motion
              detection.  Prototype systems of interconnected spikegenerating chips will
              allow real-time feedback control of connectivity.  We outline a plan for
              interfacing cortically-based ncuromorphic systems with high-speed
              multiprocessors to allow real-time attention, recognition, and learning on
              continuous video input streams.  Recent ncurophysiological studies suggest that
              neuronal responses in alert animals viewing rcal-iiorld environments differ
              radically from responses to simplified stimuli.  Such results argue for the
              study of neural-based systems interacting with real-world environments.
The
              outcome of these studies will be tools, technology and insights that provide a
              new domain of interaction between neuroscientists, computer scientists and
              mathematicians and engineers.  They will yield insight into the spike-based
              computations underlying intelligent behavior.  The technology developed will
              have immediate application to robotics and intelligent neural prostheses.


