Title       : KDI: Multiscale Physics-Based Simulation of Fluid Flow for Energy and
               Environmental Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9873326

Award Number: 9873326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Wheeler mfw@ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Todd J. Arbogast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton N. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandrajit L. Bajaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1339,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wheeler
9873326

Fluid flows at and below the earth's surface are the cause
              and cure for problems of water and soil pollution, while petroleum and natural
              gas production depends on flows in the subsurface.  In these problems, the
              length scales of practical interest range from tens of meters to kilometers. 
              However, the behavior at these scales depends critically on physics occurring
              at much smaller length scales.  A wide disparity in time scales also exists in
              these problems.  Moreover, different physical processes occur simultaneously in
              different parts of the domain.  In this project, the investigators and their
              university, government and industrial collaborators develop much-needed
              scientific understanding of small-scale phenomena from theory and experiment,
              and also develop new computational tools and strategies for incorporating this
              understanding at the practical scale, for handling multiple types of physics
              across subdomains, for remote collaboration, and for visualizing and
              manipulating the results.  The project focuses on better understanding of
              small-scale phenomena (e.g., multiphase interfacial area, hysteresis,
              dispersion, and discrete fractures in porous media), interdomain coupling by
              means of multiblock or multiphysics methodologies (e.g., coupling of surface
              water and groundwater environments), the development of accurate and efficient
              algorithms and prototype simulators, and methods for viewing results
              interactively and with collaborators off site.  The algorithms and simulators
              developed include novel mortar type spaces for coupling domains, and
              sophisticated, adaptive, finite element, finite volume and time-stepping
              methods for modeling nonlinear advective, diffusive and reactive processes. 
              The algorithms are implemented on parallel computing platforms.  Interactive
              steering and visualization are coupled closely to the simulators.  Important
              work related to this project are laboratory experiments and field data for
              critical evaluation of the simulators, demonstration of prototypical simulators
              on petroleum engineering production models and environmental subsurface and
              surface flow applications, and educational and professional outreach and
              training through workshops, video and web-based technologies.

This project
              concerns computer simulation and prediction of the movement and interaction of
              fluids in surface waters and subsurface groundwater and petroleum reservoirs. 
              The focus is on fundamental multiscale and multiphysics applications (i.e.,
              physical processes occurring together at different length and time scales and
              different physical processes occurring in different parts of the spatial
              domain).  The motivation behind this work is the need to better understand and
              quantify the effect of small-scale processes on larger, field-scale processes,
              and to understand how different physical processes occurring in close proximity
              affect each other.  The investigators study these problems through the
              development of appropriate mathematical models, numerical algorithms,
              computational science and visualization tools, and laboratory experiments. 
              This work is carried out in collaboration with other university researchers and
              government and industrial partners.  Educational outreach and training of
              future scientists and engineers is an important part of this effort.  The
              applications of interest include petroleum and natural gas production,
              groundwater contamination and remediation, surface water circulation and
              pollution, and the interaction between surface and groundwater environments. 
              These applications have significant environmental and economic impact.

