Title       : LT: Methods Development for Place-Based Industrial Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1998 
File        : a9873587

Award Number: 9873587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton J. Andrews cja1@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9873587 Andrews Industrial ecologists have traditionally examined systems with
              boundaries convenient to the accounting requirements, such as the natural
              boundaries of river basins or the economic boundaries of firms, industries or
              national markets.  However, important decision-making needs cut across systems
              defined by such boundaries.  A city, for example, is a relatively open system
              when viewed in economic or environmental terms.  The primary objectives of this
              research are to develop methods for "place-based" industrial ecology, to test
              strategies for analyzing open industrial ecosystems and to expand the social
              science component of industrial ecology.  This project will achieve its
              objectives by performing an industrial ecological analysis of the city of
              Trenton, NJ.  Leading members of the community will participate in scoping the
              study and in evaluating its adequacy, value, effectiveness and legitimacy.  The
              project will develop and apply a set of analysis tools and reflect on their
              efficacy in practice.  Tool development will draw on regional economics, that
              has developed techniques such as location quotients, shift-share analysis and
              regional input-output analysis, as well as standard statistical and
              systems-analytical methods to deal with open economic systems. This work will
              thus have strong roots in social science, relying on the insights of modern
              microeconomics (especially the transaction cost and public choice paradigms). 
              Regional economic tools will be adapted and extended to industrial ecology
              questions at the macro-level of materials and energy flows, the meso-level of
              community structure, the micro-level of individual behaviors and the
              sub-organism level of metabolic processes.  This project will provide
              methodological advances of two kinds to the field of industrial ecology: (1) it
              will introduce and test tools for analyzing open systems and (2) it will
              increase the social science content of industrial ecology.  The project will
              have broader impacts by aligning industrial ecology research more closely with
              the needs of one of its primary consumers: place-based decision makers.  This
              will make the field more relevant to environmental policy.  This grant is made
              pursuant to the joint NSF/Lucent Technologies Industrial Ecology Research
              Fellowships Program 1998.  


