Title       : Behavioral and Physiological Differences in Migratory Strageties of a
               Long-distance Migrant, the Blackpoll Warbler, and a Facultative Short-distance
               Migrant, the Yellow-rumped Warb
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9873852

Award Number: 9873852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca L. Holberton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Migrating birds make choices en route about where and when to rest and replenish
              energy reserves, often in areas they have never visited before and at a time
              when food and weather may be unpredictable.  Their ability to reach their
              destinations in good condition and in a timely manner can influence their
              chances of gettting the best wintering or breeding territories and, thus,
              influence their survivorship or reproductive sucess.  The Blackpoll Warbler,
              Dendroica straiata, almost doubles its body mass with fat reserves as it
              prepares for a trans-oceanic migration over the North Atlantic to winter in
              South America.  This species has been found to have the lowest rate of weight
              loss during migration.  This suggest that they use fat more efficiently and can
              spare skeletal muscle for use as energy reserves longer than many other birds. 
              In contrast, while the Yellow-rumped warbler, Dendroica coronata, overlaps with
              the Blackpoll warbler on its breeding grounds, it is a short-distance migrant
              (primarily overland) and does not put on such extensive fat reserves.  The
              focus of this study is to investigate differences in the behavior and phsiology
              of these two species of warblers that reflect their different energetic demands
              of migration.  In this project, the primary emphasis is on the role of
              corticosterone and related metabolites in controlling food intake and fat
              reserves.   A series of laboratory and field studies will investigate possible
              differences in patterns of corticosterone secreation in these two species that
              may reflect their different patterns of fattening and their respective need to
              protect skeletal muscle during migration.  In laboratory studies, the PIs will
              investigate the possibility that corticosterone has multiple roles in
              regulating the seasonal changes in energy demand in birds and that these two
              species may have different threshold for corticosterone's effects on fattening
              and muscle protein utilization.  By understanding how birds with different
              energetic demands have evolved to meet the challenges of migration under
              optimal conditions. we will have a greater understanding of the behavioral and
              physiological constraints of birds when conditions such as weather and habitat
              quality deteriorate.  The results from this project may illustrate how
              environmental factors encountered during the migratory period may impact bird
              populations throughout the annual cycle.
