Title       : KDI: Statistical Learning and Its Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9873477

Award Number: 9873477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Aslin aslin@cvs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc D. Hauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elissa L. Newport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Both humans and non-human primates show remarkable learning abilities.  However,
              these abilities are often limited to certain domains, developmental periods, or
              behavioral contexts.  For example, nearly all humans acquire one or more
              complex linguistic systems-that is, languages -- but not all humans acquire
              complex musical systems.  Similarly, non-human primates are exceptionally adept
              at learning to forage for and categorize different types of food, but are
              severely limited in acquiring complex communication systems.  Also, both humans
              and non-human primates appear to learn best in several domains during early
              periods of development.  Thus, learning is nearly always characterized by
              specializations, rather than by general-purpose mechanisms.  Understanding the
              constraints on learning will contribute to basic research, by accounting for
              domain- and species-specializations, and to applied research, by refining our
              understanding of which domains, ages, and contexts are optimal for
              human
learners.

The goal of the present research project is to explore the
              ability of human adults, children, infants, and non-human primates (Tamarins)
              to learn rapid sequential events.  A prime example of a rapid sequential event
              is language, in which sounds are combined to form words, and words are combined
              to form sentences.  Recent findings have demonstrated that human adults and
              infants can rapidly extract and remember very detailed 'statistics' of
              linguistic input, such as the frequency and probability that one syllable will
              follow another.  In our proposed research, we will employ miniature artificial
              'languages' which simulate some of the structural properties of natural
              languages, but which can be built with equivalent structures across different
              domains (speech sequences, tone sequences, visual sequences, motor sequences). 
              At issue is the facility humans and non-human primates show for the extraction
              of statistical structure from these different learning materials.  Are they
              equally sensitive to the distributions of elements and higher order structure
              in the materials?  Do learning abilities differ across learners of different
              ages and species, and across different structures and domains?

In addition
              to behavioral experiments with humans and non-human primates, a series of
              computational studies will allow us to investigate the formal properties of
              learning mechanisms, in order to ask what architectural and neural differences
              might underlie such differences in learning abilities. What kinds of
              computational architectures can learn the types of regularities and patterns
              that human infants learn?  Is the inability of adults or non-human primates to
              learn some types of complex sequential events due to the absence of a learning
              device specialized for that domain, or could small differences in computation
              and/or memory lead to large differences in learning outcome?

