Title       : KDI: Sequential Decision Making in Animals and Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9873531

Award Number: 9873531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Henderson john@eyelab.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred C. Dyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sridhar Mahadevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873531
Henderson
Mobile organisms make accurate behavioral decisions with
              extraordinary speed and flexibility in real-world environments despite
              incomplete knowledge about the state of the world and the effects of their
              actions.  This ability must be shared by artificial agents such as mobile
              robots if they are to operate flexibly in similar environments.  The main goal
              of the research is to undertake a detailed interdisciplinary study of
              sequential decision making across animals and robots, with a focus on real time
              learning and control of information gathering and navigational
              behaviors.

The project will take a comparative approach, combining
              psychophysical and cognitive research techniques from the study of human eye
              movement control, behavioral research techniques from the study of insect
              navigation, and computational methods from the study of mobile robots.  All of
              these systems provide experimentally tractable test-beds for studying real-time
              decision making in partially observable environments.

The research is guided
              by a class of sequential decision making models called Markov decision
              processes (MDP).  These models are attractive because they provide a formal
              framework for computing optimal behavior in uncertain environments.  However,
              these models do not fully capture the complexity of decision making in
              organisms.  We will explore extensions of the MDP framework using insights
              gained from the study of behavior in organisms and algorithms in artificial
              agents.  This synergy will lead both to a better theoretical understanding of
              sequential decision making in biological organisms, and to the development of
              efficient algorithms for artificial agents.

A major outcome of the project
              will be to show how the design of artificial creatures (robots) can be guided
              by, and serve as a guide for, the study of sequential behavior in animals. 
              Understanding the challenges that robot designers face, and the formal
              framework that they have developed to tackle these challenges, leads to novel
              questions about organisms behavior.  Similarly, insights gained from organisms
              will help suggest ways for improving algorithms for building intelligent
              artificial agents.
***


