Title       : KDI: An Integrated Computational Environment for Studying Ion Movement in
               Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1999  
File        : a9873199

Award Number: 9873199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Jakobsson jake@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Skeel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Eisenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shankar Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1337,1339,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9873199
Jakobsson
The overall objective of this project is to make it possible
              to predict the detailed function of a protein from its structure and internal
              motion. Protein structure is, of course, fundamental to protein function, but
              equally important are the internal thermal motions that a protein continually
              undergoes.  The basic problem is that protein structure is so complicated, and
              proteins have so many potential ways to move, that it is impossible to do a
              "brute force" simulation of all the possible protein motions and catalog their
              effects.  The solution is to break the problem of describing protein motion
              into a hierarchy of problems, and treat each level of the hierarchy separately,
              moving from the most detailed to more "coarse-grained" descriptions.  In each
              case, the numerical results from the most detailed calculation will be used as
              parameters for a more coarse-grained calculation.  In order to predict function
              from structure, three levels of description will be developed: 1) quantum
              chemistry, 2) classical molecular dynamics, and 3) kinetic theory.  The results
              from the kinetic theory will be compared directly with experiment.  To validate
              this approach, work will focus on ion channels, the membrane proteins that
              permit ions to cross biological membranes.  

All software developed in the
              course of the project will be embedded in the Biology Workbench
              (bioweb.ncsa.uiuc.edu).  The Biology Workbench is a Web-based computing
              environment for molecular biology that assembles database and analysis programs
              from disparate sources into effectively a single program that any user can
              easily customize to his or her own needs.

