Title       : KDI: Computational Infrastructure for Engineering Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9873384

Award Number: 9873384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard O. Palsson palsson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1337,1339,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Palsson
DNA sequencing technology is revolutionizing biology.  DNA sequence
              data now needs to be translated, into functional information.  The first step
              is the prediction of the function of individual gene products from their
              sequence through comparison with other known genes and genomes.  The second
              step, and perhaps the more challenging one, involves the use of this functional
              information on individual genes to predict cellular functions resulting from
              their coordinated activity.  In order to accomplish the objectives of this
              second step, model in silico organisms need to be built based on genomic data,
              and systems analysis methods developed to describe them so as to analyze,
              interpret, and predict the genotype-phenotype relationship.  
At present there
              is no computational infrastructure available to address these challenges. This
              project addresses this overall question by the following two methods:  
1. 
              Structural and steady state analysis methods will be developed to formulate
              organism-scale metabolic networks from annotated sequence data.  These analysis
              methods will be presented within the Biology WorkBench (bioweb.ncsa.uiuc.edu). 
              This capability will include the development of a graphical user interface that
              shows the metabolic map for a genomically defined metabolic genotype and the
              display of flux balance solutions thereon. Flux balance methods will be
              developed to study the characteristics and capabilities of defined genotypes,
              including the variation in the genotype, prediction of metabolic shifts,
              prediction of genome scale expression, and formulation of defined media, 
2. 
              To characterize the dynamic characteristics of multi-enzyme systems, methods
              will be developed to catalog, interpolate, and predict enzyme kinetic
              properties.  These methods can be used to assign enzyme kinetic properties to
              annotated genome sequences.  Methods will also be developed for temporal
              decomposition of a large set of simultaneous metabolic reactions.  These
              methods will be able to determine the independent modes of motion in complex
              systems, give a physiological interpretation of these modes, and to predict the
              pool transformation matrix that can subsequently be used for model reduction
              for description on a selected time scale.

The results of this research will
              form the basis for the needed computational infrastructure for the formulation
              and testing of in silico metabolic representations of living cells.  Basically,
              the result is the important metabolic genotype-phenotype relationship, and
              means to analyze, interpret, and predict it.  These relationships will form the
              basis for metabolic engineering based on annotated genomic data.


