Title       : High Performance Algorithms for Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9873664

Award Number: 9873664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Chelikowsky jrc@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9216,9263,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9873664
Chelikowsky and Saad
This is an interdisciplinary research grant
              funded jointly by the Divisions of Materials Research, of Advanced
              Computational Infrastructure and Research, and of Mathematical Sciences.  The
              research involves algorithm development and implementation on massively
              parallel computers, and calculations of the properties of real materials using
              electronic structure theory.  Materials of interest include amorphous
              materials, atomic clusters, liquids, glasses, extended defects, reconstructed
              point defects, non-ideal interfaces, etc.  

The recent development of high
              performance and novel architecture computers is creating new opportunities for
              the application of sophisticated electronic structure techniques to study these
              materials.  Another two or more orders of magnitude improvement in speed, which
              is likely in the near future, will enable us to step beyond the current
              computational limits in materials science and reach an exciting era of
              understanding and discovery in real materials.  These gains are not achieved by
              progress in hardware alone, but may depend more on innovations in algorithms. 
              Developing new algorithms in multidisciplinary research requires an
              understanding of the different disciplines involved by the collaborating
              members, in this case a close collaboration between computer scientists and
              physical scientists.

We will use real space algorithms (based on ab initio
              pseudopotentials) to predict the dielectric properties of quantum dots and
              nanostructured matter.  We will apply a variety of methodologies to this
              problem including quasiparticle energies determined from density functional
              theory.  We will consider quantum dots up to several thousand atoms in size. 
              This will allow us to examine the transition from "atomic" to "crystalline" in
              terms of optical and dielectric response functions.  Also, we will examine the
              structural properties of quantum dots, and extrinsic properties such as
              photoluminescence.  We intend to continue our ongoing activities in other areas
              such as defects in solids, the structure and electronic properties of
              semiconductor liquids, and crystal growth.

We will continue to examine new
              and efficient algorithms for computing eigenvectors and eigenvalues, with an
              emphasis on methods for computing a large number of eigenvectors.  These
              algorithms include, but are not limited to, spectrum slicing via polynomial
              iterations and preconditioning techniques.  In addition, we will examine new
              algorithms which avoid the computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors
              altogether.  One of these methods will be based on utilizing the Lanczos
              procedure.
%%% 
This is an interdisciplinary research grant funded jointly by
              the Divisions of Materials Research, of Advanced Computational Infrastructure
              and Research, and of Mathematical Sciences.  The research involves algorithm
              development and implementation on massively parallel computers, and
              calculations of the properties of real materials using electronic structure
              theory.  Materials of interest include amorphous materials, atomic clusters,
              liquids, glasses, extended defects, reconstructed point defects, non-ideal
              interfaces, etc.  

The recent development of high performance and novel
              architecture computers is creating new opportunities for the application of
              sophisticated electronic structure techniques to study these materials. 
              Another two or more orders of magnitude improvement in speed, which is likely
              in the near future, will enable us to step beyond the current computational
              limits in materials science and reach an exciting era of understanding and
              discovery in real materials.  These gains are not achieved by progress in
              hardware alone, but may depend more on innovations in algorithms.  Developing
              new algorithms in multidisciplinary research requires an understanding of the
              different disciplines involved by the collaborating members, in this case a
              close collaboration between computer scientists and physical scientists.
***

