Title       : Links and Mentors: Approaches to Science and Engineering Education for the 21st
               Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9873791

Award Number: 9873791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Cool cooll@alice.union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873791
Cool

Union College has been selected as one of ten recipients of the
              National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  The College, the first liberal arts institution to offer an
              engineering program, has conceptualized a successful General Education (GenEd)
              curriculum that emphasizes discovery-based learning in a research rich
              environment consisting of three stages of investigative learning.  The GenEd
              curriculum has been effectively incorporated in the development of a new
              engineering curriculum, which fosters active learning activities and provides
              exposure to engineering technologies through research. 

The College's
              efforts to integrate research and education were designed with the following
              outcomes in mind: developing new courses that rethink the way science is taught
              at each state of inquiry; creating hands-on inquiry driven laboratory courses
              for General Education science majors, and engineering courses that incorporate
              design components; promoting programs that require collaborative efforts among
              science departments; and providing diverse opportunities for student
              research.

Union College is being awarded $500,000 to advance institutional
              goals of integrating research and education, document and disseminate
              information of its exemplary activities, and expand the integration of research
              and education by conducting outreach activities over the coming three years. 
              AIRE funds will be used to help engineering faculty develop a series of
              hands-on engineering courses with laboratory components that stimulate and
              excite non-engineering students the same way that GenEd science courses for
              non-science majors have appealed to those students.  To encourage minority
              students interested in pursuing careers in teaching science or engineering at
              the college level, Union plans to create Minority Post-Baccalaureate Teaching
              Fellowships which will provide extended opportunities for students to engage in
              all aspects of the teaching enterprise.  In addition, the College will continue
              to support and promote programs targeted at training elementary through high
              school teachers in science.



