Title       : KDI: Discrete Representations in Working Memory: Developmental,
               Neuropsychological, and Computational Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9873492

Award Number: 9873492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Mozer mozer@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akira Miyake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuko Munakata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall C. O'Reilly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,1337,8888,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to futher our understanding of the neural representations that
              underlie working memory. Working memory refers to the active maintenance of
              information in the service of complex cognitive tasks such as problem solving
              and planning.  The team of investigator with study how the unique demands
              placed on the working memory system shape its representations during learning
              and development, and how these representations affect the use of working memory
              by the cognitive system as a whole.  Their primary source of insight into this
              process will come from a computational analysis, which will be used to
              integrate and explore relevant findings from neurobiology and developmental and
              adult cognition.  The primary hypothesis is that to maintain information in an
              active state over delays and in the face of interference, working memory
              representations should be discrete.  A discrete representation admits to only a
              finite set of possible states, rather than representing continuous states.  For
              example, the integers from 1 to 100 form a discrete set, in contrast to the
              real numbers in this range.  Discreteness imparts a measure of robustness to
              the representation because small amounts of "noise" can be overcome by
              interpreting an observed state as the nearest discrete stat.  From the central
              property of discreteness, a number of other properties follow.  For example,
              discrete representations should be more categorical, more easily verbalize,
              better for perceiving or performing a sequence of steps, and more accessible to
              awareness.  All these properties have component of the proposed research is to
              explore the idea that they all follow from the more basic property of
              dicreteness.  The initial goal of the project will be establish through
              experimental studies the validity of the hypothesis that working memory
              representations are indeed discrete.  This will be done by exploring a key
              behavioral consequence of this hypothesis:  working memory representations
              should be more categorical than other representations.  This predicition will
              be investigated with a set of existing empirical paradigms that have elucidated
              variables that affect the working memory system, including developmental age,
              delay, dual-task demands, and brain damage.  Working memory plays a central
              role in most accounts of complex human behavior, because working memory is
              required in any task that involves multiple stos ir a temporally extended focus
              of attention.  This kinds of tasks are important and pervasive throughout
              society, including: economic, political, and military planning; air-traffic
              control; and scientific research, to name just a few.  It is essential to
              understand the nature of the representations in the working memory system and
              to understand how people learn to  use working memory in the service of complex
              behavior.  This research will advance our knowledge in this important area, and
              may provide insight into techniques for rehabilitation of working memory
              following brain injury and techniques for assisting the development of working
              memory in children.  
