Title       : KDI: Multiscale Modeling and Simulation in Scientific Inference: Hierarchical
               Methods for Parameter Estimation in Porous Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9873275

Award Number: 9873275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Trangenstein johnt@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Higdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zbigniew Kabala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1339,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Trangenstein
9873275

The investigator and his colleagues develop new spatial
              models and numerical methods for flow in porous media.  Conventional simulation
              models for these problems require very high-dimensional parameters as inputs,
              yet the determination of these parameters is radically ill-posed.  Reliable and
              relevant additional data sources are scarce.  The problem is multi-scaled,
              since fine-scale variations in the defining parameters can have key large-scale
              effects.  Hence this project will develop models and numerical methods on a
              hierarchy of scales.  However, the relationship between different scale
              sub-models goes beyond simple averaging.  The investigators develop statistical
              models, methodology and computation for data synthesis and high-dimensional
              inference and predictions.  Computations for fluid flow incorporate
              hierarchical simulation involving adaptive mesh refinement and streamtube
              methods.  The large size of the computations requires distributed computing and
              the construction of a network of workstations running custom software.  The
              methods are validated against new analytical work in stochastic partial
              differential equations.  Finally, the resulting methodology is applied to field
              studies of contaminant cleanup involving surfactants and to oil production
              problems.

Uncertainty in porous flow has a large impact on society and the
              economy.  For example, the cost of discovery and efficient production of
              petroleum affects the cost of transportation and energy production.  Also the
              cost of location and removal of contaminants from ground water affects the cost
              and quality of safe water resources.  One goal of this project is to develop
              new statistical and computational methods to assess and reduce the uncertainty
              in modeling flow in porous media.  This goal requires new research into
              modeling, uncertainty, computation and data measurement.  To address this wide
              range of issues, this project involves a collaboration of applied
              mathematicians, statisticians and engineers.  As a result, this project is
              directed toward the Knowledge and Distributed Intelligence area of interest at
              NSF, and especially the New Computational Challenges aspect of this initiative.
               In order to assign confidence to computer simulations, the statisticians in
              this project develop concepts, models and methods to integrate data and to
              incorporate and measure uncertainty.  Together, the statisticians, applied
              mathematicians and engineers use a variety of sophisticated analytical and
              numerical techniques to reduce the size and cost of the computations.  The
              engineers apply the resulting methods to various field studies, and communicate
              the results to their industrial affiliates.  Even with these new concepts and
              algorithms, the size of the computations is so large that many computers have
              to work on the problem simultaneously.  The applied mathematicians build a
              network of workstations using fast communication boards to perform these large
              calculations, and dedicate this machine to these calculations and to student
              instruction.

