Title       : KDI: Artificial Implementation of Cerebro-Cerebellar Control of Reaching and
               Walking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2000   
File        : a9873478

Award Number: 9873478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve G. Massaquoi sgm@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Jacques E. Slotine  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gill A. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Ebner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Munther A. Dahleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,1337,8888,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Humans and other animals are capable of remarkable range of intricate motor
              behaviors.  Although the brain systems involved in motor control are mostly
              known, the way in which these systems function interactivley in motor control
              are mostly known, the way in which these systems function interactivley in
              motor control is still only partially understood.  The investigators on this
              project have recetly developed a model of cerebellar control in which they
              propose that the cerebellum implements servo (feedback based) control of limb
              movements through the processing of "wave variables" (Massaquoi & Slotine,
              1996).  Wave variables are special linear combinations of command and senory
              signals that ensure stability of servo systems despite delays in signal
              transmission.  The previously developed simple wave-variable-based cerebellar
              control model displays single-joint movement control of two-joint horizontal
              planar arm movement and also produces several realistic internal signals.  The
              model includes the roles of the intermediate and lateral cerebellum and parts
              of the cerebrum, spinal cord, peripheral nerve and muscles.  The current
              project is designed to verify and futher develop the cerebellar model by
              attempting to correlate signals observed in active experimental primates with
              those predicted by the model, and to account for motor behavior of healthy
              human subjects and humans suffering from cerebellar dysfunction.  The
              performance of the model will be analyzed from the perspective of robot balance
              and leg control during ambulation.  The investigating team seeks to develop a
              mdoel of human (primate) cerebellar system function which is physiologically,
              neurroanatomically and quantitatively accurate, and also fully comprehensible
              in engineering terms.  It is anticipated that this will contribute
              significantly to the understanding of the mechanisms, capacities and
              limitations of human and animal motor control in health and disease.  The
              project should also provide nsights into design principles for intelligent
              executive systems in general, both natural (brain-based) and artificial
              (robotic).  Anticipated applications of this line of investigation include more
              precise and specific interpretation of functional neuroimaging data, improved
              rational design of neuroprosthetic devices and neurosurgical interventions, and
              the design of more behaviorally adaptable, well-coordinated and agile robots.
