Title       : SHALDRIL II: Workshop on Shallow Drilling Systems for U.S. Antarctic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9873071

Award Number: 9873071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwood W. Wise wise@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Janecek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9873071  This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the
              National Science Foundation, supports the continuation of activities of a
              committee of marine geologists, designated SHALDRIL II (for "shallow
              drilling"), to investigate the technical feasibility of conducting shallow
              drilling operations from US Antarctic Program (USAP) vessels in support of
              scientific research.  Shallow drilling for paleoclimatic and paleoenvironmental
              records on the Antarctic continental margins has been identified in a number of
              venues as being of high importance.  These records are essential for
              constructing models of ice sheet advance and retreat and for constraining
              paleoclimatic conditions from the earliest Cenozoic (65 million years ago) to
              the very recent past.    The SHALDRIL (shallow drilling) Committee began work
              in 1996 as an offshoot of other community based Antarctic geology planning
              efforts.  With support from a previous workshop award, the committee
              commissioned a technical evaluation, by a professional engineer, of available
              drilling systems and their suitability and compatibility for use on USAP ships.
               The results of this evaluation were presented at a meeting held at Florida
              State University on February 28, 1998.    The engineering report represented an
              extensive investigation of existing and developing ship-based drilling
              technology with the main conclusion being that no extant drilling systems could
              be deployed on US vessels at present, but that two promising systems were to
              undergo field testing by their manufacturers during the coming year (1998).  In
              addition, however, there were other systems available that could be used by
              third party ships, essentially specialized drilling ships, for Antarctic work. 
                 The SHALDRIL Committee concluded, therefore, that the best course of action
              was to continue to observe and evaluate the technical development of promising
              drilling systems.  Furthermore, the Committee determined to undertake further
              assessments of potential areas for shallow dri lling, with the goal of
              specifying in more detail categories of suitable scientific drilling targets in
              various settings (geographic region, water depth, ice conditions, etc.) around
              the Antarctic margin.  The committee intends to continue its work with the
              intention of holding a follow-up workshop meeting after the field tests during
              1998 are completed.  The Committee continues to interact with individuals and
              groups in the community to ensure that the scientific perspectives and
              rationale for drilling are as complete as possible.  The workshop will occur
              between late 1998 and mid 1999.  ***
