Title       : Large-Scale Simulations of Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a9873849

Award Number: 9873849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Pelcovits pelcovits@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George B. Loriot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9873849
Pelcovits
This grant will support theoretical and computational
              research on liquid crystals using state of the art computers.  Liquid crystals
              are fascinating materials with properties intermediate between those of solids
              and liquids.  They are important for technological applications such as display
              devices, and layered liquid crystalline structures are relevant to biological
              research on lipid bilayers.  An outstanding question in liquid crystal research
              is how molecular structure influences observed macroscopic behavior.  While
              there are empirical rules underlying this connection, there is limited
              fundamental understanding.  This research attempts to improve our understanding
              through numerical simulations.

Large-scale numerical simulations of a
              variety of models of liquid crystals will be carried out.  The models to be
              developed and used in this work are phenomenological in nature, i.e., they do
              not include atomic-level detail, but do include the essential molecular
              features such as shape, electric multipole moments, and the relative strengths
              of attractive and repulsive intermolecular interactions.  By considering
              phenomenological as opposed to atomistic models, larger systems can be
              simulated.  A variety of physical phenomena will be studied including:
              flexoelectricity (the electrical response of a liquid crystal to an
              orientational deformation), the formation of chiral liquid crystal phases from
              achiral moelcules, the mechanism underlying molecular tilt in smectic phases,
              the properties of topological defects in nematics, and the properties of
              confined nematics.  Simulation techniques will include molecular dynamics and
              Monte Carlo algorithms.  The simulations will be carried out on workstations
              and massively parallel Cray computers located at the San Diego Supercomputing
              Center.
%%%
This research is aimed at understanding the properties of liquid
              crystals.  Liquid crystals are fascinating materials which are intermediate
              between solids and liquids, that is, they have properties of each.  Liquid
              crystals are commonly used for display purposes in watches and computer
              screens.  Many biological systems are in a liquid crystal state. This project
              uses state of the art computers to simulate the behavior of various types of
              liquid crystals.   Besides providing a deeper understanding of liquid crystals,
              the results should be of great interest for applications.  This group has a
              unique capability for simulating these complex systems. 
***

