Title       : Structural and Mechanistic Studies of 10-Formyltetrahydrofolate Synthetase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9873606

Award Number: 9873606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lukasz Lebioda lebioda@psc.psc.scarolina.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome D. Odom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Lovell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Bruce Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lukasz Lebioda
MCB 9873606

10-Formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase (FTHFS)
              catalyzes the reversible
formylation of tetrahydrofolate using the energy of
              ATP hydrolysis to drive
the reaction. All known FTHFSs are homologous;
              however, in many eukaryotes
FTHFS is a part of trifunctional
              C-1-tetrahydrofolate synthase while in
bacteria it is a separate enzyme. The
              mechanism of FTHFS has been studied
for almost three decades but in the
              absence of information about its
three-dimensional structure the progress has
              been limited. Of particular
interest is the role of monovalent cations in
              catalysis, the comparison of
the folate-binding site with those present in
              other enzymes. The enzyme of
interest is from thermophilic bacteria and the
              structural origins of
thermostability will be analyzed.

This study is based
              on previous studies with 10-Formyltetrahydrofolate
synthetase from Clostridium
              thermoaceticum.  Earlier work determined the
cDNA and amino acid sequence,
              expressed the enzyme in E. coli, purified and
crystallized the recombinant
              native and selenomethionine forms of the
enzyme. Multi-wavelength anomalous
              dispersion (MAD) data were collected to
2.5 A resolution from the Se-Met
              crystals. Positions of anomalous
scatterers were determined using direct
              methods and the results used to
solve the phase problem. A model of the
              molecule was built and optimized
using crystallographic refinement. Further
              studies will be directed towards
the determination of the structures of the
              enzyme in the form of complexes
with the substrates/catalytic intermediates,
              and inhibitors. Based on
structural data, the catalytic role of side chains
              present in the active
site will be elucidated. The hypotheses so generated
              will be tested using
site-directed mutagenesis.

