Title       : KDI: New Algorithms, Architectures and Science for Data Mining of Massive
               Astrophysics Sky Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9873442

Award Number: 9873442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew W. Moore awm@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter L. Spirtes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Nichol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos Faloutsos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1339,9218,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Moore
9873442
     There many massive databases in industry and science,
              and
this is particularly true for Astrophysics.  There are many kinds
of
              questions that physicists and other users wish to ask the
databases in real
              time, e.g., 'find outliers'; 'find clusters';
'find patterns'; 'classify the
              data records into N predetermined
classes.'  Wide-ranging statistics and
              machine learning
algorithms similarly need to query databases, sometimes
              millions
of times for a single inference.  With millions or billions
              of
records (such as the new generation of astrophysics sky surveys)
this can
              be intractable using current algorithms.  This project
aims to make repeated
              statistical querying of huge datasets
computationally feasible by transforming
              massive databases into
condensed representations that permit the rapid
              answering of such
questions.  To achieve these goals, the investigator and
              his
colleagues explore ways in which tools from statistics (such as
Bayesian
              networks), databases (such as kd-trees/R-trees), and
Artificial Intelligence
              (such as AD-trees and rule-finders) can
help, how they scale up, and how they
              can be combined.
     The investigators intend to help automate the process
              of
scientific discovery for astrophysical data sources in which
there is too
              much information for any unaided human to have a
chance of spotting patterns,
              regularities, or anomalies.
Government and industry in the U.S. have invested
              heavily in
ingenious new ways to gather information in all branches
              of
science and industry, from cell biology to the flows of capital
in
              international commerce.  Scientists and analysts who have
worked so hard to
              gather magnitudes more data than they had ten
years ago are now faced with an
              equally daunting task: exploiting
it fully.  It is ironic that in fields such
              as astrophysics there
is now so much data that no human has enough time to
              even see a
tiny fraction of it.  The job of discovering new
              relationships,
anomalies, and even causation, must now be at least partly
              turned
over to computers.  The investigators comprise a team
              of
statisticians, computer scientists, and astronomers who have each
already
              made progress in this direction.  This team develops new
algorithms to squeeze
              as much information as possible from
trillion-byte astrophysics databases such
              as the Sloane Sky
Survey.  They also make sure that the resulting technology
              is
deployed elsewhere in science and industry.


