Title       : KDI: The Effects of Representational Bias on Collaborative Learning Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9873516

Award Number: 9873516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $461462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Suthers suthers@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873516
Suthers
At a time when public schools are making larger investments in
              hardware and software, and colleges and universities are increasingly turning
              to distance education technology to reach a broader customer base, it is
              critical to maximize the effectiveness of technology for learning. This  
              project will improve understanding of how collaborative learning is facilitated
              by computer software with which learners construct and manipulate visual
              representations of their emerging knowledge. "Representational bias" refers to
              how these software environments facilitate the expression and inspection of
              different kinds of information.

In this project, students will use four
              software environments for recording and organizing hypotheses and empirical
              observations while investigating a recent scientific problem. The software
              environments will each provide users with a different representational device,
              namely threaded discussion lists, nested boxes, graphs, and matrices. Students'
              talk, gestures, and use of the software will be transcribed and analyzed to
              identify the concepts that students use and the types of knowledge that student
              seek and discuss, testing specific predictions concerning how the
              representational bias of each of the four representational devices affect
              learning processes. Learning outcomes will also be assessed. Studies will be
              undertaken with both secondary school students working side by side in front of
              a computer and with college students collaborating remotely in a distance
              learning paradigm.

The research will provide a better theoretical
              understanding of the role of representational bias in guiding collaborative
              learning and problem solving processes. Such an understanding will inform the
              design of more effective collaborative learning and distance learning
              environments, and will also have applications to the design of representational
              tools for a variety of other knowledge networking applications, such as
              collaborations between scientists and other practitioners.


