Title       : KDI: Global Adaptive Optimization for Structural Biology anand Other Complex
               Signal Reconstruction, Pattern Recognition and System Design Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9873139

Award Number: 9873139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Doerschuk   (Principal Investigator current)
              Saul B. Gelfand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1337,1339,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Doerschuck
The resolution of many important questions in science, engineering,
              and operations research requires the solution of a global optimization problem.
               The objective of this research is to apply state-of the art methodology in
              global optimization to several hard problems of scientific or engineering
              interest, and to develop, analyze, and implement new methodology which is
              capable of achieving a new level of performance on these and other complex
              applications.

This project will focus on three areas: 1) structural biology
              problems, especially 3D virus reconstructions from x-ray scattering and
              cryo-electron microscopy data, 2) pattern classification for seismic oil
              exploration problems, and 3) system design and evaluation for nonlinear
              satellite communications links.  These problems exhibit cost functions with
              multiple local minima and a wide variety of characteristics which complicate
              their optimization, including: a) cost functions that are driven by data that
              has a multi-scale structure, b) cost functions that are computed analytically
              but at great expense, c) cost functions that are computed by simulation or by a
              combination of analytical formulas and simulation (so-called semi-analytical
              simulation), and d) cost functions that are driven by changing data, where the
              global minimum must be tracked, possibly in real time.

The first part of the
              work involves applying current global random search algorithms to get a
              baseline for the performance and computational characteristics of these methods
              which have not been studied extensively in the problem areas described above. 
              The second part of the work will involve developing and analyzing algorithms
              with improved efficiency.  

Much of the practicality of global optimization
              stems from the extraordinary (and still growing) computation resources that are
              now available.  The most cost-effective resources are clusters of off-the-shelf
              computers.  This research group has access to a leading edge machine of this
              type.  Because local searches and simulations can be carried out in parallel
              with minimal communication overhead, the algorithms to be developed here are
              ideal candidates for implementation on such computers.  Implementation efforts
              will be focused in this direction.

