Title       : KDI: Science Controversies On-Line: Partnerships in Education (SCOPE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9873180

Award Number: 9873180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1840000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia C. Linn MCLINN@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1338,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Science Controversies On-line: Partnerships in Education (SCOPE) project
              will promote knowledge networking among natural scientists and among science
              learners exploring current scientific controversies. The research combines
              expertise in natural science, pedagogy, technology, and classroom instruction
              from the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Washington, and
              the American Association for the Advancement of Science's SCIENCE Magazine, as
              well as from national and international school partners (see letters from San
              Francisco School, Project 2061 San Antonio Schools, London, England Schools;
              Campbell McRobbie, Brisbane, Australia Schools; BatSheva Eylon, Israeli
              Schools).

The SCOPE Project will develop controversy communities of
              scientists and science learners, focusing on controversies that concern leading
              research scientists and also connect to interests of citizens, such as the
              prediction of earthquakes, the evidence for life on Mars, or the control of
              Malaria worldwide. The Project will create new tools as needed and also draw on
              powerful, available tools to support these learning communities.

SCOPE
              project will focus on four specific questions, which will be addressed through
              a research program consisting of design studies as well as learning studies.
              First, how can we design resources that bring controversies to life for the
              full range of users including scientists and science learners? SCOPE Research
              Forums will feature materials primarily for scientists interested in the
              controversy, while SCOPE Controversy Forums will feature materials primarily
              for science instructors and students investigating the controversy. Second, how
              can we create incentives and technological environments that attract global,
              multidisciplinary, and diverse communities to collaborate on central scientific
              controversies? Our prior research designing environments for on-line learning
              communities and studying their impact illustrates the benefits of productive
              community interactions while at the same time demonstrating the need for
              research to overcome drawbacks. Third, how can networking and electronic
              technologies authentically represent and encourage rich, interactive work on
              scientific controversies? The Project will explore how tools like the SCOPE
              Argument Map and Argument Analyst improve controversy research, make novel
              evidence and issues visible, help diagnose misunderstandings, and scaffold
              interactions. Finally, how can we establish new, more global work practices
              that enable controversy communities to grow and flourish? 


