Title       : Education through Research: Fostering New Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9873763

Award Number: 9873763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Yeterian ehyeteri@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. McArthur  (Principal Investigator former)
              F. Russell Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1082      AWARDS FOR THE INTEG OF RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9873763
McArthur

Colby College has been selected as one of ten recipients of
              the National Science Foundation's Awards for the Integration of Research and
              Education.  Colby clearly recognizes the importance of the integration of
              research and education and continues to develop institutional wide initiatives
              that incorporate research into the undergraduate science pedagogy.  With the
              creation of a new interdisciplinary curriculum, Colby faculty has redesigned
              courses to include open-ended, innovative approaches that are more successful
              in teaching critical thinking for science and non-science majors.  The College
              has initiated a new science planning process, which ensures students learn the
              scientific method by enhancing the discovery experience. 

Colby's efforts to
              integrate research and education were designed with the following outcomes in
              mind for all students: (1) enhancing independent and critical thinking skills;
              (2) improving writing and presentation skills; (3) formulating questions,
              solving problems, and designing and completing projects; (4) acquiring
              analytical thinking and problem solving skills; (5) learning new technical
              skills; (6) enhancing teamwork skills; and (7) developing inquisitiveness that
              lead to life-long inquiry.  Additional outcomes and impacts include fostering
              new connections through enhanced interdisciplinary linkages within and beyond
              the sciences that further integrate research and education, and fortifying the
              research-oriented culture. 

The College is being awarded  $500,000 to
              advance institutional goals of integrating research and education, document and
              disseminate information of its exemplary activities, and expand the integration
              of research and education by conducting outreach activities over the coming
              three years. To complement their successful science programs, Colby will use
              some of the award funds to establish a Postdoctoral Teaching Fellowship. A
              major key of the program is to provide undergraduates with mentors who will
              assist students in their independent research studies. In addition to providing
              a valuable service, Fellows will gain invaluable experience in undergraduate
              teaching and will learn methods of enhancing science education through
              research.


