Title       : Across-Arc Changes in H2O and Trace Elements: Evidence From Melt Inclusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9873575

Award Number: 9873575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113062             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Walker jim@geol.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9873575
Walker
Subduction zones, where oceanic plates descend back into the
              mantle, are major sites of material exchange between the Earth's outer rind and
              its deep interior.  Before the subducting plate or slab descends 200
              kilometers, however, it loses matter via dehydration and/or melting to the
              overriding plate and, at deeper levels, to the overlying  mantle wedge.  This
              loss of matter is sometimes referred to as the slab flux and further serves to
              instigate melting in the mantle wedge. Erupting magmas, stemming from this
              flux-generated melting, can, if primitive enough in composition, be used as
              probes of the slab flux.  Moreover, where magmas have been erupted at many
              locations across a subduction zone, it is possible to examine continuity in the
              slab flux with varying slab depth.  One ideal modern locale for such an
              "across-arc" investigation is southeastern Guatemala and western El Salvador,
              where subaerial volcanism stretches continuously some 100 kilometers across the
              Central American subduction zone.  This study will utilize melt inclusions
              trapped in early-forming crystals in basic scoria and ash falls to examine
              variation in the slab flux across an active subduction zone.  Melt inclusions
              in early-forming crystals often preserve relatively primitive magma
              compositions, permitting less ambiguous insights into the slab flux. Basic
              scoria and ash falls, that is, the products of rapid explosive eruptions of
              relatively primitive compositions themselves, will be utilized, as melt
              inclusions preserved in their crystals typically have experienced less
              post-entrapment chemical modification than melt inclusions preserved in
              crystals in basic lava flows.  Specifically, volatile and trace element
              determinations on the melt inclusions will be carried out by: 1) Laser Ablation
              Inductively Coupled Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS);  2) Secondary Ion Mass
              Spectrometry (SIMS); and  3) Fourier Transform = Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR). 
              Combined volatile and trace element analyses will not only serve to constrain
              the continuity in the slab flux,  but will also help to better constrain the
              nature of the melting process occurring in the mantle wedge.

