Title       : CAREER - Intelligent PDE's: Introducing Knowledge into Geometry Driven Image
               Deformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1999   
File        : a9873670

Award Number: 9873670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Sapiro guille@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Sapiro

This project addresses the development of a comprehensive research and
              educational program in mathematical techniques applied to the areas of image
              processing and computer vision. In particular, Geometric Partial Differential
              Equations (GPDE's) are used. Using GPDE's is a relatively new approach to image
              analysis that brings numerous benefits and has already lead to several
              state-of-the-art results. This research focuses on the theoretical and
              practical study of ways to introduce advanced a-priori and learned knowledge
              and information into the GPDE's framework, moving beyond the simple edge
              information commonly used. 

Key examples where knowledge can be incorporated
              include MRI and SAR, where the number of different objects present in the image
              is known a-priori; object tracking in video, for human-computer interaction for
              example, where information from previous frames can be used; and medical image
              analysis and visualization, where important biological information is
              available. This knowledge is incorporated combining Bayes rule, learning
              techniques, systems of coupled GPDE's, and special geometric forces driving the
              GPDE's. The theoretical study of these new equations is an integral part of the
              program. The educational component of this project focuses on improving
              multi-disciplinary training and creating a new image processing laboratory
              based on personal computers. New courses on GPDE's and on Geometric Visual
              Tracking are being introduced. These and the basic image processing courses are
              oriented to a diverse audience and are attended by students from many
              departments across the University. The collaboration with industry and other
              departments is also addressed defining joint projects. The whole research and
              educational program is oriented toward making advanced tools in image analysis
              more accessible to users that frequently interact with visual information in
              their personal computers.

