Title       : KDI: Virtual Environments and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9873432

Award Number: 9873432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Loomis loomis@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Blascovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              State-of-the-art virtual environment technology immerses individuals in illusory
              physical and social environments which are under the complete control of the
              virtual environment creators. People act relatively unrestrictedly and in real
              time within such virtual environments.  This fact has broad implications for
              basic and applied research in the behavioral, educational, and social sciences.
              This project focuses on immersive virtual environments as a basic research tool
              in four substantive areas:  Learning, visual perception, social interaction and
              social influence, and spatial cognition. The research will help to answer basic
              theoretical research questions, and will establish the validity and reliability
              of immersive virtual environments as a research tool.

The project will use
              immersive virtual environments to understand learning of scientific systems,
              including: presence (i.e., the feeling of immersion or being in a virtual
              representation of the scientific system such as a heart or a lung); guidance
              (i.e., free vs. guided exploration within a three-dimensional representation);
              realism (i.e., abstract vs schematic virtual representation); and verbal
              augmentation (i.e., audible narrative).  The project will also use immersive
              virtual environments to investigate basic perceptual mechanisms underlying
              distance perception, perceptual-motor transformations (i.e., perceptual
              correction of visual distortions caused by external factors such as prisms),
              and perception of lightness and shape. Immersive virtual environments will also
              be used to explore and identify nonverbal communication characteristics that
              are essential to meaningful social interaction within and outside of virtual
              environments, and to conduct studies on fundamental social influence processes
              (i.e., social facilitation/inhibition, group risk taking, and ostracism) within
              virtual environments. Within the area of spatial cognition, the project will
              investigate how individuals aggregate local cognitive maps into global ones,
              and to investigate basic properties of alignment effects (i.e., how an
              individual's body orientation affects acquisition of spatial knowledge).

