Title       : Matching in Centralized and Decentralized Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9996276

Award Number: 9996276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin E. Roth al_roth@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9507791  Roth  This proposal is for parallel theoretical and empirical
              investigations into the matching processes which go on in centralized and
              decentralized labor markets.  It builds on an investigation carried out with
              prior NSF support.  The theoretical part of the investigation has so far
              focused on "two-sided matching" models.  The empirical part of the
              investigation has so far included studies of the entry level labor markets for
              physicians in the US (including entry into specialties) and in Britain (where
              differently organized markets operate in each region of the National Health
              service), as well as entry level labor markets for lawyers (for associate
              positions in law partnerships and clerkships in Federal courts in ;the US, and
              for "articling" positions in Canada), dentists (particularly oral surgeons but
              also pediatric dentists and periodontists), clinical psychologists, and new
              graduates of elite Japanese universities.  Matching processes which are not
              labor markets have also been studied, such as the (different) recruitment
              processes of American sororities and fraternities, and the market for
              post-season college football bowls.  The most striking empirical discovery of
              the recent part of the investigation is that each of these markets has a period
              in its history which exhibited the phenomenon of unraveling of transaction
              times ("jumping the gun"), in which market transactions came earlier and
              earlier in response to competition, resulting in various types of market
              failure.  The present institutional structure of each of these diverse markets,
              whose organizations range from almost completely decentralized to almost
              completely centralized, is in substantial part a response to this history.  The
              past work concentrated on the analysis and comparison of entry level marketq
              which employ centralized market clearing mechanisms.  The present investigation
              is intended to analyze decentralized labor markets, both entry level and senior
              level, and compare their operation and matching effectiv eness both with other
              decentralized markets and with centralized ones.    The five broad lines of
              inquiry in the current project can be summarized as:  Market clearing and the
              effective length of a decentralized market namely how long the market remains
              open, how long individual offers remain open, and how long it takes to make a
              new offer after a previous offer has been rejected;  Decentralized markets as
              matching processes with random elements such as which firm reaches a given
              candidate first by telephone, when more than one is trying to do so;  Improving
              existing markets and designing new ones in order to better understand how
              different market regulations work in combination with each other, and what
              incentives and disincentives they create singly and together in particular
              contexts such as computer assisted markets;  Senior level labor markets namely
              highly decentralized markets in which  firms and workers begin matched and
              matchings are destabilized by retirements and the creation of new positions;
              and  Advice to individual market participants such as whether or not a student
              physician's self-interest is served by revealing her true preference order for
              hospitals.
