Title       : Benign Synthesis, Bioremediation and Safer Chemical Design: Factors in
               P450-Substrate Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9996152

Award Number: 9996152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey P. Jones jpj@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry M. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9710129  Jones  This proposal details studies on the use of cytochrome P450 
              enzymes in the pursuit of green chemistry.  Studies on the  nature of
              P450-ligand interactions will be exploited as a  biocatalyst to design an
              innovative synthesis for the  industrially important carboxylic acid,
              2-ethylhexanoate.  The biocatalysis pathway will lead to pollution prevention 
              since it will obviate the need for toxic and carcinogenic  heavy metals in this
              synthesis.  This synthesis was chosen  as a model for how the P450 enzyme
              family can be exploited  as a biocatalyst in general.  These same studies will
              be  used to develop predictive methodology that can be exploited  in the design
              of safer chemicals.  The predictive  methodology will allow for rapid decision
              making about the  potential of bioactivation in the development of new 
              chemicals.  Thus, less toxic chemicals can be designed into  chemicals for new
              applications and potentially hazardous  chemical identified rapidly.    The
              cytochromes P450 are a ubiquitous family of enzymes that  catalyze the
              reduction of molecular oxygen to a very  reactive monooxygen species.  This
              enzyme system is  responsible for the metabolism of both endogenous and 
              exogenous chemicals.  The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme  family has been called
              the most versatile biological  catalyst known.  This trait is a double edged
              sword that  makes the CYP enzyme family a diverse detoxifier of  chemicals, as
              well as, the major enzyme system responsible  for the production of toxic
              metabolites.  Thus, while the  enzymeis important in biosynthetic reactions, it
              is also  important in bioactivation of benign chemicals to  carcinogens and
              toxins.    The general objective of this proposal is to understand the 
              structural factors that govern cytochrome P450-ligand  interactions.  Active
              site mutants of P450cam will be  constructed and kinetically characterized. 
              Structural  information from these mutants, gained from Xray  crystallography
              and molecular dynamics studies, will define  factors  important in substrate
              binding to P450cam.  This  information can be used in the design of P450
              mutants to  perform benign synthesis, in the design of safer chemicals  and in
              the design of P450 enzymes for bioremediation.  While  the development of
              bacteria for bioremediation is not within  the scope of this grant, the results
              obtained during this  project will be directly applicable to this endeavor. 
              Furthermore, general knowledge about the mechanism of ligand-  enzyme
              interactions, that can be applied to enzyme systems  other than P450, will be
              obtained.    The following are the specific objectives of this proposal:   
              (1.1) Produce P450cam active-site mutants F87W, Y96W, L244A,  and T185F.   
              (1.2) Chemically and kinetically characterize regio- and  stereospecificity of
              oxidations to the  industrially important product 2-ethylhexanoic acid by the 
              wild-type and mutant enzymes.    (1.3) Study enzyme-ligand interactions at the
              active site  using molecular dynamics.    (1.4)     Test the dynamics models by
              examination of crystal        structures of the enzyme and enzyme-ligand
              complexes.  ***
