Title       : CAREER: Teaching through Research: Plume-Ridge Interactions in the Galapagos as
               Focus of an Integrated InterdisciplinaryChemistry Curricular Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9996141

Award Number: 9996141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Harpp kharpp@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9198,9229,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award by the Divisions of  
              Chemistry and Earth Sciences supports interdisciplinary research and  
              education on mantle dynamics and plume-ridge interactions by Dr. Karen S.  
              Harpp, Department of Chemistry, Lawrence University.   The investigation   will
              focus on the Galapagos hotspot, located south of the Galapagos   Spreading
              Center (GSC), off the west coast of South America.  The magmas   produced here
              are controlled by both hotspots and mid-ocean ridges, thus   serving as tracers
              of mantle flow patterns, extent of mixing between the   two sources, and
              detailed lithospheric structure and dynamics.  The   relationship of regional
              volcanic features, specifically the Wolf-Darwin   Lineament (WDL) as well as
              Pinta, Marchena, and Genovesa islands, to the   ridge and hotspot are not well
              understood.  Three mechanisms for   understanding the region have been
              proposed:  WDL pipes plume material to   the ridge; lithospheric weakness at
              the lineament; ridge upwelling, with   increased melt production because of the
              adjacent hotspot.  Each   mechanism results in different predictions for
              geochemical variation.    Sample lavas will be collected from Wolf, Darwin, and
              Genovesa and their   chemical compositions determined.  The data will be fit to
              models to   determine which mechanism best describes geologic activity in the
              area.    The project will be carried out by undergraduates.  In addition,  
              inquiry-based methods and team approaches  will be introduced into   chemistry
              laboratories, including a new environmental laboratory course,   at Lawrence
              University and undergraduate students will be involved in   outreach with local
              school and community groups.  The origin of volcanic islands in the Galapagos
              archipelago is not well   understood because of the complex interaction between
              ocean ridges and   local hotspots or plumes.  The geological mechanism will be
              determined by   studying the chemical composition of the lava flows at various
              islands.    The research is integrated with education of undergraduate students
              who   will be prepared in discovery-based laboratories prior to experience in  
              field work in the Galapagos.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
