Title       : Career: Properties of Typical Computable Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9996310

Award Number: 9996310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Fenner fenner@cse.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The main  research goals of this project are to study new analytical  
              techniques for elucidating the internal structure of complexity classes.  These
              techniques adapt the theories of Lebesgue measure and Baire  category to 
              computational complexity.  They provide quantitative methods to  differentiate
              `typical` from `exceptional` properties of languages in a  particular class,
              shedding light on the  relationships between the structure and  intrinsic
              difficulty of  computational problems. These concepts are also closely  related
               to the study of pseudorandom and `pseudo-generic` sequences.  Improvements to
              some of these analytic techniques are explored, and new types  of
              complexity-theoretic Baire category and their applications are  investigated. 
              The Educational Component of this CAREER Grant includes the  goals of: (a)
              Establishing theoretical computer science as an integral  part of the
              undergraduate curriculum at the  University of Southern  Maine, expanding the
              theory  offerings and more closely tying theory with  applications and with
              other subjects; (b) Implementing innovative ways  to attract nonmajors to  the
              computer science department, especially those who  are  interested in computer
              science, but may not be ready for a  traditional first programming course.  
              The routes to these goals run through  teaching, advising,  mentoring, and
              curriculum development. (This educational  component is part of the Research at
              Undergraduate Institutions  Program.)                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
