Title       : Collaborative Research: Lake Bosumtwi, Ghana: High-Resolution Paleoclimatology
               and Seismic Reflection Site Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9996099

Award Number: 9996099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Scholz cascholz@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9816830  Scholz, Christopher A.   University of Miami  Title: Lake
              Bosumtwi, Ghana: High-Resolution Paleoclimatology and  Seismic Reflection Site
              Survey    Lake Bosumtwi, Ghana, is an important and unique resource for 
              paleoenvironmental research.  The value of the Lake Bosumtwi  sediments has
              been demonstrated for reconstructing centennial to  millennial-scale variations
              of the West African monsoon.   Lamination counts and radiometric data prove
              that the last 1000  years of the Bosumtwi sediment record is annually-laminated
               (varved), and thus ideal for reconstructing and understanding  interannual to
              centennial-scale climate variability in a vast area  of Africa continuing no
              other such record.  This award supports a  project to carry out the field and
              laboratory work needed to  produce the first annually-laminated continuous
              record of the West  African Monsoon and Sahel drought extending back centuries
              and  perhaps millennia.  This record will be used to test relationships 
              between North Atlantic variability and West African rainfall that  have been
              hypothesized using the short instrumental record alone.  Because of its unique
              location, climate sensitivity and  paleoenvironmental potential, Lake Bosumtwi
              has been identified by  the international paleoenvironmental community (i.e.,
              IGBP-PAGES   Past Global Changes  and ICDP  International Continental Drilling 
              Programme ) as a high priority for scientific drilling.  This  project will
              conduct the detailed high-resolution single-channel  and
              intermediate-resolution seismic reflection survey needed to  plan a
              scientifically-optimal and safe drilling program.
