Title       : An Integrated Environment for Reasoning about regulatory Control elements in
               Microbial genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9996304

Award Number: 9996304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa Gaasterland gaaster@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IRI-9810537
Gaasterland, Theresa <gaasterl@cs.uchicago.edu>
University of
              Chicago
$0 - 18 mos.     (Jointly funded with the CISE Institutional
              Infrastructure - Total Award $49,998)

CONACyT: An Integrated Environment for
              Reasoning about Regulatory Control
Elements in Microbial Genomes

This
              research is a collaboration of the PI with Dr. Julio Collado-Vides in Mexico. 
              The goal is  to use artificial intelligence techniques in deciphering patterns
              of conservation of regulatory elements across whole bacterial genomes by
              integrating two different platforms for investigating genomes:  a multi-genome
              annotation tool that uses automated reasoning and cooperative answering methods
              to associate features with a genomic sequence (the already existing MAGPIE
              system, developed by Gaasterland) and a database of regulatory elements,
              operons, and related regulatory signals encoded in E. coli genomic DNA (Regulon
              DB, assembled by Collado-Vides). To do this, new methods need to be developed
              for the combination of different types of knowledge to make predictions, and
              the system must be able to revise prior predictions based on new knowledge.  In
              addition, there will be insights into appropriate knowledge representations
              that capture both
structure and function of living organisms.  On the
              biological side, the infrastructure developed in the project will enable an
              understanding of the degree to which knowledge gained from one organism can be
              used to guide the exploration of a new
              organism.

http://www.cs.uchicago.edu/~gaasterl/

