Title       : Functional MRI Investigations of Visual Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9996264

Award Number: 9996264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Dassonville prd@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The brain must interpret an incoming visual signal in order to form a
              perception of the outside world.  The most obvious step in this interpretation
              -- the translation from light into a neuronal code -- occurs in the retina,
              with each subsequent stage of visual processing providing a further refinement
              of this visual signal.  In general, this processing cascade leads to a
              perception of the world that would seem to be an adequate representation of the
              original image.  However, it is not uncommon for the brain to misrepresent the
              image that is presented to the eyes, often resulting in what is known as a
              visual illusion.  Even beyond well-known illusions, many studies have shown
              that much of normal vision is in fact based on an inaccurate and/or inadequate
              representation of the physical stimulus presented to the eyes.  Studies of the
              manner in which the brain misrepresents the visual scene will lead to a greater
              understanding of the way in which we see.  The proposed research was designed
              to determine whether the neuronal activity in different brain areas corresponds
              better to the physical stimulus presented to the eyes, or the subject's
              perception of this image. For this purpose, our investigations will focus
              primarily on a region of the brain that has been shown to respond specifically
              to the visual image of a face. The functional specificity of this region will
              allow us to contrast its activation under conditions in which face and/or
              non-face images are presented but may not be perceived as such. In each
              experiment, the superior temporal and spatial resolution of high field (4
              Tesla) functional magnetic resonance imaging will allow us to compare the time
              course of brain activity with the behavioral measures of visual perception in
              individual subjects.  The results of these experiments will allow us to better
              understand the processing cascade that leads to visual perception.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
