Title       : Expanded Measures of Price and Quantity Structures over Space and Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9996122

Award Number: 9996122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 21,  1998    
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26022              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bettina H. Aten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bridgewater State College
	      
	      Bridgewater, MA  02324    617/697-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The main focus of this project is to provide an updated, revised and expanded
              Penn World Table (PWT)  data set of economic aggregates that is consistent
              across time and space for over 150 countries for the whole post World War II
              period, known as Penn World Table.  This continuing effort is built upon the
              framework of the detailed benchmark purchasing power parity studies organized
              on a regional basis through the United Nations.  To prepare this large Table ,
              it is necessary to combine the regional benchmarks for the latest benchmark
              year, 1993, into a world comparison for the 100 odd countries that are expected
              to participate.  The results of previous world comparisons will then be
              integrated with the 1993 benchmark to provide the base for estimating values
              for non-benchmark countries, and the base for moving estimates of all countries
              backward and forward in time.    This project also includes the addition of
              some variables in PWT proper, as well as the inclusion of subsidiary price and
              expenditure from the benchmark comparisons that researchers will be more
              readily accessible by.  Software will be provided with the benchmark data that
              will help researchers make comparisons between any pair of benchmark countries
              that may be of interest.  It is also planned to develop a spatial measure of
              consumption and add it to the PWT data set.  This spatial consumption measure
              will also be designed on an experimental basis to provide interarea comparisons
              within a few large and geographically diverse countries.   The wide use of
              these data,, the extensive country participation in the benchmark studies, and
              the continued focus on international income comparisons in conferences and
              journals demonstrate the  importance of  the PWT to the  research community.
