Title       : Climatic and Vegetational Oscillations During the Last Glacial-Interglacial
               Transition in Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9996064

Award Number: 9996064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 20,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Sheng Hu fshu@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emi Ito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert E. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9619583  Hu    Evidence is compelling from the circum-North Atlantic and  from
              other parts of the globe that climatic warming  during the last
              glacial-interglacial transition (LGIT) was  punctuated by short-lived reversals
              to near-glacial conditions.  In  Alaska paleoecological and stable-isotope data
              from scattered sites  strongly suggest the existence of short-lived climatic
              events  during the LGIT.  This PALE/ARCSS award supports a project to  acquire
              high-temporal resolution records of vegetation and climate  during the LGIT by
              analyzing a suite of proxy indicators in  sediment cores from lakes across
              three sub-regions of Alaska.   Vegetational reconstructions will be based on
              pollen, spore, and  plant-macrofossil records supplemented by carbon-content
              and  magnetic-susceptibility stratigraphies.  The complementary  properties of
              these proxies will allow the identification of the  most plausible
              paleoenvironmental scenarios.  The results from this  project will be used to
              assess the timing, geographic extent,  character, and magnitude of climatic and
              vegetational oscillations  during the LGIT in Alaska.  As part of the
              longitudinal  (circumarctic) database from PALE and the latitudinal database
              form  PEP-I, paleorecords from this project should offer insights into  the
              linkages of North Pacific high-latitudes to the global climate  system and the
              mechanisms causing abrupt climatic changes.
