Title       : Property Regimes and Deforestation: A Quantitative Study of the Central
               Himalayas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9996202

Award Number: 9996202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59265              (Estimated)
Investigator: E Somanathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The effects of property institutions are central to economics. Yet, quanti
              tative work on the effects of property institutions is rare in economics be
              cause property institutions generally covary with political boundaries, and
              therefore with other important variables. Thus, their impact tends to be
              conflated with that of other factors. The main objective of this interdisci
              plinary study are: to build a database that gives a measure of the extent of
              ecological degradation suffered by forests in the Central Himalayas, and to use
              it to perform a quantitative study that examines the importance of property
              regimes versus demand-side factors, such as population, in causing such
              degradation.  The central Himalayan region of North India that constitutes the
              study area has three property regimes in forests within the same ecological,
              eco nomic, and cultural milieu. In all three cases, the forests are a common
              resource, (as is typical in most tropical forests), so regulation or collective
              action is needed to overcome the resulting tendency for over-exploitation.
              Reserved Forests, which are state-managed, rely mainly on regulation, while
              Panchayat Forests, managed by village councils, rely on collective action. The
              third category, consisting of village forests not under formal manage ment,
              also needs collective action to survive.  Data on forest quality in the region
              is obtained by analysis of satel lite images in conjunction with field work. A
              sample of several thousand small plots of forest is taken and forest quality in
              them measured.  The presence of thousands of Panchayat Forests adjacent to
              Reserved Forests provides an exceptional natural experiment to examine the
              effect of property regimes on forest cover. By taking a subsample of plots
              which lie across regime boundaries from each other, we can control for the
              effects of all variables other than the legal regime. Multiple regression
              analysis is used to relate forest quality in a plot of forest to the property
              regime, the ecological type, demand-side variables such as accessibility,
              social character istics of villages such as size and ethnic composition, and
              controls. Questions such as: is local collective action more effective than
              state control in con serving forests, how much do prices matter as compared to
              property regimes, and do social factors influence the effectiveness of legal
              institutions, are answered.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
