Title       : Evolution of Organismal Design: Functional Morphology of Tetraodontiform Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1999   
File        : a9996101

Award Number: 9996101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Wainwright pcwainwright@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9306672  Wainwright         This research will investigate the evolution of
              anatomical  and physiological design of the feeding mechanism in fishes of  the
              order Tetraodontiformes (puffer fishes, trigger fishes, and  their relatives).
              The primary goal of this work is to provide  several specific tests of the
              general hypothesis that features of  design limit or direct subsequent
              evolutionary changes. During  feeding behavior, patterns of muscular
              contraction will be  documented by recording the electrical signals associated
              with  muscle contraction through fine-wire electrodes, and movements of  the
              structural components of the head will be assessed by  comparing the ability of
              species to alter muscle activation  patterns and movements while feeding on
              prey that vary in the  challenges they present to the fish. Data collected from
              several  species will be used to examine the correlation between  evolutionary
              duplication of jaw closing muscles may enhance  subsequent diversification and
              flexibility of feeding behavior.  Second, the effect of incorporating a major
              evolutionary novelty  into the head on the feeding system will be explored
              using the  puffer fish body-inflation mechanism as a model system.       This
              research will contribute to our understanding of how  complex muscle-skeleton
              systems evolve. The work will provide  rare tests of the influence of specific
              features of functional  design on the subsequent evolution of those systems. In
              addition,  this research will broaden our base of comparative knowledge of  the
              diverse feeding systems in vertebrates.  ***
