Title       : Robust Parameter Estimation for Wireless CDMA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9996245

Award Number: 9996245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98858              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Miller smiller@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project involves the design and analysis of communication receivers  for
              direct-sequence (DS) code-division multiple-access (CDMA) in an  environment
              consisting of multiple user interference where each signal is  received at
              possibly different strengths and in narrowband interference  (NBI) of unknown
              forms.  This work differs from the work of many other  researchers in that the
              initial focus here is put on the problem of  parameter estimation (i.e.
              synchronization) rather than data detection.  Traditionally synchronization has
              been the most difficult aspect in the  design of communication receivers.  An
              asymptotically maximum likelihood  parameter estimation scheme will be used
              which is based on colored noise  model rather than the usual white noise.  This
              makes the proposed  estimation scheme nicely suited for dealing with NBI.  Once
              the parameter  estimation problem has been thoroughly studied, the focus will
              turn to the  problem of multiuser receiver design in the presence of NBI.  The
              optimum  receiver for such an environment has been formulated and will be 
              investigated. Suboptimal structures that are robust to errors in needed  side
              information will also be studied.  Finally the project will address  the
              problem of multiuser receiver design when the form of the transmitted  signal
              is not precisely known, as when in CDMA overlay a spread transmitter  may have
              to distort its own signal in order to avoid interfering with a  nearby
              narrowband system..
