Title       : Solvable Models of Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9996382

Award Number: 9996382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Sattinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical equations describing waves in fluids, plasmas, and optical fibers
              
are extremely complex.  Usually they can be solved only on high speed
              computers. 
However, it is often possible to approximate these complex
              problems with simpler 
equations whose solutions can be written in explicit
              analytical form. 
Such equations are called ``solvable models'', and have been
              known for years. 
An example is the Korteweg-deVries equation, which models
              waves of the 
surface of water and acoustic waves in plasmas.  It was
              discovered in 
1877 by Boussinesq, but the derivation was not rigorous. 
              Numerical 
experiments on the ion acoustic plasma equations have shown
              convincingly 
that this approximation is robust - that is, that the validity
              of the 
model extends far beyond the small parameter range for which it was
              
formally derived. This award will support a mathematically rigorous
              proof
for this conjecture. The analysis of other such models will also be
              
carried out. Among these are model equations for shallow water waves
              that
were proposed by Camassa and Holm of Los Alamos National Lab, and
              solvable 
models that are associated with Hele-Shaw flows (flows of two
              immiscible 
liquids between two plates).

Many physical phenomena have
              complicated mathematical descriptions that can
be reduced to simpler models in
              certain limiting cases.  An example is the 
description of surface waves in an
              ocean.  The full description involves a
complicated system of equations that
              has to be solved on a supercomputer
in each special instance of the problem.
              However, in the important special 
case of shallow water and unidirectional
              waves, a much simpler equation has been 
proposed as an approximation.  While
              this simpler equation can be 
studied in great detail and much more thoroughly
              than with any numerical 
simulation, the question arises for which physical
              parameters (in this case water
depth and wave height) the approximate
              description is indeed correct.  These
questions have in the past led to
              serious scientific disputes, and there are 
very few cases where they have
              been resolved by rigorous mathematical analysis.
Their resolution is very
              desirable for purely intellectual reasons and to 
validate numerical
              simulations.  The award will support work to establish 
the validity of such
              reduced equations in a related situation (waves in plasmas)
and the study of
              other reduced equations that describe fluid flow phenomena. 


