Title       : SBIR Phase I: COMPEL: A Model for Simulating Strategic Behavior in Competitive
               Power Generation Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9996158

Award Number: 9996158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleksandr Rudkevich ARUDKEVICH@TCA-US.COM  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tabors, Caramanis & Associ
	      50 Church Street
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    617/354-5304

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860819

     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              conduct theoretical research and develop a prototype software tool (COMPEL) for
              stimulating strategic behavior of generating companies in competitive power
              markets. We will use the Klemperer-Meyer Supply Function Equilibria (SFE)
              theory; which has been applied to power markets in England (Green and Newbery)
              and in the U.S. (Rudkevich et al).                           
     The U.S.
              electric industry is being deregulated in many states. In deregulated markets,
              prices will be set by market-forces and generating companies will have to
              compete for market share and revenues. Existing decision support tools,
              designed for regulated markets and based on least-cost optimization approaches,
              will not be suitable to simulate the operation of deregulated markets because
              they do not accurately capture the impacts of competition. COMPEL will be such
              a tool.
The objectives of this Phase I project are to advance the application
              of the SFE theory in modeling strategic behavior of sellers in competitive
              generation markets and to develop prototype software for easy application of
              this theory.
     Prospective users of COMPEL include regulatory agencies,
              power buyers, generating companies, financial institutions, researchers and
              consulting companies. Potential commercial applications are enormous.

