Title       : Combined NMR and Theoretical Investigation of Alkylation Reactions on Solid
               Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9996109

Award Number: 9996109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 31,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Haw jhaw@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant co-funded by the NSF-EPA Partnership for Environmental Research.
               It will generate fundamental knowledge necessary to provide the petroleum
              industries with alternative catalysts for the HF-catalyzed alkylation
              processes.  Transition to solid-acid catalysis is currently considered the
              correct alternative from pollution prevention standpoints but these catalysts
              have poor selectivity and fast deactivation rate.  Better understanding of
              mechanisms and catalytic materials is needed in order to develop further these
              catalysts. Prof. J.F. Haw in collaboration with Dr. J.B. Nicholas (Pacific
              Northwest National Laboratory) will investigate the catalyzed alkylation of
              hydrocarbons on acidic solids, namely sulfonated zirconia, BF3/alumina, and
              zeolite Beta. They will apply complementary techniques, reaction kinetics in
              flow microreactor, solid state NMR, and density-functional theory, to
              investigate fundamental catalysis issues in alkylation over selected solid
              acids: sulfonated zirconia, BF3/alumina, and zeolite Beta.  The overall goal of
              the research will be the determination of acid site structure and reactivity,
              mechanism of alkylation of trans-2-butene with isobutane, and mechanism of
              catalyst deactivation.  The nature of active intermediates, transition states,
              deactivation pathways, etc., will be investigated spectroscopically,
              theoretically, and by kinetics measurements.
