Title       : Legal Authority in a Diverse Society: The Psychology of Cross-Ethnic Authority
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9996364

Award Number: 9996364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom R. Tyler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9511719  Tyler  Recent events as well as the long-standing problems of relations
              between legal authorities and disadvantaged groups illustrate the special
              problems that arise when authority structures extend across the boundaries of
              social diversity.  This research begins from a central, important question: 
              how are legitimacy and acceptance of authority achieved in ethnically-diverse
              societies, especially in that of the United States?  Previous research has
              shown that use of fair procedures is one of  the most effective ways for
              authorities to assure that they are viewed as legitimate.  But it has not dealt
              effectively with how social diversity affects judgments of fairness of
              treatment and acceptance of legal authorities.  This project will begin to
              remedy this by comparing how people react to authorities similar to or
              different from them along salient social dimensions.  Findings from focus
              groups will be integrated with existing theory on the psychology of authority
              to develop interview questions.  Interviews will then be conducted with 1,000
              California residents drawn from four different ethnic groups to investigate
              recent encounters with authorities of the same or different ethnicity as the
              respondent, as well as numerous other matters.  A laboratory experiment will be
              conducted to test the causal relations suggested by the survey.  The project
              has the potential to guide the development of policy governing the behavior of
              authorities that will enhance the prospects that their decisions will gain
              acceptance or legitimacy.  %%%%  This research begins from a central, important
              question:  how are legitimacy and acceptance of authority achieved in
              ethnically-diverse societies, especially in that of the United States? 
              Previous research has shown that use of fair procedures is one of  the most
              effective ways for authorities to assure that they are viewed as legitimate. 
              But it has not dealt effectively with how social diversity affects judgments of
              fairness of treatment and acceptance of legal a uthorities.  This project will
              begin to remedy this by comparing how people react to authorities similar to or
              different from them along salient social dimensions.  Findings from focus
              groups will be integrated with existing theory on the psychology of authority
              to develop interview questions.  Interviews will then be conducted with 1,000
              California residents drawn from four different ethnic groups to investigate
              recent encounters with authorities of the same or different ethnicity as the
              respondent, as well as numerous other matters.  A laboratory experiment will be
              conducted to test the causal relations suggested by the survey.  The project
              has the potential to guide the development of policy governing the behavior of
              authorities that will enhance the prospects that their decisions will gain
              acceptance or legitimacy.  ****
