Title       : Interior Point Methods Semidefinite Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9996154

Award Number: 9996154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florian A. Potra potra@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kendall E. Atkinson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PI: Florian Potra    DMS-9706894    Interior Point Methods for Semidefinite
              Programming    Abstract    Further investigation of interior point algorithms
              for semidefinite  programming (SDP) is proposed with emphasis on the study of
              global and  local convergence, infeasibility detection and software
              development.  While the vast majority of interior point methods for linear 
              programming (LP) have proven polynomial complexity, this is not the  case for
              SDP. The iteration complexity of interior point algorithms for  SDP and its
              dependence on the search direction as well as on the  central path neighborhood
              used by the algorithm will be investigated.  Locally superlinearly convergent
              algorithms will be identified within  the class of interior point methods for
              SDP with proven polynomial  complexity. Superlinear convergence is especially
              important for SDP  since no finite termination schemes exist for such problems.
              The local  convergence analysis for interior point algorithms for SDP is much
              more  challenging than those for LP and it will be a major focus point of the 
              project.  A C++ package for solving large-scale SDP problems will be 
              developed. The code will efficiently handle different sparsity patterns 
              arising in applications, and will provide refined infeasibility  detectors.   
              Semidefinite programming (SDP) represents one of the most important  classes of
              optimization problems with many applications in science and  engineering
              especially related to optimal control (in electrical  engineering), optimal
              allocation of resources (in economics and  manufacturing), structural
              optimization (in civil engineeering), etc.  According to a recent survey paper,
              semidefinite programming is ``the  most exciting development in mathematical
              programming in the 1990's''.  Until recently no efficient methods were known
              for solving general  semidefinite programming problems. In the late 80's it has
              been  realized that interior point methods, initially developed for linear 
              programming, can be successfully used  for solving semidefinite  programming
              problems. The advent of interior point methods has created  new opportunities
              for the application of SDP in science and  engineering. In order for these
              opportunities to materialize it is  important to provide the scientific
              community with a good theoretical  understanding of the behaviour of interior
              point methods for SDP and  with reliable and efficient software capable of
              solving large-scale SDP  problems.  The project will investigate some of the
              most critical  issues in the theory of semidefinite programming and will lead
              to the  design of efficient practical algorithms. The software resulting from 
              this project is likely to have a positive impact on several application  areas
              in science and technology.
