Title       : Mathematical Fluid Dynamics and Education Turbulent Transport, Combustion, and
               Compressible Convection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9996181

Award Number: 9996181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,9198,9251,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701942  McLaughlin    This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty Early   Career Development Award.  The research component will focus on
              the   theoretical understanding of fluid phenomena. Specifically, these
              research   efforts outline the study of turbulent transport and scalar
              intermittency, the   numerical calculation of enhanced burning speeds in
              premixed combustion,   and theoretical and computational studies of weakly 
              compressible transport   phenomena. An underlying theme in this effort is the
              isolation of how fluid   flow properties affect transport phenomena, which may
              include enhanced   mixing rates, enhanced rare event probability, enhanced
              burning speeds, and   enhanced anelastic heat transport. These studies involve
              a sophisticated   integration of modern asymptotic, numerical, and
              probabilistic techniques.   Additionally, this award will support the continued
              curriculum development   of an advanced undergraduate/ graduate level
              Mathematical Fluid Dynamics   course.  Such a course is designed to present the
              student with the essential   mathematical tools necessary to understand fluid
              mechanics and to quickly   equip the student with essential techniques for
              attacking research problems   in Applied Mathematics.  Additionally, a small
              demonstration fluids   laboratory will be developed to offer visualization of
              many fluid   phenomena.    This Faculty Early Career Development Award will
              provide the principal   investigator the opportunity to pursue his research
              efforts in the   understanding of many fluid transport phenomena while
              additionally   developing new educational curricula. Developing sound theories
              for fluid   transport is fundamental in many ways.  The experimental
              understanding of   fluid turbulence typically involves the tracking of passive
              dye, and,   consequently, the quantification of how fluid flow properties
              affect the   mixing of such dye is critical.  Further, the development of sound
              transport   theories naturally will yield insight into a va riety of mixing
              applications   such as the tracking of atmospheric pollutants.  Perhaps most
              importantly is   the potential information such theories may offer to
              large-scale   computational fluids, combustion and climate models in which a
              common   difficulty regards how to treat unresolvable length and time scales. 
              It is an   accepted fact in computational fluid dynamics that important, non- 
              negligible, complex fluid phenomena exist which are simply not resolvable   on
              even the largest supercomputers.  These sub-grid effects play a dramatic   role
              in many fluids applications such as weather prediction. They cannot be  
              ignored, and a standard approach is to replace them by something simpler--   an
              effective mixing coefficient.  In many applications, the transport theories  
              developed here offer sound justification and quantification of these  
              coefficients, and potentially may offer improvements to existing  
              computational models.  Finally, the curriculum effort will involve the  
              development of a small fluids laboratory including a demonstration water  
              tunnel.  Through this lab, a student studying the theory of fluids will find  
              exciting visual contact with real fluids phenomena typically unavailable in  
              mathematics coursework, and this visualization will lead to greater  
              excitement and appreciation for the usefulness of mathematical theory in the  
              understanding of observable phenomena.    The National Science Foundation
              strongly encourages the early   development of academic faculty as both
              educators and researchers.  The   Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
              Program is a Foundation-  wide  program that provides for the support of junior
              faculty within the   context of their overall career development.  It combines
              in a single   program the support of quality research and education in the
              broadest sense   and the full participation of those traditionally
              underrepresented in science   and engineering.  This program enhances and
              emphasizes the importance   the Foundation places on  the development of full,
              balanced academic   careers which include both research and education.
