Title       : Comparative Responses of Moist and Dry Arctic Tundra to Altered Snow and
               Temperature Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9996383

Award Number: 9996383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn D. Walker mwalker@lter.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Seastedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5219,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400083  Walker  This project will evaluate the ecological consequences of
              climate  change in moist and dry arctic tundra with field manipulations of 
              winter precipitation and summer temperature.  Project scientists  will
              investigate effects on species performance, community  structure, and ecosystem
              C and N dynamics. They will erect snow  fences to increase snowpack and use
              small greenhouses to warm air  and soil temperatures. Growth rings and annual
              stem increments of  woody species and physiological plant performance will be 
              compared with historical temperature and precipitation records.   Experimental
              findings will also be compared to natural vegetation  patterns along snow
              gradients and areas where long-term  anthropogenic increases in snow cover have
              occurred. Simulation  modeling will be used to extend their findings with a
              focus on  net ecosystem carbon budgets.  The main effort will be to  quantify
              and understand the magnitude and direction of the  transient response of arctic
              tundra to a series of climate change  scenarios.  The experimental
              infrastructure will permit more  detailed investigations by other investigators
              in future years if  the response is, as we anticipate, of sufficient magnitude
              to be  of importance for evaluating effects of climate change to arctic 
              ecosystems.  The project is a U.S. contribution to the  International Tundra
              Experiment (ITEX).  ***
