Title       : Effects of Projectin Mutations on Myofibrillogenesis in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9996318

Award Number: 9996318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Agnes J. Ayme-Southgate southgatea@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Muscle cells undergo a complex differentiation program which culminates with
              the functional assembly of the myofibrillar apparatus.  The regulation of this
              assembly process is not well understood.   There is good evidence that titin,
              the giant protein of vertebrate muscles, might play a significant role as both
              a scaffold and ruler during myofibrillogenesis. There is, however, no direct
              proof of how essential titin is to this process because of the lack of titin
              mutants. Projectin is another giant protein which is considered a homolog of
              titin in Drosophila muscles. These two proteins share a similar modular
              structure and both form thin elongated molecules. Dr. Ayme-Southgate
              hypothesizes that projectin will form, early in Drosophila development, a
              scaffold which will then be used to assemble myosin filaments in regular
              arrays. The availability of projectin mutants allows her to use a genetic
              approach to test this hypothesis.  The first Aim is to establish primary
              myoblast/myotube cultures from gastrulae cells of wild type Drosophila embryos.
              Several reports provide reliable protocols and the general applicability of
              these primary cultures for both immunofluorescence and electron microscopy
              studies. The cultures will be followed up to the point when myotubes have
              formed organized fibrils (around 24 hours after egg laying). The timing and
              pattern of assembly will be established by conventional immunofluorescence for
              the following myofibrillar proteins: projectin, actin, myosin, alpha-actinin
              and kettin. In the second and third Aims, the effects of either projectin
              mutants or myosin heavy chain mutants on the assembly pattern will be evaluated
              in primary mutant cultures. The effects associated with the mutations will be
              evaluated at different time points, both by standard immunofluorescence and
              electron microscopy. In Aim four, a mutagenesis screen will be carried out to
              obtain new mutant alleles in the projectin gene, with a primary focus on
              obtaining projectin null allele(s). Mutations will be induced using gamma-ray
              irradiation, which is known for its high induction rate of large DNA
              rearrangements. The new projectin alleles will be selected through a standard
              F2 lethal screen. They will be further characterized both at the protein and
              molecular levels to identify the mutations leading to the absence of the
              projectin protein in homozygous embryos.

The completion of these four Aims
              will provide a more complete picture of the steps involved in the formation of
              the myofibrils in Drosophila embryonic muscles and, in particular, of the role
              and importance of the projectin protein during myofibrillogenesis.  A
              demonstration of such a role would also reinforce the significance of the data
              available for titin in vertebrate muscles.

