Title       : CAREER: Novel Materials Based on Metal-Terpyridyl Building Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9996436

Award Number: 9996436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra L. Mohler dmohler@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of of nanostructures and  
              polymers by means of metal complexation of terpyridal ligands.  Using  
              building blocks containing two or more terpyridal units, rigid rod   polymers,
              rings and molecular monolayers will be constructed.  The use of  
              carboxylate-substituted terpyridal groups in the synthesis of rings and  
              molecular monolayers will allow the self-assembly of nanotubes and  
              organometallic zeolites.  Applications as molecular wires, slow release  
              devices and as channels for cross-membrane transport of ion and molecules  
              will be stressed.  Course and curriculum development featuring polymer  
              laboratory and lecture courses will be the focus of the educational   component
              of the award. With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic   Program, the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Office   of Experimental
              Programs to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) are   supporting the
              research and educational efforts of Dr. Debra L. Mohler of   the Department of
              Chemistry at  West  Virginia University.  Professor   Mohler will focus her
              work on developing methods for the assembly of new   materials by metal
              complexation of terpyridal ligands.  The resulting   nanostructures will be
              will be examined for the ability to act as   molecular wires and slow release
              devices and as channels for the   cross-membrane transport of ions and
              molecules.  The experience gained   from the research will be be applied to the
              development of an   undergraduate lecture and laboratory polymer courses.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
