Title       : Speech Generation for Human-Computer Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9996440

Award Number: 9996440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mari Ostendorf mo@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to increase effectiveness of human-computer
              communication by improving the quality of automatically generated speech. Using
              the known linguistic structure that is a by-product of text generation, the
              research investigates both utterance-level and dialog-level control of prosody
              (i.e. phrasing, emphasis and intonation) i  n a commercial synthesizer.  The
              approach -- development of statistical models of the mapping between meaning
              and prosodic structure -- is novel in its emphasis on automatic learning
              algorithms associated with the aim of portability to different task
              domains/generators.  The research involves: collection and automatic prosodic
              labeling of `acted`   speech in target task domains; use of generated
              syntactic, semantic and discourse annotation to drive prosodic control modules;
              investigation of the role of prosody in computer initiative, e.g. in
              clarification or error correction subdialogs; and development of evaluation
              protocols for assessing speech generation quality and its impact on
              human-computer interaction.  The research will benefit existing spoken language
              interfaces by providing higher quality speech output and more flexibility for
              response generation, but it will also open up applications for human-computer
              interaction where a visual display is not available, e.g. in small devices, in
              telephone-based computer access or for persons who are visually impaired.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
