Title       : POWRE: New Approaches for Efficient Determination of Protein
Structures by
               Solid-State NMR and Isotopic Labeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9996376

Award Number: 9996376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dagmar Ringe                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mei Hong mhong@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9870373
Hong

Membrane proteins and fibrous proteins constitute more than a
              third of all proteins and carry out many important biological functions. Yet
              they cannot be characterized by single-crystal X-ray diffraction and
              solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) due to their noncrystalline and
              insoluble nature. Solid-state NMR is a powerful probe of the three-dimensional
              structure of these molecules, but to date it is inefficient for protein
              structure determination, since normally only a small number of spin labels
              (e.g. 13C and 15N) can be incorporated into the protein to measure a few
              molecular structural parameters at a time. The goal of this research is to
              develop a novel isotopic labeling approach and combine it with
              multi-dimensional solid-state NMR to obtain many structural parameters per
              experiment, thus elucidating protein structure more efficiently. This labeling
              scheme will exploit the biosynthetic pathways of amino acids to achieve
              selective but extensive enrichment of 13C. This will create many spin pairs for
              internuclear distance measurements while reducing the complex multi-spin
              interactions present in uniformly 13C-labeled proteins. This labeling approach
              will be tested on a well-characterized and stable protein, ubiquitin. Based on
              this labeling scheme, two types of solid-state NMR experiments will be
              explored. The first type of experiment probes the protein secondary structure
              by measuring the backbone torsion angles f and y. The second type of experiment
              constrains the protein tertiary structure from internuclear distances,
              especially long-range distances between the 15N and 13C on the side chains of
              different residues.

While trained in the area of NMR throughout her
              professional life, Dr. Hong's interest has been understanding the structure of
              small peptides.  With POWRE support, she intends to move into the arena of
              large polypeptides, employing molecular biological techniques of protein
              biosynthesis and isotopic labeling.  The support will provide her the needed
              start-up for the proposed study, and allow her to expand her teaching into
              areas of advanced NMR and biophysics of macromolecules to both undergraduate
              and gradute students at U Mass.  With the support, Dr. Hong also intends to
              organize a number of workshops on introductory NMR and two-dimensional NMR for
              biomolecular structure determination.



