Title       : Chloroplast Protein Import in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9996273

Award Number: 9996273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67200              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Stern ds28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9198,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9406540  Kindle    Most chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins are encoded by 
              nuclear genes, synthesized in the cytosol, and imported post  translationally. 
              Photosynthetic cells must be able to  accurately sort proteins between
              mitochondria and  chloroplasts.  Targeting specificity is mediated by transit 
              peptides which are present on cytosolic precursors and  removed during or
              shortly after import into the organelle.  Proteins that interact with the
              transit peptide during the  import process presumably discriminate between
              chloroplast  and mitochondrial precursors.  This project seeks to apply  the
              molecular and classical genetics of Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii to questions
              concening chloroplast protein  import.  Stable nuclear mutants that are
              non-photosynthetic  because they lack plastocyanin or the gamma-subunit of the 
              chloroplast ATPase (CF1-gamma) have been isolated and can be  transformed to
              photosynthetic competence using the  corresponding wild-type structural gene. 
              To define the  region of the transit peptide that is required for  chloroplast
              protein import in Chlamydomonas, the putative  import domain will be subject to
              extensive deletion and site  specific mutagenesis.  The mutated gene will be
              reintroduced  into the corresponding null mutant to determine whether it  is
              able to complement the non-photosynthetic phenotype.  The  same mutations will
              be tested in a homologous in vitro  chloroplast protein import assay.  The
              results should give a  detailed picture of the features of the transit peptide
              that  are required for in vivo and in vitro import.  A genetic  selection will
              then be set up to identify extragenic  supressors that are able to compensate
              for the transit  peptide mutation.  To minimize the number of revertants and 
              transit peptide-linked suppressor mutations that are  recovered, suppressors
              will be isolated using strains that  carry two copies of the specfiic transit
              peptide mutation,  one linked to the plastocyanin gene, the other linked to the
               CF1-gamma gene.  Dep ending on the starting strain,  accumulation of one or
              both proteins will be required to  restore photosynthesis.  In either case,
              accumulation of  both gene products will be screened by immunoblot analysis. 
              Suppressors that are unlinked to the original transit  peptides will be of most
              interest since they may identify  components of the protein import pathway that
              interact with  the transit peptide.  Chloroplasts will be prepared from 
              candidate suppressors and tested in vitro for their ability  to import
              precursors with the corresponding transit peptide  mutation.  The cloning of
              genes that are altered in such  suppressor strains should define proteins that
              interact with  the transit peptide during import.  This work will provide 
              insight into the requirements for transit peptide function  and will identify
              proteins that interact with the transit  peptide during chloroplast import. 
              %%%  With few exceptions, life on earth is completely dependent  on
              photosynthesis, the process whereby light energy from  the sun is used to
              convert atmospheric carbon dioxide plus  water into sugar and oxygen. 
              Chloroplasts are the  subcellular site of photosynthesis in eukaryotic plants, 
              and as such are critical to life on earth.  Chloroplasts  are semi-autonomous
              organelles within the plant cell, in  which the photosynthetic machinery is
              separated from the  rest of the cytoplasm by a set of two concentrically 
              arranged cellular membranes.  Since most of the proteins  which comprise the
              photosynthetic machinery are synthesized  in the cytoplasm, a mechanism is
              needed to bring those  proteins across these two membranes into the
              chloroplast.  The mechanism must be selective, since there are other 
              membrane-bounded organelles in the cell, such as  mitochondria and peroxisomes,
              which have different  functions, and different protein contents in order to
              carry  out those functions, and whose proteins are also imported  from the
              cytosol.  This project represents a very clever  approach to two closely
              related question s: 1, what is the  "signal" on certain proteins which destines
              those proteins  specifically to the chloroplast?; and 2, what are the  proteins
              in the chloroplast which are involved in the  selective recognition of that
              signal and import of  cytosolic proteins destined for the chloroplasts?  If 
              successful, the project will provide major advances in the  understanding of
              chloroplast biogenesis and specificity of  subcellular targeting.  The
              information that will be  obtained has obvious potential utility in
              agricultural  biotechnology.  ***
