Title       : Fracture of Functionally Graded Materials - Modeling, Synthesis and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9996378

Award Number: 9996378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85079              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glaucio H. Paulino paulino@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zuhair A. Munir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Gibeling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9713798  Paulino  Physically based models which can be used to predict and 
              optimize FGM mechanical performance are developed under this  project. Discrete
              and continuous FGMs are analyzed using the  boundary integral equations and the
              finite element methods,  respectively. Optimization of the compositional
              gradient by  means of numerical simulations provides relevant input for 
              material synthesis.  A novel technique known as Field-  Activated Combustion
              Synthesis (FACS), is used in the  synthesis process. Brittle FGM system,
              MOSi2/SiC, consisting  of two layers joined by a compositionally graded
              interface  sandwiched between the layers is used.  With different  applied
              electrical fields, different compositional profiles  are obtained for this
              system.  The spatial distribution of  the phase concentrations of Mo and Si are
              determined from  electron microprobe analysis. The distinct samples, with 
              various compositional profiles at the graded interface, are  tested by
              carefully placing a crack inside the  compositionally graded.layer. The
              fracture behavior of FGMs  with crack faces parallel and perpendicular to the
              property  gradient are investigated both experimentally and  numerically. The
              numerical models are calibrated by fracture  mechanics experiments. The
              influence of compositional  distribution functions on the structural behavior
              and the  mechanics of crack initiation and propagation in FGMs under 
              mechanical and/or thermal loads is studied. The study  contributes to the
              understanding of mechanical behavior and  optimal (or near optimal)
              compositional distribution  functions of MoSi,)/SiC and Ti3SiC2/SiC FGMs, in
              particular,  and to the actual design of FGMS, in general.  ***
