Title       : The Myosin Family of Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9996126

Award Number: 9996126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Titus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Phagocytosis is the process by which cells ingest particles.  It is a major
              means by which unicellular organisms obtain nutrition, and in multicellular
              animals, it is essential for functions such as the clearance of debris in
              tissues and defense against invading pathogens.  Phagocytosis proceeds in
              several discrete steps: particle attachment to the surface of the cell;
              recruitment of cytoskeletal elements consisting of actin microfilaments to the
              underside of the underlying plasma membrane; construction of a phagocytic "cup"
              of actin-rich membrane around the particle; fusion of the apposing plasma
              membranes to form a complete membrane enclosure, or phagosome, around the
              particle just under the plasma membrane; and internalization, i.e., movement of
              the membrane-enclosed particle to the interior of the cell.  The contents of
              the newly formed phagosome are then degraded following fusion with
              intracellular membrane-bound lytic compartments (e.g., lysosomes).  The
              mechanism by which the particle is physically internalized following phagocytic
              cup formation remains unknown.  The cell exerts a significant amount of force
              during particle internalization, around 10 - 30 piconewtons.  All available
              studies indicate that a myosin (a molecular motor which moves actin
              microfilaments) is responsible for generating the forces necessary for particle
              engulfment.  However, the identification of a specific myosin that plays an
              essential role in phagocytosis has until now been lacking.  

An
              unconventional myosin required for phagocytosis, myoi, has recently been
              identified in the slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum, which is dependent on
              phagocytosis for nutrition.  Cells lacking myoi exhibit a 70% decrease in the
              uptake of particles.  The phagocytosis defect in these cells is not due to a
              failure of the cells to bind the particle, nor can it be attributed to a
              general disorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.  The specificity of the
              defect suggests that myoi is largely responsible for generating contractile
              forces during phagocytosis.  Interestingly, myoi is a class VII myosin.  This
              family of myosins has been implicated in neurosensory functions in both mice
              and humans, where it has been speculated to play a role in either linking the
              actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane or participating in endocytic
              trafficking.  The myosin VII heavy chain is comprised of a conserved myosin
              motor domain, three to five light chain binding motifs in the neck region of
              the protein structure, and a tail region that has a short stretch of predicted
              coiled-coil structure followed by a tandem repeat of a MyTH4 (myosin tail
              homology 4) and talin homology domains.  The functions of the MyTH4 and talin
              homology domains are unknown, but it has been speculated that they are required
              either for the supramolecular organization of myosin VII or for binding to
              targeting or regulatory molecules.  

The identification of a class VII
              myosin in Dictyostelium, a simple eukaryote amenable to molecular genetic
              manipulation, makes this an ideal system in which to carry out detailed
              functional analysis of this myosin.  The role of myoi in phagocytosis will be
              analyzed first by real-time observation of the mutant cells during
              phagocytosis.  Complementation studies will be carried out with Green
              Fluorescent Protein (GFP) tagged myoi and its distribution during phagocytosis
              will be determined and correlated with the different stages of this process. 
              Site directed mutagenesis will be used to create deletions of various elements
              of the tail domain, and the phenotypes of cells expressing these deletion
              constructs will be analyzed to determine the function and distribution of the
              altered myosins.  The results of these experiments will provide a
              characterization of the role of the first myosin found to be directly involved
              in phagocytosis, and will allow a determination as to whether the tail region
              is essential for proper localization and/or function.

The myosin family of
              motor proteins is ubiquitous among eukaryotic cells, and has long been known to
              be responsible for fundamental motility functions ranging from intracellular
              movement of subcellular components to whole cell movements such as cell
              crawling and muscle contraction.  In recent years, many distinctly different
              types of myosin motors have been identified and characterized in molecular
              terms.  However, the functional signficance of these various myosins has
              remained unknown.  This project focuses on one of the very few so-called
              "unconventional" myosin types for which a distinct function has been
              correlated.  The relatively simple yet genetically tractable slime mold,
              Dictyostelium, is an ideal organism for these studies, because there is a great
              deal of background information known about actin, myosins, and associated
              proteins in these cells, and because it undergoes many fundamental cellular
              processes that are dependent on actin and myosin (including ameboid motility
              and phagocytosis).  The work will lead to a better understanding of the role of
              unconventional myosins, particularly the class VII myosins, in all eukaryotic
              cells.



