Title       : A Schema Library for Biological Collection Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9996204

Award Number: 9996204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley D. Blum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,9169,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The million of specimens contained in biological collections  (natural
              history museums and herbarial) represent extensive,  high-quality documentation
              of the Earth's biota.  Collection  data are stored, however, in different data
              structures under  different database management systems, and are consequently 
              different to synthesize.  In this project, museum data  specialists computer
              scientists are collaborating to build a  federation query server from a
              web-accessible schema library  and an extensive suite of scientific management
              tools  (developed by the OPM Project, Lawrence Berkeley National 
              Laboratories).  The schema library documents the structures  of individual
              collection databases and a reference model of  shared concepts.  The data
              management tools use inter-schema  mappings to transform queries and data
              between the reference  model and local databases.    Biological collections
              data can be used to determine species  distributions; multi-species patterns of
              distribution and  diversity; and how distributions are influenced by 
              environmental factors (e.g., climate) and land-use  practices.  This project
              will make collections data more  accessible by automating the repetition and
              complexity of  querying different collection databases, and will help  deliver
              collection data into the emerging National  Biological Information
              Infrastructure.  The query server  will complement the analysis, visualization,
              and prediction  tools that are being developed at the San Diego  Supercomputing
              Center (for the US-Organization for  Biodiversity and our understanding of
              global climate change.  This work is supported by the Database Activities
              program in  the BIO directorate.
