Title       : Advanced Constraint Techniques for User Interface Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9996001

Award Number: 9996001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Hudson hudson@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the use of advanced constraint-based techniques for the
              production of high  quality user interfaces.  Constraints as a general
              technique allow the declaration of a set of  relationships that are to hold
              between entities.  Constraint satisfaction systems are then used to  maintain
              those declared relationships automatically without explicit programming.  The
              use of  constraint techniques offers to dramatically simplify the task of user
              interface implementation and  hence make the creation of easy to use computer
              applications substantially easier.  This project will  employ propagation-based
              constraint techniques and seek to provide advances in several related areas. 
              Tools to make existing constraint techniques more practical will be produced
              and distributed to the  user interface community.  New applications of
              constraints to user interface tasks will be explored,  and new visual notations
              for constraints will be developed.  Finally, this project will develop new 
              concurrent algorithms for constraint satisfaction which will, for the first
              time, allow constraints to  be effectively employe d in multi-user interfaces
              distributed across networks.  Taken together, these  advances will serve to
              make a wide variety of high quality user interfaces easier to construct, and 
              hence will promote creation of dynamic computer applications that are
              significantly easier to use.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
