Title       : Career: Resource Management for Parallel and Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9996418

Award Number: 9996418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 3,  1999     
Expires     : August 3,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon B. Weissman jon@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A metasystem is an ensemble of workstations, parallel, and vector machines
              connected by one or more networks.  Metasystems offer the promise of high
              performance both in reduced completion time and high job throughput.  The goal
              of this project is to develop a set of automated scheduling tools that will
              produce reduced completion time and high job throughput in a wide-range of
              metasystem environments.  This investigation will also explore fundamental
              issues in the relationship between completion time and job throughput.  The
              approach taken will be based on the Prophet scheduling system developed by the
              PI at the University of Virginia.  Prophet automatically schedules data
              parallel jobs across a network of heterogeneous workstations to reduce
              completion time.  In this project, Prophet will be used to schedule data
              parallel, task parallel, and sequential jobs in a general metasystem that may
              contain multicomputers, multiprocessors, and ATM networks.  Prophet will be
              applied to real workloads that include scientific applications to test the
              efficacy of the scheduling tools.  For parallel jobs, the completion time
              obtained by Prophet will compared to the completion time obtained by the Mentat
              scheduler.  The system throughput obtained by Prophet will be compared to the
              throughput obtained if resource sharing is not considered in making scheduling
              decisions.  It is also expected that insights into scheduling policies will be
              gained by studying the interaction between throughput and completion time.
