Title       : Mechanism of an Evolutionary Change in Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9996146

Award Number: 9996146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery WJ33@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to understand the mechanisms underlying
              evolutionary changes in the chordate body plan.  For these studies, the PI has
              developed a model system consisting of two closely-related ascidian species
              with different larvae.  The ascidian tadpole larva exhibits all the hallmarks
              of a chordate yet contains only 2500 cells and six different tissues.  Molgula
              oculata (the tailed species) has a swimming tadpole larva with a tail
              containing a notochord and striated muscle cells, whereas Molgula occulta (the
              tailless species) has an immotile larva lacking these features.  Fertilization
              of tailless species' eggs with tailed species' sperm results in restoration of
              the notochord and tail in the hybrid larvae, suggesting that they were lost in
              part by changes in zygotic tail-forming genes.  In previous funding periods the
              PI has identified some of the tail forming genes.  This project extends those
              studies in focusing on the Manx and bobcat genes, which encode a putative
              transcription factor and an RNA helicase respectively.  Preliminary studies
              show that Manx and bobcat are present in an operon-like cluster in the tailed
              species' genome.  Here the PI proposes to determine how these linked genes
              regulate ascidian evolution and development.  First, the PI will characterize
              the entire Manx/bobcat gene complex to determine whether other tail-forming
              genes are present and whether these genes are indeed part of an operon in the
              tailed species.  Second, the PI will determine the roles of the Manx and bobcat
              genes in tail development, particularly in mediating cell proliferation and
              programmed cell death.  Third, the PI will characterize the Manx/bobcat genes
              in the tailless species to determine what mutations may have accumulated to
              result in tail regression.  Finally, the PI will study the potential
              interactions between Manx and bobcat and the forkhead and Brachyury (T) genes,
              which are known to be involved in axis and notochord development in ascidians. 
              Thus, by studying tail forming genes in ascidian larvae, the PI hopes to shed
              light on the mechanisms underlying the origin of the chordate body plan during
              evolution.
