Title       : An Objective Rotation Tensor Applied to Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9996080

Award Number: 9996080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 24,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis E. Wedgewood wedge@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS  9625347  Principal Investigator: Wedgewood 
                This grant will support the investigation of a fundamental issue in fluid
              mechanics, viz., identifying the complete set of kinematic variables and
              rheological time derivatives that are admissible in constitutive equations. 
              This work will be useful in the description of the mechanical behavior of
              fluids.  It is a common requirement that constitutive equations should be frame
              invariant (or objective).  The Rivlin-Ericksen tensors and convective
              derivatives that are presently employed are sufficient to satisfy objectivity,
              but it has been established that the vorticity can play a much less restricted
              role in constitutive equations than the traditional formalism allows.    It is
              argued that it is the relative difference between the rotational state of the
              fluid element and its local surroundings that can cause stress in fluids with
              long-range molecular interactions.  These arguments lead to a decomposition of
              the vorticity into two portions, one of which represents the rotation caused by
              shear deformation.  The remaining portion of the vorticity is useful in
              defining a frame invariant time derivative.  This theory was first presented as
              part of a network theory for polymer melts in Wedgewood and Geurts (1995a).   
              Predictions of the theory will be tested using Brownian dynamic simulations
              that will indicate if polymer chain interactions can give rise to the predicted
              stresses.  Also proposed are simulations of complex flow (e.g., the driven
              cavity and the four-to-one contraction) using the stochastic methods recently
              developed (Wedgewood and Geurts, 1995b) and established finite element methods.
               Finally, the evaluation of existing experimental data and the design of new
              flow experiments are proposed as a vital element in establishing the usefulness
              of the proposed theory.
