Title       : SBIR Phase II: Handheld Geometer's Sketchpad
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9996103

Award Number: 9996103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas R. Jackiw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KCP Tech
	      1150 65th Street
	      Emeryville, CA  94608    510/595-7000

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5373,9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801206  Jackiw  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              from Key Curriculum Press, Inc. will leverage recent understanding of Dynamic
              Geometry software to an emerging new category of classroom technology--handheld
              computers--that will greatly lower barriers to the financial, physical, and
              intellectual accessibility of technology across the 6-12 mathematics
              curriculum.  The starting point for the project is The Geometer's Sketchpad
              (Trademark), one of the most highly regarded and commercially successful
              software systems presently available for math education.  Reinventing Dynamic
              Geometry for handheld platforms will dramatically change the shape of student
              interactions with technology, moving these interactions away from isolated
              moments of technocentric computer activities conducted in a computer lab and
              toward a deeply-integrated learning process, wherein technology supplements and
              extends student learning in routine practice both inside and outside the
              classroom.  These new contexts for technology-assisted learning in turn place
              new requirements upon-and create new opportunities for-educational software
              design.  The proposed combination of an innovative hardware/software device
              with classroom curriculum and professional development materials to support its
              use will fundamentally change how teachers and students learn and do
              mathematics.  The commercial success of The Geometer's Sketchpad development
              materials provide another proven avenue of commercial sustainability for the
              eventual products of the proposed research. demonstrates the commercial
              potential of Handheld Geometer's Sketchpad.  The new device will have even more
              utility for the geometry classroom than the current incarnation of The
              Geometer's Sketchpad; and, if the research is successful, it will have ready
              application throughout the 6-12 mathematics curriculum.  The enthusiastic
              response of teachers, students, and researchers to prototypes of software and
              curriculum produced during Phase I indicates that the re will be high level of
              teacher support.  Curriculum and professional development materials provide
              another important avenue of commercial sustainability for the eventual products
              of the proposed research.  ***
