Title       : Development of Mapping Processes in Mathematical Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a9996353

Award Number: 9996353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121260             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Dixon jadixo@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the development of central processes in mathematical
              problem solving. The project examines a central issue in theories of formal
              problem solving: how children and adults select an appropriate mathematical
              operation when they encounter a novel problem. Despite the fact that students
              learn a particular mathematical operation (e.g., division) in the context of
              relatively few problem domains (e.g., equally distributing candy), they can
              eventually apply the operation to solve problems in a tremendous variety of
              novel domains (i.e., domains in which the solution operation has not been
              identified for them). The proposed research investigates two central processes
              in mathematical problem solving: Domain Mapping  and Operation Mapping. The
              Domain Mapping process is similar to analogical mapping and unfolds as follows.
              Students learn a formal operation (e.g., division) in the context of a
              particular base domain (e.g., equally distributing candy). As a consequence,
              the base domain and the formal operation become linked. When a novel problem
              domain is encountered the child attempts to analogically map the novel domain
              to the base domain. If the two domains can be mapped, the formal operation is
              applied. Mathematical operations can also be reached through Operation Mapping.
              Children induce the functional relationships that hold for a mathematical
              operation as they apply it to problems and practice computational procedures.
              Under Operation Mapping, these functional relationships (i.e., what the
              mathematical operation accomplishes) are directly mapped to the representation
              of the novel problem. In the first study, developmental changes in the use of
              the two mapping processes will be assessed using a correlational design with
              children from 4th through 8th grade. A second study will examine the effects of
              the introduction of rational numbers on students' representations of the
              mathematical operations and on their subsequent problem solving. The
              introduction of rational numbers effectively rewrites the functional
              relationships that hold for different operations. This should affect students'
              representations of mathematical operations and have subsequent detrimental
              effects on their ability to use the Operation Mapping process. The third study
              directly manipulates the Domain and Operation Mapping processes and test the
              causal relationships each predicts. The proposed project will substantially
              contribute to research on the development of problem solving, and to the study
              of problem solving in adults. This research will also provide tremendous
              educational opportunities for students, and involve collaboration with local
              teachers and administrators.

