Title       : Efficient, High Resolution, Numerical Methods for Free-boundry Problems with
               Surface Tension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9996349

Award Number: 9996349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Sussman sussman@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elbridge G. Puckett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9706847  Sussman    This research concerns the analysis and development of
              numerical techniques for modeling solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations for
              two-phase incompressible flow.  This methodology is specifically targeted at
              problems characterized by large density and viscosity jumps (e.g.  air/water)
              and stiff, singular source terms, such as those due to the surface tension
              force.  Problems with these features are extremely important in science and
              industry.  Casting, mold filling, thin film processes, extrusion, spray
              deposition and jets are just a few examples.  These problems present
              considerable challenges.  Standard finite difference methods can either be too
              dissipative or too oscillatory near regions of large density variations.  The
              resulting elliptic equation for enforcing the divergence free condition on the
              velocity field (projection step) has coefficients that exhibit a large jump at
              material interfaces.  The resulting elliptic equation will also have a widely
              varying source term at material interfaces, since the divergence of the surface
              tension term will appear as a singular source term for the projection equation.
               In this research, the proposers plan to work in close collaboration with Dr.
              John Andrews of Xerox and David Wallace of Microfab technologies in developing
              numerical methods for modeling jetting devices.  In an ink-jet device, it is
              important to study the characteristics of droplet formation.  Because surface
              tension plays a large role in the droplet formation process, it is important
              for a numerical method to accurately model the surface tension effects during
              break-up of a droplet.  It is also important for a numerical method to
              accurately predict the size of emitted droplets.  Currently an adaptive level
              set method and a second order volume-of-fluid method have been developed for
              computing two-phase flows as characterized above.  Objectives of the proposed
              research include improved numerical modeling of the interface between material
              boundaries and improved mo deling of surface tension, especially at points of
              droplet break-up.  In the process of this study, the proposers will compare the
              behavior of the levelset method to that of the volume of fluid method which use
              a very similar formulation for the surface tension force.  The proposers will
              also compare numerical solutions to solutions obtained  via asymptotic methods
              and drop experiments conducted by Xerox.     This research concerns the
              analysis and development of numerical techniques for modeling incompressible
              two-phase flow (such as air and water).  Problems in two-phase flow are
              extremely important in science and industry.  Casting, mold filling, thin film
              processes, extrusion, spray deposition and jets are just a few examples.  In
              this research, the proposers plan to work in close collaboration with Dr. John
              Andrews of Xerox and David Wallace of Microfab technologies in developing
              numerical methods for modeling jetting devices.  These companies develop
              jetting devices used in ink-jet printers, solder deposition and the fabrication
              of micro-optical elements.  In a jetting device, it is important to study the
              characteristics of droplet formation.  Because surface tension plays a large
              role in the droplet formation process, it is important for a numerical method
              to accurately model the surface tension effects during break-up of a droplet. 
              It is also important for a numerical method to accurately predict the size of
              emitted droplets.  Objectives of the proposed research include improved
              numerical modeling of the interface between material boundaries and improved
              modeling of surface tension, especially at points of droplet break-up.  In the
              process of this study, the proposers will compare the behavior of the
              computational method with drop experiments conducted by Xerox.
