Title       : Protein-RNA Interactions in Splicing of a Physarum Group I Intron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9996344

Award Number: 9996344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Woodson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9601148  Woodson  Post-transcriptional processing of RNA is a fundamental step
              in eukaryotic gene expression and consequently of basic importance to
              biological processes such as embryonic development and disease. A central
              problem in RNA processing is understanding how proteins contribute to the
              formation of catalytic RNA structures. We will use protein-dependent splicing
              of a group I intron as a model for the folding and assembly of protein-RNA
              complexes in vivo. A protein that accelerates splicing of a group I intron from
              Physarum nuclear pre-ribosomal RNA has been biochemically identified in nuclear
              extracts of Physarum polycephalum. This protein is the first example of a
              nuclear group I splicing factor.   An advantage of this simple system for
              biochemical studies is that the intron RNA is able to self-splice in the
              absence of protein, enabling a direct comparison of protein-dependent and
              protein-independent splicing in vitro. In addition, we have previously
              established a bacterial system for expression and splicing of group I introns
              in pre-ribosomal RNA. Consequently this system is well suited for future
              investigations of protein-RNA interactions in vivo and will be directly
              relevant to processing of pre-ribosomal RNA.  Preliminary work has shown that
              this Physarum splicing factor primarily recognizes a tRNA-like structure that
              is not part of the catalytic core of the intron. As maturase proteins that
              facilitate group I splicing are so far known to predominantly bind their
              cognate intron core, our observation suggests a novel mode of group I
              protein-dependent splicing. The minimal binding site and essential recognition
              elements within this tRNA-like structure will be determined using chemical
              modification and ribonuclease protection, and site-directed mutagenesis. Models
              of protein-facilitated splicing will be evaluated by determining the dependence
              of in vitro splicing kinetics on variables such as protein concentration,
              temperature and time of preincubation. Protein-induced changes in the 
              structure of the catalytic core will be determined by comparing the pattern of
              Fe-EDTA-dependent hydroxyl radical cleavage of intron RNA in the presence and
              absence of protein. Intermediates in the complex assembly pathway will be
              separated by native gel electrophoresis.  The Physarum splicing factor will be
              cloned and expressed as a fusion protein in E. coli. cDNA libraries will be
              screened by hybridization to probes derived from peptide sequences or by
              complementation of splicing in bacteria. Biochemical characterization of the
              cloned protein will permit more detailed analysis of protein function and
              investigation of whether this protein binds other cellular RNAs. Development of
              bacterial (or yeast) expression systems will lead to further work on in vivo
              splicing of group I introns and enable us to dissect the roles of non-specific
              and specific RNA-binding proteins in the processing of pre-ribosomal RNA.  %%% 
              Most genes in higher organisms contain non-coding sequences, or introns, that
              are removed after the gene is transcribed into RNA. This process, which is
              called "splicing", is an essential step in the normal expression of genes in
              human and other organisms. Defective splicing can lead to disease or to
              developmental disorders. Correct splicing is determined by the sequence and
              structure of the RNA itself, and also by interactions between RNA and proteins.
              We have isolated a protein that promotes correct splicing of a group I intron
              in pre-ribosomal RNA of the slime mold Physarum polycephalum. This system will
              be used as a model for investigating how proteins enhance splicing reactions.
              The points of interaction between the RNA and the protein will be determined,
              and the way in which the protein alters the three-dimensional structure of the
              RNA investigated. In the future we will determine whether this protein also
              regulates expression of other genes. These experiments will lead to a better
              understanding of how more complex splicing systems in human genes are
              controlled.  ***
