Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Origins of Rice Insects Determined by Genetic
               Analysis and GIS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9996409

Award Number: 9996409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37440              (Estimated)
Investigator: George K. Roderick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal System Office
	      2200 University Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5942,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9816384
Roderick

This award provides funds to permit Dr. George K. Roderick,
              Center for Conservation Research and Training, University of Hawaii, to pursue
              with Dr.Yoo-Han Song, Department of Agricultural Biology, Geong-Sang
              University, Korea, for 36 months, a program of cooperative research to
              determine the source of immigrant species of rice planthoppers (Homoptera:
              Delphacidae) to Korea.  These species do not over-winter in temperate areas
              such as middle China, Korea, and Japan but are found throught the year in
              tropical regions of South and Southeast Asia.  The collaborators will use their
              respective areas of expertise in molecular population genetics (Dr. Roderick)
              and in GIS analysis (Dr. Song) to test hypotheses of the origin of these insect
              pests.

Based on prevailing wind patterns at the time of immigration, the
              sources of immigrant rice pests have been hypothesized to be a region of
              Southern China and northern Vietnam and that populations further south do not
              contribute to the yearly pool of migrants.  These hypotheses, however, have
              never been tested.  The collaborators propose to address these hypotheses using
              new molecular genetic tools coupled with an analysis using a geographical
              information system (GIS).  In particular, they will determine the origins of
              the Korean immigrations of rice planthoppers (Homoptera: Delphacidae) as well
              as test whether southern, more tropical populations (south of the Red River
              Delta in Vietnam) are distinct from populations found to the north.  They also
              will examine the relative roles of geographic barriers and wind direction and
              speed in determining patterns of migration.  This research will provide insight
              into the factors that lead to genetic differentiation among populations as well
              as provide information for management of rice pests.  The collaborators are
              highly regarded scientists in their respective fields of research.  This
              project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
              Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and
              Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information,
              ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual
              benefit.  Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
***


