Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Arithmetic Models for Shimura Varieties, L-Functions and
               Cohomology Groups as Integral Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9996393

Award Number: 9996393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgios Pappas pappas@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9623269  Pappas      The PI will continue his work on the following two
              problems:  A. Study the geometry and the local properties of arithmetic models
              of Shimura varieties over primes of non-smooth reduction, by using ideas from
              the theory of equivariant embeddings of homogeneous spaces.  B. Study the
              integral representations that appear in the cohomology of arithmetic varieties
              with finite group actions. This is part of a program for extending the theory
              of Galois module structure of rings of integers of A. Fr;3hlich and M.  Taylor
              to higher dimensional arithmetic varieties. The author proposes to investigate
              relations of invariants describing these representations with data obtained
              from L-functions.    This is research in the field of algebraic geometry.
              Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one
              which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its
              origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest
              equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the field makes use of methods not 
              only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding
              application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer
              science, and robotics.
