Title       : Determination of c-Scr's Direct Substrates Following PDGF-BB Stimulation of
               Fibroblasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9996303

Award Number: 9996303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevan M. Shokat shokat@cmp.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Protein kinases have a central role in many cellular functions including
              transmitting signals received at the cell surface to pathways within the cell,
              cell-cell communication, cell cycle control, cell morphology and motility, and
              many other processes.  Multiple kinases are often involved in the regulation of
              specific pathways, so that the role of each kinase is difficult to determine. 
              This is complicated further by the fact that kinases have overlapping substrate
              specificities.  Recently a chemical method has been developed by the PI for
              directly tracing kinase substrates using an engineered kinase, which accepts an
              unnatural phosphodonor with a gamma 32P label.  This research will explore
              substrate selectivity in the platelet derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)
              kinase pathway in fibroblasts.  This pathway is important in controlling entry
              in to the cell cycle as well as fibroblast motility and morphology.  In this
              project the substrates that are phosphorylated by c-Src after it is recruited
              to the stimulated PDGFR will be determined.   These studies will provide a
              detailed picture of how 2 kinases act to stimulate complex cell signaling
              cascades in fibroblasts.  The use of chemical tags for individual kinases in
              these pathways will enable better resolution of how these receptors coordinate
              with the nonreceptor tyrosine kinases to finely control important cell
              responses.
