Title       : Synthetic Coordination Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9996002

Award Number: 9996002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Reed chris.reed@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support for research on weakly coordinating   anions
              by Dr. Christopher A. Reed, Chemistry Department, University of   Southern
              California.  The goal of the project is to develop the chemistry   of carborane
              anions based on the icosahedral CB(11)H(12) anion.  The   anion will be
              functionalized, typically with halogens, to make it as   inert as possible to
              coordination with a cation.  Some synthetic work   with fullerenes is also
              proposed.  The basicity and redox properties of   the resulting species will be
              determined and compared with those of known   weakly coordinating anions.  New
              spectroscopic and electrochemical   methodswill be used to rank anion basicity.
               The anions developed will be   used to carry out a magnetochemical
              investigation of an iron compound to   determine the extreme magnetic
              parameters for the S = 3/2 spin state.    New extremes of electrophilicity,
              coordinative unsaturation, oxidation   potential and electrolyte behavior are
              expected to be observed.   Negatively charged species (anions) usually
              associate tightly with   species bearing a positive charge (cations).  By
              preparing anions whose   shape and charge distribution prevents them from
              closely associating with   cations, highly reactive cations result.  
              Development of this chemistry   has implications for numerous chemical
              processes, including cationic   polymerization and battery technology.  It
              could lead to new chemical   reagents for use in synthesis and excellent
              catalysts.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
