Title       : NSF Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9996005

Award Number: 9996005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23300              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kriegman kriegman@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,9227,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This research addresses problems in machine perception and                  
              robotics.  The work is focused in two areas:  recognizing curved               
              objects in images, and mobile robot navigation.  Recognizing                   
              complex curved 3D objects, whose image features depend strongly on             
              viewpoint, is one of the fundamental problems of computer vision.              
              Objects are modelled by collections of algebraic surfaces and their            
              intersection curves, and the geometric constraints involved in                 
              predicting and interpreting the images of these models are                     
              represented by sets of polynomial constraints.  Techniques from                
              algebraic geometry and robust numerical methods can be used to                 
              solve these constraints.  Viewpoint dependent features are                     
              predicted from an object model and represented as an aspect graph              
              which enumerates all topologically distinct views.  Elimination                
              theory is used to relate image measurements to objects, and                    
              optimization techniques can be applied to estimate an object's                 
              pose; objects are then recognized from a library of models.                    
              Problems to be addressed include automatic generation of object                
              models, new object representations, prediction for sensors with                
              limited resolution, computational efficiency, and indexing large               
              data bases.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Mobile robots provide a dynamic test-bed for robust computer vision            
              algorithms in an unstructured world.  In addition to developing new            
              sensors, research focuses on obtaining the necessary information to            
              perform a task.  While some activities are readily achieved through            
              visual serving, others require developing a 3D representation of               
              the environment.  Stereo and structure-from-motion provide 3D                  
              information from image measurements which can be incorporated into             
              a relational map.  This map forms the basis for motion planning;               
              paths revisit previously seen places and strategies for exploring              
              new areas can be determined.  Additionally, robot tasks and                    
              cultural constraints are described more naturally when objects are             
              recognized within this map.                                                    
                                                                                             
              
