Title       : Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Fluid Dynamic Processes Controlling
               Channelized Lava Flow Emplacement Through Numerical, Experimental, and Field
               Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1998    
File        : a9996007

Award Number: 9996007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 10,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15678              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy K. P. Gregg tgregg@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Fornari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706822  Gregg  Lava flows, present on all terrestrial planets, are the surface
              expression of the thermal and chemical evolution of a planet.  However, because
              an active extraterrestrial lava flow has yet to be observed, emplacement
              parameters (such as effusion rate and flow velocity) must be inferred from the
              final flow morphology.  Channelized, or leveed, lava flows (flows that solidify
              only at their margins during emplacement) have relatively simple geometries,
              and thus have been the subject of many numerical models attempting to relate
              eruption and emplacement conditions to final flow dimensions.  However, lava is
              a complex fluid with temperature- and strain-rate-dependent behavior, and no
              extant model accurately describes all aspects of the emplacement of channelized
              lava flows.  In contrast, computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations are
              designed to treat complicated fluids such as lava.  By combining CFD
              simulations of lava flows with results from analog experiments using
              polyethelyne glycol wax to simulate lava, a new model will be generated that
              relates the emplacement dynamics of channelized flows with the morphology of
              the final lava flow form.  Once the CFD simulation is shown to accurately
              reproduce and predict the behavior of simulated lava flows, it will be tested
              on the well-documented 1984 Mauna Loa, Hawaii flow.
