Title       : CAREER: Geometric Methods for Numerical Computing: Graph Partitioning, Mesh
               Generation and Parallel Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9996047

Award Number: 9996047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanghua Teng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This research focuses on the development of geometric    methods and  their
              numerical applications.  The project involves  the   design of efficient 
              algorithms for a variety of fundamental  problems in parallel   geometric and 
              numerical computing and the  implementation of these   algorithms on both
              modern  supercomputers  and workstation clusters. The research has   two
              principal  directions.    Geometric Methods for Unstructured Mesh  
              Partitioning and  Generation: The main theoretical and software question is how
                to  make use of  underlying geometric structures and numerical  conditions to
                generate an unstructured finite element  mesh and partition   it for
              subsequent  parallel numerical  simulations.    Parallel Numerical and  
              Applications: The primary goal  is to apply geometric mesh   techniques to the 
              parallel solution of large sparse linear   systems, to adaptive  and 
              hierarchical computations, to distributed COSMOS circuit    simulation, and  to
              dynamic load balancing for parallel N-body  simulations.      The companion 
              education plan is to design and teach courses in  computer   science, in the
              newly  introduced Scientific Computation  Program at the University   of
              Minnesota, and  in the areas that  bridge the two.  It involves the  
              development of research  programs  and projects for graduate and undergraduate 
               students who are  interested in interdisciplinary research.  It also involves 
               the  development of  summer professional programs for professionals  from
              industry   companies,  government research labs, and other  universities, to  
              initiate the collaboration  between universities  and industry.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
