Title       : RPG: Iodide Channels in the Thyroid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1998  
File        : a9996092

Award Number: 9996092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peying Fong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chloride channels represent the most extensively characterized class of anion
              channels in living organisms. These channels participate in a wide variety of
              tasks, ranging from highly specialized ones, such as transepithelial movement
              of salts and water, to general housekeeping functions, such as regulation of
              cell volume. The elucidation of channel behavior and regulation has been aided
              largely by the application of patch clamp recording techniques. In several
              instances, molecular biological tools have led to primary structural data,
              permitting the determination of the structures underlying functional
              characteristics.    A defining property of such channels is their ability to
              conduct chloride ions. However, a significant number of chloride channels have
              been demonstrated to conduct iodide better than chloride. In most systems, this
              selectivity presents no problems, since chloride is present in tremendous
              excess compared to iodide. A notable exception is the thyroid gland, which
              vectorially transports iodide from the blood and into the follicular lumen.
              Here, an iodide selective channel would contribute substantially to normal
              physiology. Thus, the thyroid follicular cell could represent an ideal model
              system for eventually cloning an iodide selective anion channel, thereby
              facilitating elucidation of structural features that determine halide
              selectivity.    In order to obtain preliminary data that will be important in
              determining the feasibility of such long term goals, this study proposes to use
              patch recording techniques:  1) to determine if an iodide conducting channel
              resides in the apical membrane of the follicular thyrocyte and 2) to study
              biophysical properties, especially the halide selectivity, of such a channel.  
               Whereas comprehensive studies of cation channel selective permeability have
              been facilitated by the availability of both highly selective drugs as well as
              primary structural information, that of anion channels has suffered from the
              lack of specific pharmacological probes. M oreover, compared to that of cation
              channels, the application of molecular techniques in cloning and
              structure-function studies of anion channels is in its infancy. The latter has
              provided, however, information suggesting that the gating of these channels
              does not necessarily result from mechanisms analogous to those of cation
              channels. Thus, information gained from achieving the goals of this proposal
              may represent the first insights into novel mechanisms governing ionic
              selectivity of anion channels.
