Title       : Topics in Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9996077

Award Number: 9996077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136100             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Fulton wfulton@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fulton    The research in this proposal concerns a variety of topics in
              algebraic geometry and related fields, including:  topology of algebraic
              varieties;  degeneracy loci and classical groups;  configuration spaces; 
              curves on Calabi-Yau threefolds; compactifications of moduli spaces; 
              intersection theory, Chow groups, and relations with K-theory; p-adic Hodge
              theory;  representation theory, including Langlands dual group; group
              cohomology and Koszul algebras; conic bundles and Mori fibrations.    Algebraic
              geometry has a long and important history in mathematics, particularly because
              it interacts with so many other fields of mathematics, such as topology,
              analysis, algebra, and number theory.  It has flourished during the last half
              of the twentieth century, especially in this country.  The recent interactions
              with physics have brought a new energy to the field, since we have learned that
              very classical problems - like counting the numbers of plane curves passing
              through a given set of points - are intimately related to ideas like mirror
              symmetry in modern physics.  This is another example of a problem that seemed
              to be of purely theoretical interest in mathematics that has turned out to have
              unexpected connections with another subject, to their mutual benefit.  At its
              simplest and most fundamental level, algebraic geometry studies sets defined by
              polynomial equations; such sets arise in many problems in computer science and
              robotics, and there is increasing interaction between algebraic geometry and
              these fields.
