Title       : CAREER: Structure/Property Relationships for Dendritic Macromolecules Containing
               Stereogenic Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9996003

Award Number: 9996003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic V. McGrath mcgrath@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702123  McGrath           Research: This CAREER award presents the design,
              synthesis, and study of  dendrimeric materials containing interior chiral
              moieties and the study of  the fundamental relationships between chirality and
              conformational order  in these materials. The primary goal of this research is
              to develop an  understanding of the effect that chirality has on the
              conformational order  of three-dimensional dendritic microstructures. The
              ultimate goal of this  research is the development of new materials for
              asymmetric catalysis and  chiral separations technologies.    The  initial 
              phases  of  this research are  a  systematic  study  of  the 
              structure/property relationships of a large family of  dendrimers  of  the 
              same  basic  structure  in an effort to elucidate  the  factors  governing 
              conformational  asymmetry and chiral microenvironments in  this  class  of 
              synthetic  macromolecules. The dendrimer systems proposed  for  study  are 
              based  on enantiomerically pure 1,2-diol linkages and benzyl aryl or alkyl 
              aryl  ethers.  These  materials  with  asymmetrlc  interior  cavities  and 
              functional  groups  capable of attractive interactions (hydrogen  bonding) 
              should  be  able  to selectively clathrate guests of a certain  shape  and 
              functional  group arrangement. Hence, host-guest interactions between  the 
              dendrimers and small molecules will be studied. These materials will  then  be 
               tested   for   chiral  discrimination  in  high  performance   liquid 
              chromatography (HPLC) and micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography 
              (MECC).  Selective encapsulation and guest binding will also be the  basis  for
               the  development  of  these  materials  as  multi-site  reactors  for 
              asymmetric  catalysis. Reaction rate acceleration will result from  either  (a)
               hydrophobic  binding of reactants in the dendrimer  interior  or  (b) 
              reaction  at  transition metal catalytic centers anchored on the  1,2-diol 
              linkages  of  the  dendrimer. Teaching: Fewer women  than  men  embark  on  c
              areers  in  the physical sciences. A woman's decision not  to  enter  the 
              sciences  is  rarely  made at the graduate, undergraduate,  or  even  high 
              school  level.  Research  has shown that very early  social  and  cultural 
              influences, rather than biological factors, steer girls away from science, 
              with  a sharp disparity in attitude towards science between boys and girls 
              occurring  between grades 4 and 8. It is proposed to address this  problem  by
              developing an outreach program to local elementary schools (grade 3 and  4) 
              based  upon providing encouragement of curiosity, hands on  scientific 
              experiences,  and positive male and female role models  with  the  aim  of 
              portraying science as an attractive activity/career opportunity for  girls  and
               young  women to pursue. It is hoped that this heightened interest  in  science
               will  help overcome the social, cultural, and curriculum  factors  which 
              currently contribute to girls' declining attitudes towards  science  through
              the junior high years.  %%%  This research program will result in an
              understanding of the effect of  chirality on the onformation of dendritic
              macromolecules and a new paradi  gm for the design of chiral dendrimers which
              can provide asymmetric envir  onments to encapsulated guest molecules. In
              addition, a new generation of  materials with applications in chiral
              chromatographic separations and  asymmetric catalysis will be prepared.  ***
