Title       : Integrative Modeling of Environmental Change in Agroecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9996423

Award Number: 9996423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54104              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Stephen Lansing jlansing@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award to the University of Michigan supports the research in Bali,
              Indonesia, of a cultural anthropologist studying the formal properties of
              wet-rice agricultural irrigation systems. The main focus is to understand how
              stable patterns of cooperation persist in the management of irrigation systems,
              given inescapable asymmetries in access to resources and incentives for
              cooperation.  The research will develop and test a model that differs from
              previous models by incorporating a more realistic information about the
              regional ecosystem, and by expanding the social universe to include N players
              in an iterated game.  The resulting model should predict changes in ecological
              processes (irrigation flows, pest diffusion, etc. ) and the payoffs for various
              strategies of cooperation or `defection`.  These factors in combination can
              predict the patterns of cooperation in response to changes in the environment,
              such as increases in pests due to adoption of `Green revolution` agriculture
              (the causality to be modeled is thus complex with human decisions changing
              environmental variables which then impact on later decisions).  The PI and his
              students will develop and test the model with measures of agricultural and
              ecological variables recorded through fieldwork over three summers.  The
              project combines research and teaching in an innovative way since the students
              will be actively involved in field work and model specification.  This research
              is important because this form of agriculture produces a significant amount of
              food in similar ecosystems in the world at large. Increases in our
              understanding of the sources of productivity, such as optimal water management
              and the management of pests to produce larger harvests is of obvious
              importance.  In addition the advances in specification of formal models of such
              systems, that are more tightly tied to local and regional specifics while
              retaining their generalizing formal nature, will expand our general capacity to
              understand human behavior in this realm.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
