Title       : Integrating Multiple Stress Factors in the Alpine TimberlineEcotone: Direct
               Linkage Between Adaptive Biology and GlobalChange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9996247

Award Number: 9996247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Smith smithwk@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Vogelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604497  Smith  The ecophysiological effects of multiple stress factors have
              been recognized as an important omission in studies of plant adaptation to the
              environment and effects on abundance and distribution patterns.  Cold
              temperatures, in combination with high sunlight levels, is a particularly
              important combination of stress factors that results in severe inhibition of
              photosynthesis in numerous agricultural and the few native species that have
              been studied.  This project will investigate the adaptive responses of native
              alpine/subalpine plants to one of the most extreme, naturally-occurring
              combinations of low temperature and high sunlight found in any habitat.  By
              evaluating plant responses to this extreme stress combination, we hope to
              establish an estimate of the maximum adaptive capabilities to this
              multiple-stress scenario that currently exists among terrestial vascular
              plants.  The study will focus on photosynthetic responses that we believe are
              critical to plant survival under these extreme multiple-stress conditions.  In
              addition, the impact of future changes in global climate on cold temperature
              photoinhibition will be evaluated using two atmospheric parameters which are
              known measures of global atmospheric change, atmospheric warming and increases
              in UV radiation.  The results will be evaluated on a leaf, whole-plant, and
              landscape level.
