Title       : Collaborative Research: A Molecular Investigation of Trade-Offs and Evolutionary
               Stability in a Simple Competitive Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1998  
File        : a9996060

Award Number: 9996060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony M. Dean adean@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9629695  Dean  Two competing species, each a winner on a single substitutable
              resource, may coexist when both resources are available.  Will there be a
              sympatric divergence of the two species, each  specializing on its preferred
              resource, or will one evolve to replace the other?  Because mutation is a
              stochastic process, many believe that the adaptive divergence of populations 
              is irreproducible: if the tape of life is rerun, the evolutionary outcome will
              be dramatically different.  Drs. Dean and Dykhuizen propose to distinguish
              these hypotheses experimentally using replicated populations of clonal
              bacteria.  Because the strains are almost genetically identical, the ecological
              question of sympatric speciation becomes congruent with the genetic question of
              the evolution of specialization through trade-offs.  Part 1 will establish two
              strains of E. coli harboring two different lactose operons and competing for
              two alternative galactosides.  This study will test the prediction, made from a
              knowledge of biochemistry (a bottom up approach), that the two strains will
              coexist only within a certain range of ratios of the two alternative
              galactosides.   Part 2 investigates the evolutionary dynamics of coexistence. 
              Long-term chemostat  experiments (a top-down approach) will allow adaptive
              mutations to accumulate in each strain.  These experiments are designed to
              address: 1) whether trade-offs at the molecular level force specialization on
              particular resources;  and, 2) whether increasing specialization (or increasing
              generalization) perturbs the initial equilibrium frequencies or leads to
              competitive exclusion (i.e. only one strain wins).
