Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Comparison of Regional Flood Frequency Responses to
               Climatic Variability in the Western United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1998   
File        : a9996036

Award Number: 9996036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155905             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Kyle House   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric V. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ & Comm Col Sys of NV
	      2601 Enterprise Road
	      Reno, NV  895121666    702/739-3517

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1325,1579,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9725331   House      The connection between floods and decadal-to
              centennial-scale climatic variations in the past has   tremendous implications 
              for probability assessments of the magnitude and frequency of future floods,  
              especially in relation to scenarios of future regional or global climate
              change.  This study will use   paleoflood data to compare the influence of
              decadal-to millennial-scale climatic  variability on the   magnitude and
              frequency of large floods on rivers in three district hydroclimatic  regions of
              the western   U.S: the Southwest, Northwest, and western Great Basin.  The
              paleoflood studies will provide physical   evidence of individual flood events
              in the past, extending the record of severe floods on each river by 100s   to
              1000s of years through stratigraphic analysis of flood deposits.  Previous
              studies in the Southwest and   preliminary field work conducted during the
              summer of 1997 on the John Day River in Oregon and the   Truckee River in
              Nevada confirm the availability of excellent paleoflood records from rivers in
              all three   regions.  Paleoflood chronologies on rivers in the southwestern
              U.S. indicate a connection between   regional climatic conditions and
              centennial-scale variations in the frequency of large floods over the last  
              5000 years.  A principal aim of this project is to determine whether
              demonstrated regional differences in   the timing and controls on floods at the
              short time scales of the modern records hold true for the regional   responses
              of floods to longer-term climatic variations.  This broad, new perspective on
              flood   hydroclimatology is achievable even with the relatively coarse
              resolution of radiocarbon dating methods.    With the collaboration of Kelly
              Redmond, Deputy Director and Regional Climatologist for the Western   Regional
              Climate Center, modern discharge, meteorological and atmospheric-pressure data
              will be   analyzed to serve as analogs for the paleofloods  in each region and
              thus aid in understanding the   underlying physical bas es for the patterns
              observed in each regional flood series.  The study will also take   advantage
              of recent refinements in statistical computer programs for incorporating
              paleoflood information   into single-site flood frequency analyses (developed
              by the Bureau of Reclamation), and methods for the   quantification and
              reduction of paleoflood discharge-modeling uncertainties (House, 1996).  
              Understanding links between climate and floods from the basis of real
              information on the magnitude and   frequency of great, rare floods will improve
              the ability of water-supply managers to foresee the regional   consequences of
              glodal-and regional-scale climatic phenomena, an increasingly important
              component of   long-term planning in the face of uncertain future climate
              conditions.
