Title       : Estimation and Equalization of Time-Varying Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1999        
File        : a9996252

Award Number: 9996252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgios B. Giannakis georgios@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michail K. Tsatsanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Intersymbol Interference (ISI) is caused by multipath effects or  bandwith
              constraints and presents a major obstacle in modern high-  speed digital
              transmission.  When the communication link is also  fading with time, it is
              essential for the equalizer to be able to  follow the channel's time
              variations.  While several adaptive and  blind methods have been proposed for
              time-invariant or slowly  fading channels, relatively little attention has been
              given to the  rapidly fading case.    The major goal of this project is to use
              basis expansion ideas as  a tool for the equalization of rapidly varying
              channels.  In this  framework, each time-varying coefficient is expanded into a
              set of  basis sequences, and the expansion parameters are estimated using 
              novel adaptive and decision directed schemes.  Next, basis  expansions are
              combined with time-varying correlations and higher-  order statistics to
              address time-varying, blind equalization in a  rapidly fading environment. 
              Finally, based on physical intuition  and experimental data, the selection of
              the "best" basis which  captures optimally the channel's dynamics is being
              addressed.   Complex exponentials are being investigated for the mobile radio 
              channel, while wavelet expansions are being considered for channels  with
              abrupt changes, and are being compared with stochastic channel  modeling
              approaches.
