Title       : Engineering Fe Site Into Host Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9996427

Award Number: 9996427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115833             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Caradonna   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Crothers  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic   Chemistry
              program with instrumentation funding from the Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities supports research in the laboratory of   Professor John Caradonna at
              Yale University.  The research involves a   semisynthetic design approach to
              probe the protein effects on the   reduction potential and electron transfer
              activity of the Fe/S cube in   iron-sulfur proteins and the iron site in
              iron-containing superoxide   dismutase (SOD).  Selectively mutated proteins
              have already been designed   by computer methods and constructed by biological
              techniques.  The  SOD   protein exhibits catalytic activity.  The proteins will
              now be   characterized by an array of physical methods to systematically
              determine   the effects of hydrogen bonding, localized charges and dipoles on
              the   electron transfer activities of the metal centers in the proteins.      
              This research utilizes a new achievement in the study of metal   centers in
              proteins by incorporating iron sites into host proteins.  The   objective is to
              construct functional metalloprotein active sites inside   host proteins of
              known structure.  This allows a high degree of control   of the environment of
              the metal center, which provdes for systematically   studying the effects of
              the protein on the metal site's activity.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
