Title       : Spreading Inquiry-Based Elementary Science: Case Studies of Promising Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9996360

Award Number: 9996360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine C. Lewis clewis@mills.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mills College
	      5000 Macarthur Ave
	      Oakland, CA  946131301    415/430-2255

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Two synergistic sets of activities are proposed.  The first activity is a series
              of case studies that document four models for spreading a coherent,
              inquiry-based approach to elementary science.  Two models in the U.S. will be
              nominated by well known U.S. science educators, researchers and policy makers. 
              Two models will be Japanese, selected in order to study conditions not readily
              available for study in the U.S.  (E.g. lesson based professional development). 
              Using a research approach that documents each model's "theory of action,"  the
              case studies will focus on the 1) goals, assumptions, and intervention method
              and 2) site and system characteristics as they provide supports or barriers to
              each approach.  (E.g. local, state and national policies, assessments,
              governance structures, standards).

The second strand of activities seeks to
              develop and test, from the case studies, brief written materials and video
              examples designed to build understanding of coherent, inquiry-based science
              instruction and of the systemic features that support it.  

Expected
              outcomes include 1) increased documentation and understanding of models for the
              spread of coherent, inquiry-based science instruction and of the supports and
              barriers encountered by these models; 2) creation of video and written
              resources that communicate the nature of such science instruction and the
              inventions and policies that support it 3) increased knowledge of the important
              strategic audience, venues, and communication methods for supporting the spread
              of coherent inquiry based science instruction; and 4) examples of potential
              system supports.

