Title       : Critical Phenomena and Non Fermi Liquid Behavior in Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9996282

Award Number: 9996282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Millis millis@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707701  Millis  This award is for theoretical research on non-fermi-liquid 
              metals.  The main focus of the work will be on the theory of  electrons
              interacting via singular interactions caused by  proximity to critical points
              and for systematic comparisons  of the results to experimental data.    For the
              past forty years the central concept on which metal  physics is based has been
              Landau's Fermi Liquid Theory,  which holds that at temperatures or energies
              much less than  the Fermi energy, the physics of metallic interacting 
              electrons is isomorphic to the physics of non-interacting  electrons.  One of
              the key experimental achievements of the  past decade has been the
              demonstration that many classes of  materials (including the high temperature
              superconductors,  many heavy fermion materials and several transition metal 
              compounds) exhibit low temperature behavior which is  metallic yet is
              inconsistent with Fermi Liquid Theory.  The  physics of these non-fermi-liquid
              metals is not at all  understood.    This grant will study this important
              problem based on the  controversial assumption that non-fermi-liquid behavior
              in  metals is somehow related to critical point fluctuations as  might be
              observed in an equilibrium phase transition.  %%%  This theoretical award will
              study the properties of metals  which are not explained by the theoretical
              foundation  established many years ago.  Many materials of current  interest,
              such as the high temperature superconductors,  exhibit metallic behavior which
              cannot be explained by  present theory.  Consequently, new physical foundations
              need  to be established.  Successful completion of this project  will have wide
              impact on the way we interpret the behavior  of metals and other materials. 
              ***
