Title       : Rigidity Aspects of Ergodic Actions of Lattices in Semisimple Lie Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9996433

Award Number: 9996433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 2,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Furman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Katok/Furman    Lattices in (higher rank) semisimple Lie groups have
              many remarkable   properties, among them strong rigidity (Mostow) and
              superrigidity   (Margulis, Corlette), which describe linear representations of
              these  discrete groups in terms of the linear representations of the ambient 
              Lie groups. One of the main themes of the proposal is to understand  possible
              generalizations of strong rigidity and superrigidity to the   framework of
              representations taking values in general locally compact   (rather than linear,
              or Lie) groups.  Another (but as it turns out to be a closely related) line of
              research is the study of the orbit structure of finite measure-preserving group
              actions. It turns out that ergodic finite measure-preserving actions of higher
              rank lattices have such a rigid orbit structure, that the group (i.e. the
              lattice) and the action can be reconstructed just from the produced orbit
              relation. Further questions and problems arise in the   analysis of these
              orbitally rigid actions. Some progress has already been  obtained in several of
              the proposed problems.       The proposed research addresses various questions
              which join two disciplines:   ergodic theory and Lie groups, or more generally:
              probability and algebra.   This joining, namely the use of ergodic-theoretic
              methods in Lie groups   and Lie groups examples in ergodic theory, has already
              proved itself as   extremely fruitful in both fields, by solving problems and
              establishing   new phenomena, which appeared naturally within the scope of one
              filed, but   solutions of which required techniques and ideas from another one.
              The   proposed research focuses on, so called, rigidity aspects of certain  
              structures (both in ergodic theory and in Lie groups). Here rigidity   means
              that the object, carrying certain structure, cannot be changed   without a
              substantial change in this structure. This in particular means   that the
              object itself can be reconstructed (or the object is determined)   by this
              structure. Many rem arkable rigidity results are known and widely   used for
              lattices in Lie groups, and the proposal addresses several natural  
              generalizations of these results.
