Title       : Community Composition and Biomass Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9996114

Award Number: 9996114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 31,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahid Naeem naeems@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709559  Naeem  The composition of biological communities varies enormously over
              most scales of investigation. Changes in community composition are especially
              prevalent in small ecosystems where local extinction, colonization, and
              biological invasion are commonplace, but large communities are arguably
              experiencing such changes as well. How sensitive are community properties to
              such variation in composition and can patterns be predictable? Although
              communities exhibit a tremendous range of responses to even small-scale changes
              in community composition, a diverse body of theory suggests that this broad
              range of responses is predictable. This body of theory is based on the
              compensatory abilities of species within trophic guilds and the distribution of
              interaction strengths and the number of trophic groups in a community. The
              large number of replicate communities necessary for testing this theory,
              however, has limited empirical explorations. This research will use small
              analogs of freshwater microbial communities reared under controlled
              environmental conditions with sufficient replication to test this body of
              theory. Composition is experimentally varied using both assembly and
              fixed-structure methods to produce communities that contain 2, 3, 5, or 5
              trophic levels with 1 to 5 species per level. Autotrophic and heterotrophic
              biomass will be measured as community response variables. Three sets of
              experiments are designed to explicitly assess the roles of compensatory growth
              and interaction strengths in determining patterns in biomass distribution. This
              study will provide an in-depth exploration of the interface between a specific
              set of theories and its biological analogs. It will link experimental results
              with equivalency- and uniqueness-based theory to predict patterns in the
              association of biomass distribution with community composition.
