Title       : CAREER: Efficient Numerical Solutions in Geophysical Subsurface Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9996412

Award Number: 9996412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Huo Liu qhliu@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this career program are to develop efficient forward and inverse
              techniques to solve electromagnetic and elastodynamic problems in geophysical
              subsurface sensing, and to foster an effective, interdisciplinary educational
              program.  In geophysical subsurface sensing, electromagnetic and acoustic
              sensors are widely used to probe the complex geological structures from within
              a borehole.  The interpretation of these important measurements, however,
              remains a challenging problem because of the complexity of the underground
              medium and of the presence of the wellbore.  Simulating realistic
              three-dimensional models encountered in these problems can easily exceed the
              capacity of any modern supercomputer if conventional methods are used. 
              Therefore, there is a pressing demand for more efficient numerical techniques
              to simulate large-scale electromagnetic and acoustic measurements.  These
              simulations are also critical in processing the collected data and in
              computer-aided design of new measurement systems.  In this research, efficient
              forward and inverse solutions will be developed for electrodetype, induction,
              and sonic well logging tools in three-dimensional inhomogeneous media.  In
              forward solutions, the measurement data are simulated given the physical
              properties of the medium.  In inverse problems, on the other hand, the physical
              properties of the medium are determined from the measurement data, which is the
              ultimate goal of geophysical subsurface sensing.  As the focus of research, a
              series of efficient forward models will be developed as a backbone of nonlinear
              inversion for 3-D electromagnetic and elastodynamic problems.  The techniques
              proposed will allow one to solve much larger problems than conventional
              finite-difference and finite-element methods on a supercomputer.  The forward
              solutions will be effectively coupled with the inverse algorithms.  In the
              educational program, the principal investigator (PI) proposes to strengthen the
              interactions among faculty members and students in electrical engineering,
              geophysics, and mechanical engineering departments by developing
              interdisciplinary courses and by collaboration.  Three new cross-department
              courses will be developed, and the use of computers and network in
              electromagnetic education will be incorporated to improve the teaching
              effectiveness. The research program will be fully integrated with the
              undergraduate and graduate electrical engineering education.  This integrated
              career program Will significantly advance the capability of simulating 
              large-scale forward and inverse electromagnetic and elastodynamic problems in
              geophysical  subsurface sensing. The petroleum industry will benefit from this
              research program  through the publication of knowledge and software developed. 
              This program will also benefit subsurface mapping of underground buried waste
              and the medical imaging industry.  The students involved in this research will
              have the unique opportunity to acquire interdisciplinary knowledge on the
              applications of electrical engineering in geophysical exploration.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
