Title       : Role of the Plasma Membrane Ca2+-ATPase in Neuronal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9996447

Award Number: 9996447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Brandt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9604729  Brandt     Calcium plays an integral role in regulating cellular 
              function.  It exerts  its effects in the cell through interactions with a
              variety  of specialized  proteins.  One of these proteins is the plasma
              membrane (PM)  calcium pump.  PM calcium pumps remove calcium from the cell,
              while  consuming ATP to drive  the reaction.  It has recently been found that
              genetic  manipulation to block  production of one type of PM calcium pumps in a
              neuronal  cell line prevented  this cell from developing into a mature nerve
              cell when  treated with nerve  growth factor.  This observation suggested that
              PM calcium  pumps may be  important in nerve cell development and regeneration.
               Further, it was found  that a class of steroids known as glucocorticoids,
              which  have been known to  prevent the type of neurons used in these studies
              from  developing into  mature nerve cells, had a greatly enhanced effect when
              PM  calcium pump  production was blocked.  From these two observations it was 
              hypothesized  that PM calcium pumps might be involved in controlling  calcium
              levels in the  cell responsible for determining how effective  glucocorticoids
              are in  preventing neuronal development.  The studies to be  undertaken as part
              of  this research project will first examine changes in internal  calcium
              levels  that might be affecting the efficiency of glucocorticoid  action by 
              interacting with another calcium-regulated protein called  calreticulin.  If 
              changes in internal calcium levels are found, then the  underlying alteration 
              in biochemical properties will be determined by studying  possible changes in 
              proteins that regulate calcium levels in the cell, among  these proteins will 
              be the PM calcium pumps.  The ultimate goal of this research  program will be 
              to better understand the mechanisms of calcium regulation  that affect nerve 
              cell development and regeneration.
