Title       : CAREER: Design and Control of Biomimetic Mobile Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a9996366

Award Number: 9996366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94249              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Berkemeier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile robots play a central role in the research and educational  goals of this
              project.  Research activities focus on the  locomotion of walking, running, and
              swimming machines.  A design  approach is advocated in which desired dynamic
              behaviors are  built into a robot, through such means as spring-mass and 
              pendulum components.  Control will be accomplished by coupling  actuators to
              nonlinear oscillators, in a manner analogous to  pattern generators in animals.
              Locomotion in unstructured  environments will also be considered, and robots
              will be  fabricated to test theoretical predictions.  Bright high school 
              students will be recruited for educational and research  activities. A
              mechatronics course will be developed, which will  feature a competition among
              student-constructed mobile robots and  a focus on industry approaches to
              problem solving. Undergraduate  students will be sought for participation in a
              national mobile  robot competition. Use of the Internet for educational
              purposes  will be explored in the development of hyperlearning modules for 
              courses the PI teaches and in the use of videoconferencing  technology to
              broadcast lectures. Graduate students interested in  careers in academia will
              be encouraged to teach, write proposals,  and supervise the research of
              undergraduates and high school  students.
