Title       : Supramolecular and Covalent Polymer Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1999        
File        : a9996253

Award Number: 9996253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel I. Stupp s-stupp@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9972048
Stupp

Strategies will be explored to create synthetic
              macromolecules, covalent or supramolecular, analogous to folded proteins
              because of their locked-in specific shapes and the chemical map on their
              surfaces.  For this purpose, experiments are proposed to understand the factors
              that control the formation of these nanostructures, for example, attractive vs.
              steric forces, rigidity contrast among molecular segments, and specific
              molecular interactions.  Using NMR experiments with deuterated molecules and
              dynamic light scattering, the research program will also investigate the
              factors that allow some clusters to be polymerized nanoscopically into stable
              covalent polymers.  Furthermore, the formation of nanostructures with
              topographical features such as cavities, pores, twists, or grooves will be
              investigated using binary or ternary compositions of aggregating molecules as
              well as chiral molecules.  One of the specific strategies will involve the
              mixture of rod and rodcoil or rod-dendron molecules that aggregate but exclude
              the bulky segments to the periphery for entropic reasons.  Part of this
              strategy will involve the formation of piercing cavities using chemically or
              enzymatically hydrolyzable molecular segments, and the formation of complex
              aggregates made up of more than one nanostructure.  Because of the expected
              dimensions in these complex aggregated, there is a better chance to image
              aggregate geometry and phase composition.  At the same time, the proposed
              experimental work will be complimented with computer simulations and genetic
              algorithms to identify new molecules that might be prone to self assemble into
              the desired structures.

Learning how to create shape-defined structures that
              mimic proteins could lead to the discovery of highly functional synthetic
              structures analogous to those found in biology.  The possibilities include
              macromolecular structures that function as materials with sensing capacity or
              with the ability to transfer information as a result of contact with agents in
              the environment.  Such novel materials could have a deep impact in medicine and
              also on highly advanced technologies for human-computer interfaces.

