Title       : Racial Polarization and Realignment in the New South
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9996019

Award Number: 9996019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Lublin dlublin@american.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American University
	      4400 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200168066    202/885-3440

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In this study precinct data for county, state, and federal elections between
              1980 and 1996 are matched with data on the racial composition of precincts in
              order to analyze racial polarization and realignment in the south.  Racial
              polarization is defined as the difference in support for the Democrats among
              blacks and whites (or Latinos where appropriate).  Using an ecological
              inference program (EI) this study estimates, with confidence intervals, support
              for Democrats and Republicans among blacks, whites, and Latinos in every county
              in the south for virtually all county, state, and federal elections.  Litigants
              and judges in cases challenging or supporting the creation of majority-minority
              districts are likely to rely heavily on these estimates.  Unlike past studies
              which have focused primarily on whether polarization prevents the election of
              minority officials, this investigation gauges the size of the racial gap in
              support for the Democrats.  Contrary to the conventional wisdom often expressed
              by the courts and the media, the principal investigator hypothesizes that
              racial polarization has increased as blacks continue to vote nearly unanimously
              for Democrats and greater numbers of whites cast ballots for Republicans.  The
              estimates of racial polarization make it possible to test competing theories
              for why racial polarization varies across location, time, and office.  The
              study compares the strength of the white backlash theory with other nonracial
              theories.  The white backlash theory states that whites who live in areas with
              a high percentage of blacks usually vote more conservatively than whites in
              areas with few blacks, but some speculate that the economic gap between blacks
              and whites explains racial polarization.  The investigation tests several
              theories about the nexus between racial redistricting and realignment.  While
              several studies examine the partisan impact of racial redistricting at the
              federal level, this study is the first to explore whether racial redistricting
              resulted in Republican state legislative or county council gains.  The data set
              produced by this investigation will be of immense value to other scholars
              interested in exploring this important topic.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
