Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Non-Smooth Feedback Control of Nonholonomic
               Mechanical Systems with Applicationsto Mobile Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1999    
File        : a9996096

Award Number: 9996096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis Tsiotras   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award supports US-France cooperative research aimed at the
              design of   control laws for nonholonomic robot systems.  Nonholonomic systems
              are mechanical   systems with motion constraints.  The collaboration involves
              Panagiotis Tsiotras of the   University of Virginia and the research group led
              by Carlos A. Canudas de Wit at the   Automation Laboratory of the Ecole
              Nationale Superieure d'Ingenieurs Electriciens in   Grenoble, France.  The
              investigators will develop a methodology for constructing non-  smooth,
              time-invariant, feedback control laws for special classes of nonholonomic  
              systems, which include the case of mobile robots.  Implementation of the
              control laws via   force or torque actuators and robustness to external
              disturbances will be examined.  The   controls will then be experimentally
              tested and compared to other methods using mobile   robots at the University of
              Virginia and at the Automation Laboratory in Grenoble.  The US investigator
              brings to this collaboration expertise in stabilization and control of   rigid
              bodies.  This is complemented by the French investigator's expertise in
              nonlinear   control theory and control of nonholonomic systems.  The project
              will advance knowledge   of new nonlinear algorithms for nonholonomic systems
              with fast convergence rates and   could be applied to autonomous or
              semi-autonomous mobile robots and underactuated   mechanical systems.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
