Title       : Direct Measurement of Strain-Rate Dependent Constitutive Relations for the
               Compression of Clay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9996432

Award Number: 9996432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Fox pfox@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-9622644      Title:  "Direct Measurement of Strain-Rate Dependent 
              Constitutive Relations  for the Compression of Clay"    co-PI's:  Gerald A.
              Leonards and Patrick J. Fox, Department  of Civil  Engineering, Purdue
              University      The objective of the proposed research program is to provide 
              definitive  experimental data to resolve long-standing issues of strain  rate
              effects  during the process of consolidation in clay.  Novel  experimental
              techniques  will be applied to measure the time-dependent and time- 
              independent  components of compressibility both during and after the 
              consolidation  process is completed, without the need for analytical 
              interpretation of the  test results.  Undisturbed soils, known to be sensitive
              to  strain rate  effects, will be tested  using: 1) a fixed-ring 
              consolidometer specially  treated for low sidewall friction, and 2) a
              Ko-triaxial cell  modified to  provide essentially one-dimensional strain under
              conditions  of zero side  friction, using a flow-pump volume control system. 
              Local  values of void  ratio and effective stress will be measured directly. 
              Large  ranges in  strain rate will be investigated by testing samples of 
              different thickness.  Redundant experiments will be used to establish that the 
              results are free  from bias due to minor departures from zero side friction in 
              one case, and  from zero lateral strain in the other.  With the basic 
              constitutive  relations obtained from direct measurement, predictions of  pore
              water  pressure dissipation in incremental loading tests, and build  up of pore
               water pressures in constant rate of strain (CRS) tests, will  be compared 
              with those using replicate specimens from block samples.  The results of  this
              study will have a fundamental bearing on how  consolidation concepts  are
              taught, and on how they are applied in practice.
