Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: A Regional Analysis of Hydrological &
               Biogeochemical Processes at the Terrestrial-Aquatic Interface of Andean Amazon
               River System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9996184

Award Number: 9996184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. McClain mcclainm@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5956,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704268  McClain      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists  and engineers to conduct three to twenty four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the  use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral research visit  by Dr. Michael E. McClain of the University of
              Miami to work with Dr.  Carlos A. Llerena at the Universidad Nacional Agraria
              La Molina in Lima,  Peru.  Dr. McClain will initiate a regional analysis of
              hydrological and  biogeochemical processes operating at the terrestrial-aquatic
              interface  of rivers in the eastern Andean cordillera of Peru.  This project
              will  link with another NSF sponsored program, the Carbon in the Amazon River 
              Experiment (CAMREX).  This research indicates that riparian zones are 
              particularly active environments of chemical change and transport.  It  is
              critical that a baseline of chemical and dynamic data be collected  now, for
              comparison to physical basin characteristics before extensive  development of
              the often targeted riparian zones. It is an important  idea to calibrate these
              processes chemically and relate them to broad  catchment properties that can be
              remotely sensed on a large scale and  interpreted within the context of a GIS
              model.  This work will also  provide the nucleus of another research
              initiative, the Andean Amazon  Rivers Analysis and Monitoring (AARAM) Project,
              which is being funded  initially by the Inter American Institute for Global
              Change Researah.  It will link scientists from Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador,
              Colombia, Brazil,  France and the U.S.          ***
