Title       : Anaerobic Gene Regulation of Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9996014

Award Number: 9996014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michiko M. Nakano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Nakano  9722885  The Gram-positive soil bacterium Bacillus subtilis
              activates diverse processes for its survival upon exposure to various kinds of
              stress. Recent findings that B. subtilis grows anaerobically support the use of
              B. subtilis as a system to study gene regulation in response to oxygen
              limitation. Since B. subtilis is often used as a host in the fermentation
              industry, the study of anaerobiosis in B. subtilis may provide an opportunity
              to improve upon its use in fermentation as well as providing insights into
              regulation of gene expression in response to a changing environment.  B.
              subtilis grows anaerobically by two different pathways, nitrate respiration
              using nitrate as an electron acceptor and fermentation in the absence of
              alternative electron acceptors. This research focuses on regulation of gene
              expression in cells undergoing nitrate respiration. Fnr, a member of catabolite
              activator protein (CAP) family, is known as a global anaerobic regulator in
              nitrate respiration. Fnr is required for the transcription of genes whose
              products function in nitrate respiration, such as narGHJl, encoding respiratory
              nitrate reductase, and narK, which is involved in nitrite extrusion. The
              accumulated studies of Escherichia coli demonstrate that the activity of Fnr as
              a transcriptional regulator is modulated by anaerobiosis through a mechanism
              mediated by iron bound to cysteine residues. B. subtilis Fnr may also be
              activated by this mechanism, but transcription of the fnr gene is highly
              induced by oxygen limitation unlike the case in E. coli. The anaerobic
              induction of fnr transcription requires the ResD-ResE two-component signal
              transduction system that also regulates aerobic respiration. Thus mutations in
              resD or resE impair both aerobic and anaerobic respiration. The major goal of
              this research is to determine how the ResDE system is activated and how fnr
              transcription is induced by the ResDE-dependent mechanism. In order to
              understand the activation of the ResDE pathway, a suppresser muta nt that
              bypasses the requirement of the putative histidine kinase, ResE, in nitrate
              respiration will be characterized by sequencing the wild-type and the mutant
              allele of the gene. The part of the fnr promoter region that is required for
              anaerobic regulation will be defined by deletion or mutational analysis using
              PCR. The wild-type and mutant fnr promoters will be used to examine if ResD
              binds to the fnr promoter by gel retardation assay and DNA footprinting.
              Searches for other possible regulators of fnr transcription will be carried out
              by using transposon and plasmid integration mutagenesis as well as by looking
              for ResDE-controlled promoter activities in an SP( phage-borne library of B.
              subtilis promoter-lacZ fusions.
