Title       : Statistical Methods for Multilocus Molecular Evolutionary Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9996118

Award Number: 9996118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Spencer V. Muse muse@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9707395  Muse   With the advent of fast, inexpensive DNA sequence data,
              the field of molecular evolution has blossomed, finding diverse applications in
              topics ranging from ecology to drug design. To this point, however, most
              analyses have been somewhat one-dimensional; while several genes are often used
              in a study, the DNA sequence data for each locus are usually analyzed
              independently.  Such a "single locus" approach can be of limited utility. Many
              interesting phenomena are expected to leave their signature effects across
              multiple loci in systematic and sometimes predictable manners. In addition, we
              know that genes evolve not as isolated entities, but as arrays of interacting
              loci that give rise to form and function. These facts demand that inferences
              incorporate data from all relevant loci.    The central theme of the proposed
              research is to develop and evaluate statistical methods for performing
              molecular evolutionary analyses on multiple genetic loci. These procedures will
              help to identify mechanisms, both biological and demographic, that affect
              evolutionary processes at the DNA sequence level. The potential applications of
              the methods span many areas of biological study. For instance, these procedures
              will provide ways for testing whether or not short-lived organisms evolve more
              quickly than long-lived ones. The methods can also be used to look for
              evolutionary responses at the genetic level of a host organism to a genetic
              change in a parasite. Another important area of application involves the
              identification of functionally important regions of genes.
