Title       : Formation Process and 3-D Dynamics of Vortex Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9996254

Award Number: 9996254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 17,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23299              (Estimated)
Investigator: Monika Nitsche nitsche@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9729158  Nitsche    The goal of the present project is to perform numerical
              investigations to develop a   better understanding of vortex ring dynamics. 
              The case is considered in which a   vortex ring is formed by ejecting an amount
              of fluid from an opening.  In the first   part of the project, the focus will
              be on the initial formation process of   axisymmetric rings.  Viscous effects
              dominate the flow in an initial time interval   and affect the vortex
              trajectory and total shed circulation.  The effects of viscosity   by adapting
              a successful 2-dimensional Navier Stokes solver for high Reynolds   number flow
              to the axisymmetric case will be investigated.  Inviscid effects of the   flow
              using a vortex sheet model will also be studied in order to determine whether  
              present similarity theory predictions can be adjusted to better predict the
              initial   flow.  The second part of the project concerns 3-dimensional dynamics
              of vortex   rings formed at an opening.  The development of a numerical method
              to compute   3-dimensional vortex sheet separation at an edge will enable the
              study of the   stability of these flows, as well as the effects of
              nonaxisymmetric openings and   nonaxisymmetric forcing.  For this purpose, a
              3-dimensional vortex filament   method will be developed which incorporates
              vortex separation at a sharp edge   and implements a fast summation algorithm
              to enable high resolution calculations.    Understanding the dynamics of vortex
              rings is essential to understand more   complicated flows such as those that
              occur in combustion processes, or in the   airborne vortex structures
              presenting a hazard to aircraft.  An inviscid numerical   model has been
              developed for axisymmetric vortex rings generated at a circular   opening. 
              This model was proven by comparison with experiment to recover   detailed
              information about the real flow.  In the present work, this model will be  
              extended to 3-dimensional flows, and will be used to study the stability of the
                flows, the effects of non-axisymme tric openings and nonaxisymmetric forcing,
              as   well as the potential applicability of present theoretical results to
              predict the flow.    Several of these aspects of the flow are difficult to
              understand experimentally or   analytically, and the computations promise to
              give a deeper insight into the flow   dynamics. In order to perform this work,
              current numerical tools available for   2-dimensional flows will be expanded to
              3-dimensions.
