Title       : Mechanism of Cytoplasmic Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9996168

Award Number: 9996168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph S. Quatrano rsq@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    Dr. Quatrano  96-04672      Zygotes of the brown alga Fucus provide a
              model system to study the basic mechanisms involved in the generation of
              zygotic/cell asymmetry and the partitioning of localized cytoplasmic components
              to the resulting daughter cells.  Large, single-celled zygotes synchronously
              develop a polar axis in culture that can be experimentally oriented by imposed
              gradients such as unilateral light.  Such cells present an ideal system to
              study how a polar axis is established and how a cell directionally transports
              cytoplasmic material to a site defined by an extracellular vector.  Dr.
              Quatrano  now knows  that secretion of these targeted vesicles into the
              extracellular matrix (ECM) is required to stabilize the molecular asymmetry 
              established by the external vector, and believes that this also have evidence
              that secreted material into the ECM may signal information to the cytoplasm to
              initiate polar growth and to orient the plane of cell division.  The role of
              targeted secretion, resulting in an asymmetry of the macromolecules present in
              the zygotic ECM of Fucus, now provides an exciting paradigm to apply to other
              polar cells for the study of extracellular positional information during
              development.  Using the Fucus system he will pursue answers to the following
              questions:  What are the cellular cues and sequences in MRNA that are
              responsible for the localization of specific transcripts in the developing
              Fucus embryo?  What are the roles of small GTP-binding proteins and septins in
              the development of cell polarity and the orientation of cell division in the
              Fucus zygote?  What are the similarities between the molecules and processes
              that establish polarity in Fucus and those operative in higher plants, yeast,
              insects, and vertebrates?
