Title       : POWRE: Neural Substrates for Glucoprivic Regulation of Reproductive Hormone
               Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9996239

Award Number: 9996239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen P. Briski pybriski@ulm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-2011

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                BRISKI, K.P.  IBN 98-05789    The goal of the research to be performed with
              this NSF POWRE  funding is to explore the link between energy balance and 
              reproduction. This project is particularly suited  for a  POWRE award because
              it will allow exploratory work to  determine the feasibility of a new line of
              inquiry.  Sufficient metabolic fuels are necessary for successful  reproduction
              in female mammals.  Because metabolic imbalance  initiates physiological and
              behavioral responses that  restore energy homeostasis and allocate available
              fuels for  life-sustaining processes, high-energy activities such as 
              reproduction are often impaired.  While decreases in  reproductive hormone
              secretion during energy deficits  reflect hypothalamic gonadaotropin-releasing
              hormone (GnRH)  dysfunction, the neural mechanisms that link substrate fuel 
              homeostasis with neuroendocrine function are not clear.  Recent studies show
              that intracerebral administration of the  glucose anti-metabolite,
              2-deoxy-glucose (2DG), inhibits  plasma luteinizing hormone (LH)
              concentrations, thus  implicating central glucoprivic receptors in the
              regulation  of reproductive hormones.  Reports that circulating LH is 
              inhibited by infusion of 2DG into the fourth ventricle  suggest that
              interoreceptors of functional significance for  reproductive function occur
              within a diffusion range of this  delivery site, but the specific location(s)
              of these  receptors in this part of the brain are unknown.  Glucose-  sensitive
              neurons may exist more rostrally within the  ventromedial hypothalamus nucleus
              (VMN) and lateral  hypothalamic area (LHA), but the role of these loci in 
              compensatory reductions in reproductive hormone secretion  during glucose
              substrate imbalance has not been studied.  This proposal seeks to characterize
              the neuroanatomical  distribution of central glucoprivic receptors that inhibit
               preovulatory LH secretion in intact female rats, and to  identify hypothalamic
              structures that contain neurons  critical for reproductive endocr ine responses
              to glucose  substrate imbalance.  The PI proposes to identifity the  origin of
              central glucoprivic signals that inhibit phasic  gonadotropin secretion by
              investigating the effects of site-  specific infusion of 2DG into discrete
              brain loci on the  onset, magnitude, and duration of the preovulatory LH surge 
              in intact, adult female rats.  She will also investigate  whether the
              functional integrity of several discrete  hypothalamic structures is critical
              for glucoprivic  inhibition of the reproductive neuroendocrine axis by 
              examining whether reversible pharmacological inhibition of  local cellular
              function by colchicine attenuates inhibitory  effects of glucose
              anti-metabolites on gonadotropin  secretion.  Other experiments will determine
              if specific  neuropeptide neurons are critical for gonadotropin responses  to
              2DG.
