Title       : CPMSA: "Project SUCCESS-The Surry, Sussex, Charles City, and King and Queen
               Education Consortium Educating Students for Success"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9996309

Award Number: 9996309
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580494             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Hicks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sussex County School Board
	      P.O. Box 1368
	      Sussex, VA  23884    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The four small, rural Virginia counties of Surry, Sussex, King and  Queen, and
              Charles City, have formed a consortium identified as  Project SUCCESS.  This
              consortium was organized to address the  historical pattern of academic
              under-achievement of its public  school students, especially minorities.  The
              project's academic  focus is science and mathematics.  The primary intervention
               strategies will be in the following categories: 1) professional  development
              for teachers; 2) curriculum revision; 3) student  enrichment; 4) parental
              involvement; and 5) community involvement.   It is to be noted that the
              objectives and activities described for  Project SUCCESS have been developed in
              consideration of Virginia's  Statewide Systemic Initiative in science and
              mathematics, VQUEST  (see Appendix A for a further explanation of this
              relationship to  VQUEST).    This grant application is being submitted to
              request support for  the staff development and student enrichment aspects of
              the  consortium plan.  Activities in these categories will include  summer
              programs for teachers and students, student Saturday  Academies during the
              academic year, informal education experiences,  parent and community seminars
              on the importance of science and  mathematics for today's citizens, increase
              participation of  teachers in professional science and mathematics
              organizations,  more student participation in science fairs, workshops to
              increase  the types of science and mathematics assessment methods used 
              internships, and other interactions between students and  professionals to
              increase student awareness of careers in science,   mathematics and relate
              fields.  Support is being sought to continue  staff development activities
              focused on summer "Laboratory  Institute" for three additional years.  ***
