Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9996153

Award Number: 9996153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anthony E. Kelly                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Atman atman@engr.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9297,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9358516  Atman    Engineering education for the beginning student should
              1)engage the  student's interest so he/she will stay in engineering and
              2)provide  the student with a foundation for learning how to function 
              successfully in a world of rapid technological change.  As a way to  meet these
              challenges, many engineering schools are changing their  curricula to include
              realistic engineering problems for students to  solve in their freshman year. 
              These can be semester long  engineering design projects or shorter problems
              that are open-ended  in nature.  By giving freshman engineers open-ended
              problems to  solve, we will provide them with a simulated real world
              experience,  but at this print we have no research base from which to provide 
              recommendations for the engineering professors who must guide  students through
              the ambiguity of the engineering design process.   What can we expect a
              freshman engineer to extract about the  engineering process while solving
              open-ended problems?  Does the  student apply what is learned in one problem to
              the next problem  encountered?    The objective of this work is to document the
              problem-solving  approach novice engineers take when presented with ambiguous,
              pen-  ended design problems.  This will be accomplished b a series of 
              think-aloud studies that examine various aspects of engineering  students'
              strategies for solving open-ended problems.  These data  will answer questions
              such as 1)do "good" students and "poor"  students differ in their approach to
              studying case study material  and solving open ended problems?  2)do approaches
              to engineering  design problems of these two student groups differ from
              experienced  engineers?, and 3)do engineering students generate self- 
              explanations as they study case-study material about design  problems, and does
              this help them improve their performance in  design tasks?  The answers to
              these questions will contribute to a  research base from which recommendations
              will be developed for  teaching strategies to facilitat e learning for
              engineering  students.  ***
