Title       : Faculty Early Career Development: Development of an Integrated Environment for
               Surface Mount Device Technology Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2001    
File        : a9996183

Award Number: 9996183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137318             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Rene Villalobos rene.villalobos@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9502897  Villalobos   In the electronics industry, components are so small and
              delicate that manufacturing requires automation systems, but the paradox is
              that a person inspects components visually.  This Faculty Early Career
              Development award's research and educational components will focus on this
              problem.  This research develops an integrated engineering approach to assembly
              and inspection of surface mounted devices (SMD's).  The tasks are:  inspection
              routine generation formulated as a Markov decision problem, development of a
              physical distributed flexible inspection system, and use of neural network
              technology for diagnostics and process control, and a very focused on SMD
              manufacture.  The educational focus complements the research, involving
              undergraduates, advising and undergraduate student recruitment, in addition to
              new courses.  The education plan, while tied to integrated electronics
              manufacture, is broader in its scope.  It will develop three courses, one of
              which is an entrepreneurship course that will include successful role models
              from industry to instill the product-to-market spirit.  The principal
              investigator plans to continue his activity with student involvement in applied
              research, advising undergraduates and graduates, and spending time recruiting
              undergraduate students, all the marks of a well-rounded faculty member.   The
              research and educational plans have a high probability of improving the
              technology and engineering resource base.  The educational program is strong in
              student development in a total way.  ***
