Title       : Organometallic Charge Transfer and the Reduction of Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9996283

Award Number: 9996283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford P. Kubiak ckubiak@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Clifford P. Kubiak, Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for an investigation of charge transfer in   organometallic
              systems that occur on the vibrational time scale and that   can be interpreted
              within the framework of the Marcus-Hush theories of   electron transfer.
              Intervalence charge transfer occurs near the   vibrational time scale in some
              triruthenium clusters, as evidenced by   coalescence of carbonyl infrared
              stretching bands, and differences in the   electron exchange rates in these
              complexes reflect differences in the   electronic coupling within the
              complexes. In this project the factors   that control this coupling will be
              delineated. A self consistent physical   description of the phenomenon will be
              developed through detailed   spectroscopic studies of the dynamical IR
              averaging in the triruthenium   complexes. The picture then will be generalized
              by investigations of   three additional, strongly coupled organometallic charge
              transfer   complexes: (i) laterally interconnected dimers of trinuclear clear
              nickel   clusters; (ii) oligomeric metal clusters with strong metal-metal  
              interactions; and (iii) new tetra(diphenylphosphino) quinodimethane   bridged
              dinuclear metal complexes. Many of these complexes have   appropriate redox
              potentials and catalytic properties for the   electrochemical reduction of
              carbon dioxide, and this aspect of their   chemistry will be developed.   The
              transfer of electrons between reactants and products is a critical   step in
              many chemical reactions. In these processes the maximum rate of   electron
              transfer is defined by the rate of vibrations within and solvent   motions
              about the reactant and product molecules. This study addresses   electron
              transfer processes that take place at the same speed as   molecular vibrations
              and will determine the factors that control the   electron transfer rate. The
              results will permit both a better basic   understanding of electron transfer
              and provide a basis to design systems   with tuned electron transfer
              properties. The application of the basic   knowledge gained in the project will
              be demonstrated by devising systems   that are capable of chemically activating
              carbon dioxide.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
