Title       : Microbial Ecology of Hydrothermal Plumes: An Interdisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9996176

Award Number: 9996176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 31,  1999   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28908              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach reysenbacha@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth McLaughlin-West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1319,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9617702  Reysenbach    In order to better understand the chemical processes
              occurring in  hydrothermal plumes and develop predictive models of
              hydrothermally-derived  chemical fluxes, it is necessary to characterize the
              effects that microbial  activity have on plume chemistry. The main objectives
              of this project are:  1. To characterize the diversity and define the structure
              of microbial  communities associated with chemical fluxes within the
              hydrothermal plume  environment, utilizing molecular phylogenetic techniques;
              2. To map changes  in the diversity and structure of the microbial community as
              the plume ages;  3. To examine the abundance and activity of specific members
              of the plume  microbial community through the use of fluorescent rRNA probes.
              This  research will provide significant new information about these poorly
              defined  microbial effects which in turn will aid in the development of
              realistic  models of chemical fluxes in hydrothermal systems.  A fourth
              objective of  this project is to provide an opportunity for the new Ph.D. (E.
              McLaughlin)  to broaden her research experience as defined in the RIDGE program
               announcement. A postdoctoral position in Dr. Reysenbach's laboratory will 
              allow E. McLaughlin to learn and utilize molecular phylogenetic techniques. 
              Thus, fostering "cross-disciplinary fertilization" by combining the  molecular
              phylogenetic expertise of the host laboratory with the geochemical  knowledge
              obtained during the candidate's thesis work.
