Title       : Pilot HGDP: Assessment of High-Throughput Assays for the PCR based Genotyping of
               Classical Polymorphic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9996298

Award Number: 9996298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Shriver   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ranjan Deka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Ferrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many individuals from many populations have been typed for the traditional
              `classical` blood group and enzyme polymorphisms (e.g. ABO, Rh, and MNS). In
              fact, these markers make up the majority of the population genetic data
              available today.  However, for a number of reasons, the use of these markers is
              declining and their continued use will depend on being able to type them from
              DNA samples. The primary goal of this project is to develop high-throughput
              DNA-based assays for 12 of the most important classical genetic markers. These
              new assays will then be used to type a number of different ethnographically
              defined populations previously typed using the classical methods. In this way,
              the concordance of the DNA-based and the classical assays can be tested in
              populations from around the world.   The successful completion of this project
              will result in the modernization of some very important genetic marker systems,
              insuring their continued use and making them accessible to more researchers. In
              the process of the conversion of these markers two high-throughput genotyping
              methods will also be compared. The ability to generate large numbers of
              genotypes is essential to molecular population genetic studies. Practical
              lessons from this project will be of interest to researchers planing
              large-scale genetic screening, population, or family-based studies.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
