Title       : Channel Coding Problems Associated with the Transmission of Compressed Signals
               over Mobile Radio Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9996222

Award Number: 9996222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Fuja tfuja@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nariman Farvardin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate methods for providing  reliable
              transmission  of compressed information - speech, images, video,  and data -
              over the bandlimited, fading channels that characterize mobile  communication
              systems.  The research will focus on two (intersecting) lines  of
              investigation: (i) Error control strategies that exploit the properties  of
              data compression algorithms: The goal here will be to make effective use  of
              the "residual redundancy" remaining in signals after compression;  virtually
              all presently-used source coding schemes leave some such  redundancy, and
              channel decoders that are "tuned" to exploit it can offer  substantial gain
              over decoders that are not. (Recent results regarding CELP  speech coding show
              2-5 dB of gain.) (ii)The design analysis, and  implementation of error control
              codes specifically for digital mobile  communication.  It is well known that
              the distance properties that make a  code "good" for additive white Gaussian
              noise channels are not the most  important design properties for codes to be
              used over fading channels.  Recently, the P.I. and collaborators have developed
              an approach to code  design for fading channels that results in significantly
              improved  performance with respect to the "traditional" approach; this research
              will  extend the work in this area, developing new codes and analyzing their 
              performance in a variety of contexts - including the synergy between the  codes
              and "diversity reception" (i.e., multiple antennas) and the  performance of the
              codes at low signal-to-noise ratios.  The work to be  undertaken will be a
              mixture of code design, analysis, and simulation.  Successful completion of the
              proposed research will result in a capability  to support multi-media transport
              over mobile communication channels.
