Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Seismic Permanent Displacement of
               Geosynthetic-Reinforced Soil Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9996230

Award Number: 9996230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9842               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoe I. Ling Ling@civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dov Leshchinsky  (Principal Investigator former)
              Victor N. Kaliakin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9603033  Leshchinsky    This award supports a two year collaborative research 
              project between Professors Dov Leshchinsky and Hoe Ling of  the University of
              Delaware and Professors Jiro Takemura and  Tsutomu Kimura of the Tokyo
              Institute of Technology in  Japan.  This research project will undertake a
              study of the  long-term performance of geosynthetically reinforced walls  and
              implications of creep and stress relaxation on design.  The problem of
              time-dependent response of geosynthetically  reinforced soil structures
              requires study from the  standpoint of fundamental mechanics and current design
               procedures, for future applications.  The major goals are:  1) to
              experimentally study stress relaxation of selected  geosynthetic reinforcement;
               2) develop a simple  constitutive model to realistically simulate the time 
              dependent behavior of the reinforcement;  3) implement this  model into an
              existing finite element computer code; and  4)  conduct an extensive numerical
              parametric study of  geosynthetically reinforced walls at working stress 
              conditions.    The proposal brings together two laboratories that have 
              constituted different parts of the process:  the Americans  will be responsible
              for conducting the analytical parts of  the research and the Japanese will be
              conducting the  centrifuge tests.  The results of the research will  facilitate
              the understanding of time dependent behavior of  geosynthetic reinforcement
              interactive with backfill soil  and will make the design of such structures
              more rational.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project 
              will broaden our base of knowledge and promote international  understanding and
              cooperation.  ***
