Title       : Gravitational Radiation Sources for Cryogenic Resonant Bar Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9996213

Award Number: 9996213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee S. Finn LSF5@PSU.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award will initiate a new theoretical research  program to study
              issues connected with the design of the  next generation of acoustic
              gravitational wave detectors  designed to operate at high frequency.  Data
              analysis  techniques that properly account for detector noise will be  adapted
              to the truncated isocahedral gravitational antenna   TIGA  design.  These
              techniques will be used to evaluate  several astrophysically relevant
              high-frequency  gravitational radiation sources, including  but not limited  to
               the final burst of radiation from the coalescence of a  binary neutron star or
              stellar mass black hole system,  supernovae explosions, precessing pulsars, and
              general non  axisymmetric pulsars.    An educational program is proposed that
              focuses on  communicating to non-science students the nature of  scientific
              inquiry and the manner in which it is conducted.  The vehicle for this program
              is an astronomy course that  fulfills a university distribution requirement. 
              Computer  laboratories will be constructed that will allow students  to, for
              example, determine the age of a star cluster by  examining the distribution of
              stars within it, or calibrate  the distance scale and find the Hubble constant
              and age of a  model universe.  In addition, a novel evaluation and study  aid -
              concept maps - will be introduced into the same  course.  A concept is an
              object  e.g., star, planet, galaxy,  black hole  or an event  e.g., eclipse,
              nova, sidereal  year .  New concepts come to be understood in terms of their 
              relationships with concepts previously known.  Deeper  understanding of
              concepts already known corresponds to the  construction of new relationships
              between them.  A concept  map is a graphical representation of the concepts and
              the  relationships among them that a student has come to  recognize.
