Title       : Theoretical Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9996173

Award Number: 9996173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John W. Lightbody, Jr.                  
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glennys R. Farrar farrar@physics.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1288      ASTROPHYSICS & COSMOLOGY THEOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in theoretical elementary particle physics,  astrophysics and
              cosmology will include studies of possible  new particles predicted by
              `supersymmetry` (which relates  the constituents of matter to the basic
              forces), the origins  of the highest energy cosmic rays, the nature of the Dark
               Matter which makes up most of the mass of the Universe, and  problems of
              interest concerning the four basic forces of  nature. Attention has focussed
              recently on several ways in  which supersymmetry may be hidden from discovery
              because the  new particles related which it predicts, although light  enough to
              be produced in existing accelerators, have very  subtle signatures.  Thus it is
              extremely important to find  ways to infer their existence.  The properties of
              the  highest energy cosmic rays suggest they may in fact be new  particles,
              whose understanding could shed light on  supersymmetry as well as quasars. 
              Quasars are objects which  were especially populous in the early universe and
              are  thought to be enormous black holes accreting the surrounding  galaxy. The
              studies to be undertaken are important to  furthering our understanding of both
              the cosmos and the  basic forces.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
