Title       : Early Mississippian Social Negotiation and Cahokia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9996169

Award Number: 9996169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 17,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Pauketat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Timothy Pauketat and his colleagues
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the Cahokia
              region, located East of St. Louis, Missouri. Cahokia is a monumental site which
              included large mounds and `woodhenges` and which served as center for perhaps
              the largest and most hierarchically organized society known in prehistoric
              North America. Excavation at the site of Cahokia itself revealed a spatial
              organization indicative of a sustained consistent centralized power and it is
              likely that tens of thousands of individuals were incorporated into this
              system. Exotic goods associated with burials indicate trade networks which
              extended across the midwest. While most archaeologists have assumed a
              straightforward and fairly rigid form of political organization, Dr. Pauketat,
              based on his prior work in the area, believes that a significant amount of
              flexibility existed and that many groups within the Cahokia sphere of influence
              exhibited varying degrees of independence. In his recently supported NSF study,
              he noted the sudden appearance of `Richfield groups` in an area about 35 km.
              from Cahokia at ca. 1,050 AD. It was just then that Cahokia underwent its
              greatest fluorescence and Dr. Pauketat believes that Richfield peoples moved
              away from the site center to obtain a greater degree of independence.  Dr.
              Pauketat and his team will conduct a pedestrian survey over a representative
              sample of this area. They will note surface material and features and plot
              their distribution. On this basis it will be possible to determine the extent
              and population density of Richfield peoples. Three sites will be chosen for
              excavation. The purpose will be to determine settlement configuration and house
              organization for comparison with contemporary Cahokia counterparts. Ceramics
              and other cultural objects will be analyzed also to determine degree of
              similarity. On this basis degree of cultural separation from Cahokia can be
              determined and the changes in such distance traced over time.  This research is
              important for several reasons. Archaeologists have come to realize that large
              `capitals` such as Cahokia can only be understood in a broader regional
              context. Data collected to date suggest that simple models of hierarchy and
              dominance can not be automatically applied in such situations and that constant
              negotiation and re-definition of power between center and hinterlands likely
              existed. The data collected by Dr. Pauketat will help to confirm or deny this
              model. The research will involve a University of Buffalo field school and thus
              provide training for many students.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
