Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry of Kernel Subgroups of Nonpositively Curved
               Cube Complex Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9996342

Award Number: 9996342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel Brady nbrady@math.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704417  Brady       The investigator of this project will study the geometric 
              and finiteness properties of kernel subgroups of the fundamental  groups of
              nonpositively curved cube complexes.  A combinatorial  version of Morse theory
              applied to cube complexes may be used to  analyze the finiteness properties of
              the kernels of right-angled Artin  groups.  Some of these kernels have
              remarkable finiteness properties.  A major goal of this project is to study the
              geometry and topology of  these kernels.  It is hoped that these groups contain
              examples which  distinguish between geometric and cohomological dimension, and 
              examples which distinguish between combable and automatic groups.  It  is also
              worth considering more general settings in which the Morse  theory arguments
              may be applied, and what information these ideas may  yield in the study of the
              coherency question for various classes of  groups.  Another interesting
              direction to investigate is whether the  Morse techniques may be combined with
              branched covering techniques to  produce examples of torsion-free groups that
              do not contain free  abelian subgroups of rank 2, and that are of type FP(n)
              but not  FP(n+1).       The main objects under investigation in this project
              are  piecewise euclidean cubical complexes.  These may be thought of as  
              constructed from regular euclidean squares and cubes, neatly stitched  together
              along their faces and edges.  Such complexes have symmetry  groups, which may
              be thought of as generalizations of the wallpaper  pattern groups, or of the
              3-dimensional crystallographic groups one  encounters in the study of lattices
              in chemistry.  The main purpose of  this research is to examine subgroups of
              these symmetry groups.  One  technique is to introduce height functions on the
              cubical complexes  and to look at the subgroups consisting of all those
              symmetries that  preserve the `contour lines' or level sets of such functions. 
              These   constant-height slices often exhibit remarkable geometric patterns 
              that are far f rom obvious when one looks just at the ambient cubical  complex.
               The subgroups of symmetries that preserve these slices have  very different
              algebraic and geometric properties from those one   encounters in the euclidean
              crystallographic world.  These examples  help deepen our understanding of the
              concept of geometric symmetry.   ***
