Title       : Vertex Algebras, S-duality Conjecture, and Counting Plane Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9996346

Award Number: 9996346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenbo Qin zq@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Zhenbo Qin
DMS-98 77103

Professor Qin will work in the general
              area of algebraic geometry, vertex algebra, Gromov-Witten invariants, and their
              interplay with physics.  The main tools to be employed are the moduli space of
              Gieseker semistable bundles on algebraic surfaces; the modular invariance of
              the characters of vertex operator algebras, and the localization formula from
              intersection theory.  The investigation should shed light on the relations
              between stable bundles, vertex algebras, and the S-duality conjecture from
              physics.  Professor Qin also expects to learn more about the relation between
              certain enumerative invariants and Gromov-Witten invariants of the complex
              projective plane.

Algebraic geometry is one of the great advances in
              mathematics of the 20-th century. In the last twenty years all areas of
              mathematics and some branches of physics have benefited from our increased
              application of the abstract but powerful ideas of this subject. In algebraic
              geometry, geometric objects are replaced by algebraic objects which retain the
              basic properties of the geometry.  This opens the study to the abstract methods
              of algebra.  The result is that complicated geometric connections are easier to
              study and understand. Professor Qin's research has many of its roots in
              mathematical physics and should help us understand some of the basic building
              blocks of our world.

