Title       : CAREER: Turning Automation into a Team Player: The Development of Multisensory
               and Graded Feedback for Highly Automated (Flight Deck) Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9996448

Award Number: 9996448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nadine B. Sarter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  introduction  of modern technology to a variety  of  complex  dynamic 
              domains  has  led  to  benefits  such  as  an  increased  precision and
              efficiency of operations. These benefits appear  to  accrue  primarily in
              situations where automated  systems  perform  tasks on their own, i.e., without
              operator involvement.  In other  situations,  where  humans and machines  need 
              to  cooperate  and  coordinate their activities, unexpected difficulties with 
              human-  automation  communication are being encountered.  The  short-term  goal
               of  this  combined  research and education  program  is  to  improve   the 
              communicative  skills  of  modern  (flight   deck)  technology through the
              development of new forms of multimodal and  graded automation feedback. Its
              long-term objective is to prevent  the  (re)creation  of similar or new
              problems with  human-machine  collaboration by training students at the
              University of  Illinois  in  a  practice-oriented  approach to  system  design 
              where  the  constraints  of  the  human,  the machine  agent,  and  the  task 
              environment are identified and integrated early on. This  project  serves  to
              advance our understanding of mechanisms and strategies  mediating  successful
              and poor human-automation coordination.  It  emphasizes the importance of
              combining a reactive and a proactive  approach    to    reducing   difficulties
                with    human-machine  communication.   And  it  contributes to the 
              important  goal  of  promoting  the  transfer  of basic research  results  to 
              applied  system design.
