Title       : SBIR Phase II: Infrared Detectors Using Micro-Cantilevers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9996407

Award Number: 9996407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 31,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Hunter hunter@consultec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sarcon Microsystems, Inc.
	      725 Pellissippi Parkway
	      Knoxville, TN  379323300    423/966-3506

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9627174  Hunter  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
              result in the development of new types of infrared detectors utilizing very
              recent developments in microcantilever technology.  Such devices can be mass
              produced using standard semiconductor manufacturing methods, and specially
              tailored to our particular application using micromachining techniques.  During
              Phase I of this project, a working laboratory version of a temperature and IR
              sensor was constructed and tested using both optical and piezoresistive
              techniques to measure the cantilever bending due to thermal induced stress. 
              The piezoresistive technique was shown to have an order of magnitude higher
              sensitivity for detecting optical radiation than the optical sensing technique,
              and the attendant alignment and electronic amplification requirements needed to
              optimize the output response from the sensor were considerably simpler than
              those for the optical detection technique.  During Phase II of the project the
              performance of the infrared temperature sensor will be optimized using the
              piezoresistive technique and various engineering prototypes of this instrument
              will be built.  Phase III will involve commercialization of this technology
              through fabrication and sales of various stand-alone instruments specifically
              designed for given IR sensing and temperature measurement applications. 
              Commercial applications of infrared detectors based on microcantilevers are
              numerous since these detectors are extremely sensitive, easily miniaturized,
              and can be readily mass produced.  Medical applications include non contact
              thermometry and whole body thermal imaging for cancer detection.  High
              sensitivity temperature measurement and IR imaging capabilities are required in
              the aerospace industry, military, and for night vision and security
              applications.  Temperature control in manufacturing and machines also are
              possible applications.
