Title       : Physiology, Phylogeny and Adaptation in Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae): An Endemic
               Hawaiian Plant Genus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9996358

Award Number: 9996358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd E. Dawson tdawson@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9601325  Dawson    This research is an investigation of patterns of functional
              diversity with respect to their phylogenetic (evolutionary) relationships
              within Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae).  A phylogeny (evolutionary tree) of the
              genera Schiedea and Alsinidendron shows that the two genera arose from the same
              ancestor and have radiated into diverse habitats in the Hawaiian Islands, and
              include rain forest vines, coastal and subalpine shrubs, and herbs.  The
              comparative ecology and physiology of plants has rarely been conducted in a
              rigorous phylogenetic context, with knowledge of the evolutionary relationships
              of the species.  As a result, it is difficult to know whether physiological,
              anatomical and morphological traits are adaptations to different environments
              because these traits have changed through evolutionary time in response to
              novel selection in new habitats or are historical artifacts of past selection. 
              This research will study patterns of physiological specialization associated
              with shifts in breeding system and morphology that accompany shifts in habitat
              preference.  Research objectives are: (1) to describe the patterns of
              physiological diversity (patterns of water use and water-use efficiency using
              measurements of carbon fixation and water loss rates, instantaneous water use
              efficiency, carbon isotope ratio, hydraulic properties, and their associated
              morphological changes) for 9 representative species; (2) analyze habitat
              characteristics and correlate them with the functional traits for these
              species; (3) interpret functional characteristics with respect to their
              evolutionary relationships to understand patterns of physiological and
              morphological character evolution; and (4) provide a detailed analysis of
              functional changes within species and by gender that have occurred as
              hermaphroditic species colonized drier habitats and different breeding systems
              evolved.  Field studies will provide information about functional variation
              under natural conditions, and common garden studies will pr ovide information
              about functional variation among species and by gender under controlled
              conditions in the absence of environmental variation.  In particular, plant
              hydraulic architecture (e.g., wood structure and water transport properties) is
              likely to have contributed to enhanced drought tolerance for Schiedea with
              evolution of woody features and colonization of drier habitats.    This study
              is one of the first to merge plant physiological ecology with phylogenetic
              systematics, and permits an understanding of the nature and patterns of
              physiological and functional character evolution.  Greater knowledge of how
              physiological and other functional characters change through evolutionary time
              with changes in environment is critical to understand how global climate
              changes will affect both native and agricultural plants.
