Title       : CAREER: Resource Management in Distributed Multimedia Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9996147

Award Number: 9996147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorg Liebeherr jl3k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this proposal is to advance the state-of-the-art of 
              distributed  multimedia systems in both research and education. A novel 
              approach for managing heterogeneous resources in a shared distributed 
              multimedia network is presented, called multiclass relative Quality-of 
              Service.   The research agenda concentrates on the exploration od this 
              approach, the design and evaluation of traffic control algorithms, and  their
              implementation and  empirical evaluation in a testbed network.  The  education
              agenda is focused on the use of multimedia technology  to  innovate  education.
               The research and education agenda will:    1) develop new approaches for
              resource management in distributed  multimedia  systems that can operate in a
              shared network environment. A new  service  model,  called  multi-class 
              relative Quality-of-Service, is  proposed. Different from existing service
              models for multimedia networks,  the proposed service model can satisfy service
              requirements of most  delay-sensitive multimedia applications, yet can be
              realized in the  current infrastructure of shared network resources.    2)
              design and analyze novel traffic control algorithms for resource  management in
              multimedia networks with multi-class relative Quality  of-Service. The proposed
              research includes development and  evaluation  of  flow control methods for
              relative Quality-of-Service, approaches to cope  with dynamically changing
              resource management policies, and new routing  algorithms.    3) design,
              implement, and experimentally evaluate new protocol  mechanisms  for resource
              management in distributed multimedia systems. By implementing  the mechanisms
              as extensions to currently used network protocols, existing  networks can
              gradually evolve  to  an  environment  with  Quality-of-Service guarantees.   
              4) gain insight in and evaluate the use of interactive  multimedia  for 
              education.  An interactive tele-tutoring tool, already partially realized  by
              the PI, that enables  teachers and students to interact over  a campus 
              network, will provide an experimental platform to study  the  use  of 
              interactive multimedia tools for teaching.    5) contribute to the
              establishment of `multimedia' as a main area of an  education in computer
              science. This includes the development of a  project-oriented senior level
              course in multimedia systems that uses  multimedia classrooms available at the
              institution.
