Title       : CAREER: Biomechanics of Swimming: Understanding the Physics of Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9996419

Award Number: 9996419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Jordan  9734393        This  proposal is concerned with integrating a
              research program  in  the  mechanics of swimming with a teaching program in
              biomechanics to generate an  atmosphere  where  undergraduate students can 
              team  about  the  physics  of  biology  and the processes of science. The
              research aspect of this  proposal  focuses  on  the  swimming  performance
              consequences  of  morphological  and  physiological  variation in aquatic
              animals. At issue is the idea  that  the  muscles which generate force do so in
              a way that depends upon their speed of  shortening which in turn determines the
              hydrodynamic force produced  by  the  muscle. Thus, a complete analysis of
              swimming would  solve, simultaneously, the force-velocity relationships for
              both muscle and  fluid-dynamic forces. The proposed work will attack this
              "force balance"  with both experimental and theoretical approaches for analyses
              of swimming  in anuran tadpoles.  As a model system, tadpoles are ideal for
              studies of  scale effects on swimming performance. These animals propel
              themselves by an  retrograde bending wave on the tail, show a dramatic
              ontogenetic size  variation,  and an intriguing predator-induced morphological
              variation which  appears to confer a swimming  performance advantage over
              non-induced forms. This research program will be  integrated into a teaching
              program by bringing the experimental techniques  of biomechanics into the
              classroom.  Through demonstrations, laboratory  exercises and independent
              research projects, students will be able to apply  what they have learned in
              their biomechanics coursework, as well as other  biology and engineering
              courses, in an effort to understand the physical  constraints and determinants
              of swimming performance.
