Title       : A Zooplankton Population Dynamics Model in the California Current Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9996229

Award Number: 9996229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Huntley Mhuntley@kona.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Meng Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Project Summary:  We propose to construct a practical zooplankton population
              dynamics model based on novel advances in the biomass spectrum theory (Platt
              and Dernman 1977; Zhou and Huntley submitted). Testing and application of the
              theory will use eddy resolving CTD OPC (Optical Plankton Counter: Focal
              Instruments Inc.) data collected in the California Current region during June
              July 1993 and September October 1993.  The novel advances in the biomass
              spectrum theory explicitly include population dynamics parameters such as rates
              of individual growth, birth, and mortality.  We first developed a general
              biomass spectrum theory of size structured zooplankton population dynamics
              based on Platt and Denman's model (1977), and then demonstrated that this
              theory can be practically applied to estimate zooplankton population dynamics
              rates and productivity from observations of the biomass spectrum.  In this
              theory, zooplankton, including all species and stages, are classified by
              weight.  For estimating population dynamics rates from field observations and
              verifying modeling results, we further developed an objective interpolation
              method which removes the effects of advection from observations and calculates
              statistical properties of the spatiotemporal interpolation. This objective
              interpolation method will be applied to zooplankton data obtained in the
              California Current region. The results, together with the biomass spectrum
              theory and individual population growth models. will be used to estimate rates
              of population dynamics. These rates and zooplankton spatiotemporal
              distributions allow us realistically to construct and verify a population
              model. Then we will develop a numerical model based on the biomass spectrum
              theory and analyzed population dynamics rates, which takes the phytoplankton
              and physical fields from observations or modeling, and outputs zooplankton
              spatiotemporal distribution and productivity. This model provides the trophic
              link between models of phytoplankton and fish, and can be directly embedded
              into an existing hydrodynamic ecosystem model for ecosystem study and
              prediction of secondary production.  This approach assertively addresses the
              central GLOBEC paradigm First, it directly addresses population dynamics at the
              mesoscale. Second, it couples modeling with observations derived from new
              sampling technology (OPC). Third, this research involves a conscious effort to
              provide a model that can assimilate field data and therefore can be used to
              both guide and interpret GLOBEC observations in Northeast North Pacific Ocean. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
