Title       : Collaborative Research: Cretaceous Mammals From Mongolia and Higher-Level
               Mammalian Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9996172

Award Number: 9996172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo W. Rougier grougier@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm C. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Novacek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527811  Novacek   Since the famous fossil-collecting expeditions to the Gobi
              Desert of Mongolia in the 1920s, scientists at the American Museum of Natural
              History and their colleagues have continued an outstanding tradition of
              research on Cretaceous-age dinosaurs, birds, and mammals. Fossil collections
              resumed recently with Mongolian and Chinese collaborators, and these new
              expeditions are yielding abundant specimens of both known and entirely new
              groups (taxa) of dinosaurs and early dinosaur-like mammals. Material includes
              exquisitely preserved skulls and skeletons of multituberculates and taxa
              considered to belong to basal groups of placental mammals. Study of this
              material will provide new evidence bearing on taxonomic diversity and
              phylogenetic (evolutionary) relationships of early mammal-like reptiles and of
              the early lineages of true mammals. New characters from dentition, skull, and
              postcranial skeletons will be amassed using traditional paleontological
              techniques as well as new CT (computer-aided tomography) scanning of specimens,
              which avoids destructive sampling.    AMNH scientists in association with
              colleagues at University of Louisville and abroad are working to integrate the
              new knowledge of taxa and of characters from these early fossil mammals with
              knowledge from known fossil and extant groups, and in turn to compare their
              results with data from molecular (DNA) studies of living taxa. In particular,
              well-documented fossil species will provide calibration points for theoretical
              studies of molecular evolutionary rates. And the eventual integration of
              morphological and molecular evidence should provide robust estimates of
              evolutionary history for the early lineages of mammals and their close
              relatives.
