Title       : A Flexible End-to-End Protocol Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9996069

Award Number: 9996069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Calvert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Support for emerging network applications requires that the basic  delivery
              service provided by the network infrastructure be augmented  with services that
              are implemented in the end systems connected to the  network.  Examples of such
              services include: recovery from messages  lost in the network; encrypting
              transmitted information; verifying  that received information was not forged or
              modified in transit;  adjusting the rate of transmission to available
              bandwidth; and  attaching identifying information to the transmitted data so
              that the  receiver can process it even if it arrives out of order.  Some of 
              these services are provided today by protocols that are organized in  layers. 
              Although it is a very useful paradigm for organizing network  functionality,
              research and experience have identified several  problems with layering as it
              is applied to end-to-end functions  (i.e. those that are implemented in the end
              systems rather than the  network). In particular, layering causes services to
              be too coarsely  grouped together, so that applications may have to make use of
              some  services they don't need in order to get others.  (For example, TCP 
              forces an application that needs congestion control to also accept  reliability
              -- which, if not needed, just adds unnecessary overhead.)  Layering also causes
              functions to be implemented in more than one  place in the stack, and hides
              information that might be useful for  improving efficiency.    This project
              aims to develop and deploy a platform for end-to-end  functions that
              incorporates the lessons learned about protocol design  and implementation over
              the last several years.  The platform, which  is called Tau, is not intended to
              identify all the functions that  applications may ever require, but rather to
              streamline the process of  incorporating those functions into systems and
              applications as they  are identified and developed.  The approach involves
              developing a  simple conceptual framework and a common message format that
              supports  optimization of  common processing paths, while also allowing for 
              extension at a (modest) cost in efficiency.    Tau has three main features. 
              The first is an explicit composition  mechanism (a metaheader) that promotes
              modularity of function and  implementation but avoids the problems associated
              with layering.  The  second is a generic protocol interface, which allows
              individual  protocol functions to be implemented separately, then composed 
              efficiently, to provide just the services required by the application.  In
              developing this feature, the project will contribute new methods of 
              integrating code for fast execution while preserving modularity at the  source
              code level.  The third feature is a set of protocol functions  that can be
              extended to include new services in addition to the  traditional ones mentioned
              above.    Information on the Tau Project is available via the World-Wide Web at
               http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fac/Ken.Calvert/Tau.html
