Title       : Travel Support for Weekend Algebra Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0305906

Award Number: 0305906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee C. Klingler klingler@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Markus Schmidmeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Lee Klingler 
Proposal Number:  DMS
              -0305906
Institution: Florida Atlantic University

ABSTRACT

The next
              "Weekend Algebra Conference" is scheduled for the fall of 2003 at Florida
              Atlantic University.  Over the years, this series of conferences has attracted
              notable mathematicians from numerous universities throughout the Southeast,
              with areas of interest ranging from infinite abelian groups and modules over
              domains to representation type of categories of modules and categories of
              subgroups. These
conferences have allowed numerous algebraists from smaller
              universities to meet, exchange research ideas, and forge institutional
              partnerships and relationships.  The proposed project encourages increased
              participation by young mathematicians, by providing travel support for up to
              fifteen graduate students and recent doctoral recipients to attend this
              meeting.

The dependence of science and engineering (as well as business and
              economics) on mathematics is generally recognized.  Thus, a steady supply of
              skilled mathematicians is crucial to maintaining the health of the university
              system.  Mathematicians, in order to be effective in their professional
              careers, need to pursue a path of intellectual growth and scholarly activity. A
              key component of this intellectual activity is the chance to meet regularly
              with other mathematicians and exchange ideas.  For the last thirty years, the
              yearly "Weekend Algebra Conferences" have provided this opportunity to numerous
              mathematicians from universities throughout the Southeast.  The proposed
              project offers travel support to developing mathematicians to attend the next
              meeting in this series, in the fall of 2003.  By limiting support to students
              and untenured faculty, the proposed project focuses on nurturing mathematicians
              early in their careers, thus addressing the long-term research and educational
              infrastructure of mathematics departments in the Southeast.  Special effort to
              recruit women and minorities for funding broadens the impact of the proposed
              project by increasing the participation of underrepresented
              minorities.


	


