Title       : AMPATH Workshop: Fostering Collaborations and Next Generation Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0305876

Award Number: 0305876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio Ibarra julio@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi Alvarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the workshop is to create an environment for AMPATH
              participants, potential participants and those with a regional, hemispheric or
              international interest in the project to exchange ideas, form new and solidify
              existing collaborations and articulate specific Network Infrastructure
              needs.

The conference will continue the work of identifying the universities
              and research centers in the AMPATH service area who require, or would take
              advantage of, high-performance connectivity to research institutions in the
              U.S. and worldwide if it were available.  Proposed speakers at the conference
              include researchers that participate in projects between collaborators in the
              U.S., Canada, the AMPATH service area, Europe and Asia/Pacific.

Building on
              last year's success with the "Workshop to Identify Areas of Scientific
              Collaboration between the US and the AMPATH Service Area (2002)," the First
              AMPATH International Conference, this "Fostering Collaborations and Next
              Generation Infrastructure" will further delve into the benefits of utilizing
              the AMPATH advanced networking infrastructure for scientific research and
              education.  The main objective of the conference is to create an environment
              for AMPATH participants, potential participants and those with a regional,
              hemispheric or international interest in the project to exchange ideas, form
              new and solidify existing collaborations.  The conference will continue the
              work of identifying the universities and research centers in the AMPATH service
              area who require, or would take advantage of  high-performance connectivity to
              research institutions in the US and worldwide if it were available.  Proposed
              speakers at the conference include researchers that participate in projects
              between collaborators in the U.S., Canada, the AMPATH service area, Europe and
              Asia/Pacific.

AMPATH is a project of Florida International University in
              collaboration with Global Crossing, in support of scientific research
              applications that either involve collaboration between U.S. and multi-national
              researchers or wholly run U.S. projects in the AMPATH service area.  Research
              and Education networks to the UCAID Abilene network and the Central America,
              Mexico, and the Caribbean and the rest of the world to further advance U.S.
              science and education.

This workshop will produce a report summarizing the
              discussions.


