Title       : ALGORITHMS: Parallel Large-Scale Sparse Linear System Solvers: New Methods and
               Paradigms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a0305120

Award Number: 0305120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousef Saad saad@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Masha Sosonkina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  investigators   have  developed  a  set   of  parallel  algebraic
              multilevel techniques for solving distributed sparse linear systems of
              equations,  leading to the  ``parallel Algebraic  Recursive Multilevel Solver''
              (pARMS),  a portable and general purpose  library for solving sparse  linear
              systems  on  parallel computers. One of their goals is to begin to address the
              `efficiency gap' between `special purpose'  and `general purpose'  methods.  On
              one  extreme of the spectrum of solvers available, lie sparse direct methods
              which are robust,  general-purpose, but  expensive.  On  the other  extreme,
              are special purpose methods, such  as multigrid, which utilize information
              about  the  underlying   problem  to  tailor-design  certain  solution
              procedures.  Such methods  can be optimal but they  aim at solving the original
              physical problem instead  of the resulting linear system.  In between  these
              extremes  are the  preconditioned Krylov  methods whose performance is
              variable.

This research is characterized by a different vision of what a
              library of parallel iterative solvers should offer. The investigators strongly
              believe that a new paradigm is  required where a solver is no longer a
              monolithic  box comprising a  set of  preconditioners, but  allows the user to
              input specific information,  indeed even parts of the solution algorithm, in
              order to tailor the multilevel solution procedure.  This approach,  which is 
              enabled by  the modular  design of  pARMS,  is in perfect agreement  with the
              standard  approach used in  industry.  The new  paradigms  and methods 
              envisioned  in  this  research will  also
include a number of other key issues
              which arise in a typical solution process.  Thus, it is important to exploit
              the underlying context when solving  nonlinear systems  of  equations.  It  is 
              also important  to ensure that the pARMS code provides a fall-back option to an
              efficient sparse direct solver for  situations where the iterative solver
              fails. The  investigators  also  plan  to  explore new  questions  which  are
              starting  to  emerge  with  the  advent  of  the  Computational  Grid. Finally,
              they  will keep  in mind architecture-  and problem-dependent tuning of
              solution algorithms.

The software developed  by the investigators will
              continue  to be made publicly available.   Both investigators have  major
              interactions with researchers in important applications areas.  The pARMS-X
              code is also likely to have  an impact on graduate education, as  was the case
              with SPARSKIT in the past. 


