Title       : RUI: Magnetic and Superconducting Properties of Nickel Borocarbides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0305397

Award Number: 0305397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160406             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Schmiedeshoff gms@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award provides support to a researcher at an
              undergraduate institution for a project that seeks a better understanding of
              the competition between the low temperature states of novel metals and the ways
              in which these states coexist with each other.  The primary focus is on the
              interplay between superconductivity, magnetism, and heavy fermion behavior in
              the rare-earth nickel-borocarbides. The competition between superconductivity
              and the charge density wave state of alpha-uranium will also be studied. 
              Thermal expansion and magnetostriction measurements will be the primary
              techniques used to probe this competition. Resistivity and magnetoresistance
              measurements will provide additional information.  The results of these new
              measurements will be combined with existing specific heat measurements in a
              Gruneisen analysis characterizing the energy scales of these materials and
              their origins.  This research will advance our understanding of metals while
              training students drawn from a diverse pool of talented undergraduates at
              Occidental College, a liberal arts college in metropolitan Los Angeles.  

In
              the broadest sense, the goal of this individual investigator project is to
              discover how to design materials with specific, pre-determined properties, such
              as powerful magnets for motors and generators, or high-temperature
              superconductors for efficient, economical power transmission.  The immediate
              goal is to better understand how superconductivity interacts with magnetism and
              other metallic states.  The project will focus on a series of compounds in
              which superconductivity and magnetism co-exist.  Superconductivity and
              magnetism are usually mutually exclusive so the study of such materials can
              provide important information about these phenomena. This research will advance
              our understanding of metals while training undergraduates drawn from a diverse
              pool of talented undergraduate students at Occidental College, a liberal arts
              college in metropolitan Los Angeles.  These students will be well-prepared for
              graduate school and for joining the technical workforce.  


