Title       : NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Nonlinear Homogenization and Applications to
               Composites, Polycrystals and Smart Materials; June 23-26, 2003; Kazimierz
               Dolny, Poland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0305443

Award Number: 0305443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Ponte Castaneda ponte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0305443
PI: Pedro Ponte Castaneda
Institution: University of
              Pennsylvania
Title: Group Travel: NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Nonlinear
              Homogenization and Applications to Composites, Polycrystals and Smart
              Materials

ABSTRACT

This grant provides complementary support for several
              US young participants to attend a NATO Advanced Research Workshop on "Nonlinear
              Homogenization and Applications to Composites, Polycrystals and Smart
              Materials" to be held in Kazimierz Dolny, Poland, from 23 to 26 June, 2003. 
              Additional funding from the NATO ARW program will cover the travel expenses of
              the Key Speakers, as well as those of junior participants from NATO Partner
              countries (mostly Eastern European countries). The aim of the workshop is the
              evaluation of critical needs in nonlinear homogenization and novel applications
              in modeling materials systems exhibiting complex microstructures. The behavior
              of composites, polycrystals and smart materials is often nonlinear. There have
              been important and significant developments over the last two decades both in
              terms of nonlinear homogenization methodology (deterministic and stochastic),
              as well as in terms of novel applications to the above-mentioned classes of
              materials.  Also, phase transformations can be studied by using similar
              methods.  Homogenization methods offer promising new tools for constructing
              macroscopic models in biomechanics.  It is thus highly desirable to gather
              specialists in nonlinear homogenization, composite materials and micromechanics
              to promote progress in each of these fields keeping in mind the potential
              technological applications.  The main topics of workshop are: 1) Convex and
              non-convex homogenization methods and applications to advanced composites,
              smart materials and structures like plates and shells; 2) Homogenization
              estimates for polycrystalline aggregates in elasticity, plasticity and shape
              memory alloys: the effect of texture and its evolution; 3) Multi-scale modeling
              and discrete-to-continuum passage; 4) Recent developments and new directions in
              shape optimization; 5) Functionally graded structures for maximum strength and
              stiffness; 6) Structures of bi-stable inertial elements: waves, averaging,
              control; and 7) Homogenization methods in modeling bone and soft tissues.
              

The need for research in the field of nonlinear homogenization stems from
              the ever-increasing role of composites, polycrystals and smart materials in
              high-tech industries.  Materials such as functionally graded materials,
              piezoelectric composites, magnetic materials and ferroelectrics also belong to
              this class.  It has also become increasingly clear that living tissues exhibit
              very complex hierarchical microstructures.  Among the broader impacts of the
              proposed workshop are the following.  The conference is strongly multi- and
              inter-disciplinary in character, involving mathematicians, engineers and
              material scientists with various sub-fields of specialization.  In addition, it
              is expected that the workshop will provide opportunities for the transfer of
              information between Western and Central/East European countries, between
              research centers and universities, and among researchers from different
              scientific areas.  The workshop, whose proceedings will be disseminated through
              a NATO Science Series publication, will seek to identify open problems and
              future trends in the above-identified areas.  Finally, the meeting will include
              several graduate students, young investigators and faculty from
              underrepresented groups. 




