Title       : CAREER: A Career Plan for Research and Education in Smart Materials and
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0305027

Award Number: 0305027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 12,  2002 
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gangbing Song gsong@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER proposal is aimed to develop a smart materials and structures
              academic program at The University of Akron. This proposal includes four major
              components:
1)	Conduct innovative research in smart materials and structures.
              The PI will focus on:
(1) Compensation of hysteresis in smart actuators using
              neural networks and sliding-mode based robust controller. (2) Precision
              tracking control of Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) actuators. (3) Position control of
              SMA actuators without a position sensor. (4) Active control of a composite
              plate with embedded SMA wire actuators. (5) Precision shape control using piezo
              patch actuators. (6) Vibration damping using controllable backlash.
2)	Develop
              a state-of-art Smart Materials and Structures Laboratory to support
              research.
3)	Establish a novel smart materials and structures curriculum,
              including new courses and a teaching laboratory.
4)	Integrate research, lab
              development and the curriculum with undergraduate teaching, minority programs,
              women engineering programs, and outreach programs.
The significance and impact
              of this Career Development Plan are multifold:
1)	Contribute to the advance of
              technology development in smart materials and structures. Hysteresis exists in
              almost all smart actuators. The proposed control approach has potential to
              compensate for hysteresis and significantly increase control accuracy and
              stability of smart actuators and widen their applications. The elimination of
              the position sensor in a SMA servo system will dramatically decrease its cost
              and widen SMA's application. The proposed active shape control will
              significantly increase accuracy and robustness of precision system such as
              space reflectors. The smart composite beam with embedded SMA actuators will
              enable many potential applications for active shape control and vibration
              damping. Vibration damping using controllable backlash can be applied to many
              cantilevered flexible structures. 
2)	Strengthen research and teaching at The
              University of Akron.
3)	Benefit underrepresented students to participate
              engineering research.
4)	Benefit high school students to pursue higher
              education and careers in engineering.
5)	Benefit local industries and
              government agencies by supplying students with knowledge of this emerging
              technology.

