Title       : Workshop for the Retention of Underrepresented and Minority Engineering
               Educators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0305673

Award Number: 0305673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norma J. Mattei nmattei@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1059,9102,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This workshop is designed to encourage retention and advancement of qualified
              women and underrepresented minority engineering educators in pursuit of
              scientific and engineering challenges. The workshop will bring together a
              select group of 80 of the nation's outstanding engineering educators.
              Participants will be underrepresented and minority engineering educators who
              predominately have been in tenure track positions for less than five years or
              are in the last year of their Ph.D. program and actively pursuing tenure track
              academic positions.  The participants will be employed in teaching and/or
              research positions and actively developing their own unique research programs. 
              
	Specific workshop goals are to:
!	Foster technical and intellectual
              exchange among Ph.D. level, underrepresented and minority engineers who are or
              desire to be engineering educators;
!	Instill in its participants the sense of
              a technical community in which they can thrive and to which they can
              contribute; and 
!	Increase participant awareness of research and funding
              opportunities.
	The workshop will consist of ten formal sessions spread over a
              three-day period. The workshop will open with a presentation in which
              integration of research and education will be emphasized. This will be followed
              with detailed presentations on funding opportunities from technical program
              managers representing agencies such as NSF, ARO, AFOSR, ONR, DARPA, and NASA. A
              panel of university deans will discuss their perspectives on reasonable career
              expectations and demands. The deans' panel will be set up to include discussion
              of issues related to tenure, teaching, research, publications, funding,
              outreach and a rewarding personal life along the career path of an engineering
              educator. Role models selected based on their outstanding technical abilities
              and successful careers will be invited to give technical presentations, blended
              with personal and professional insights, and will be available for discussion
              with younger participants throughout the workshop. All participants will give a
              brief summary of their current research interests, increasing fellow
              participants' awareness of the diversity of related opportunities for
              involvement in different research areas. Participants will attend several
              working sessions on topics ranging from diversity issues to preparing
              successful grant proposals and tours of national research laboratory test
              facilities. Each day will close with a reception or banquet organized to
              promote discussion and networking among participants.
	The workshop
              proceedings will summarize the recommendations from the working session
              discussions, provide a workshop outcomes assessment and recommendations
              statement, and include a two page abstract from each participant that describes
              their research interests. The envisioned short-term significance and benefits
              of the workshop are threefold: enhanced participant awareness of what is
              required to be successful in academe (teaching, publishing, outreach, etc.),
              diversification of participants' research program goals, and development of a
              network of mentors and peers who encounter similar challenges in advancing
              within academe. The envisioned long-term significance and benefits of the
              program are improved retention of women and underrepresented minority engineers
              as active researchers, mentors, and instructors in engineering education, and
              increased diversity in the undergraduate engineering student population as a
              result of a more diverse engineering faculty.

