Title       : A Theoretical and Observational Study of Midlatitude Mesoscale Convective
               Vortices (MCVs) in Vertical Shear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0305412

Award Number: 0305412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Montgomery MTM@chandra.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Reasor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Because of their longevity and ability to organize convection, mesoscale
              convective vortices (MCVs) have been the focus of studies seeking to improve
              the prediction of widespread, heavy precipitation events during the warm
              season.  Although progress has been made in the past decade toward identifying
              conditions favorable for MCV generation, and in linking the strengthening of
              MCVs to convective regeneration in their vicinity, dynamical processes
              governing the MCV lifecycle are still not well understood.  To better predict
              potential flooding events in association with MCVs requires a basic
              understanding of how MCVs form, and what permits them to maintain their
              coherence in adverse environmental flows.  The Principal Investigator (PI) will
              address both questions under the aegis of the Bow Echo and MCV Experiment
              (BAMEX).

Observations suggest that the formation and longevity of MCVs
              depend critically on how the MCV interacts with ambient vertical shear.  To
              further understand this interaction the PI will conduct a combined theoretical,
              numerical, and observational study that builds on the PI and Co-PI's previous
              NSF research.  The theoretical study will commence by examining the
              quasi-geostrophic `free' alignment of an idealized MCV.  This sets the stage
              for a key theoretical analysis to determine the critical shear necessary to
              irreversibly shear apart a given MCV.  Knowledge of the critical shear is
              believed central to distinguishing those MCVs that regenerate convection from
              those that do not.  The impact of new convection triggered by the vortex's
              resistance to ambient shear will be studied systematically with the goal of
              determining the feedback of convection on the intensity of the
              MCV.

Observational tests of the theoretical work will be carried out using
              airborne Doppler radar and dropsonde data from the BAMEX investigation of MCVs.
               In particular, the evolution of vorticity associated with the MCV and nearby
              convection will be documented using diagnostic tools previously developed to
              study the dynamics of the hurricane core and the genesis of tropical cyclones. 
              Presently, no observational data set is yet available detailing the radial
              vorticity structure of an MCV, the evolution of MCV tilt and intensity, and the
              development of vorticity in association with regenerated convection, all of
              which are essential elements of the BAMEX research objectives.

Successful
              completion of this research can potentially provide forecasters with the
              knowledge needed to extend the prediction time for some times of warm season
              convective storms.
