Title       : ALGORITHMS: Scalable Solvers for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a0305666

Award Number: 0305666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Chuan Cai cai@schwarz.cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this three-year research effort is the design, analysis  and
              software implementation of a class of parallel nonlinear iterative methods  for
              the numerical solution of some highly nonlinear partial differential  equations
              (PDEs) arising from important applications in computational fluid dynamics  and
              computational biology. 
The nonlinear PDEs to be considered in the project are
               usually not strongly elliptic, and they often contain non-elliptic components
              causing the solution to be nonsmooth and have local singularities, such as
              boundary layers or sharp fronts. For smooth nonlinear problems, traditional 
              nonlinear methods, such as Newton's methods, are capable of reducing the global
              nonlinearities at a nearly quadratic convergence rate but become very slow once
              the local singularities appear somewhere in the computational domain, even if
              this happens to only a few components of a largenonlinear system. 
The
              proposed algorithm is motivated by the class of nonlinear preconditioning
              algorithms introduced by Cai and Keyes in 2001 for solving algebraic nonlinear
              equations that have unbalanced nonlinearities.
In nonlinear preconditioning,
              the global problem is partitioned into subproblems, and subspace nonlinear
              eliminations are performed on all subproblems. 
The subproblem are then
              'glued' together by a Schwarz type domain decomposition method. Due to the
              subspace nonlinear elimination, the local singularities are removed, and the
              global system therefore has more uniform nonlinearity. A family of such
              algorithms will be studied using a combination of multilevel/multigrid, domain
              decomposition, nonlinear preconditioning, and nonlinear elimination methods.
              Roughly speaking, in these algorithms, domain decomposition provides the
              parallelism, multilevel provides the scalability with respect to the problem
              size and to the number of processors on parallel computers, and nonlinear
              elimination removes the sensitivity to the local singularities.
Several
              important application problems will be considered, including the steady state
              incompressible Navier-Stokes equations with high Reynolds number and the
              optimization of a steady state biofluid problem. To study the parallel
              performance of the algorithms  on high performance computers, such as a cluster
              of workstations and supercomputers,  a library  will be developed as a plug-in
              package that is fully interoperable with PETSc of Argonne National Laboratory.
              The proposed algorithm and software development 
will have a great impact on
              the application areas, and will also have substantial influence on other areas
              of computational sciences where large nonlinear equations  need to be
              solved.


