Title       : Investigating the Phase Diagram of the High Temperature Superconductors by
               Angle-Resolved Photoemission (ARPES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0305253

Award Number: 0305253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Carlos Campuzano jcc@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The superconducting phase transition in the underdoped high temperature
              superconductors is rather unusual, in that it is not a mean-field transition as
              other superconducting transitions are. Instead, it has been observed that a
              pseudo-gap in the electronic excitation spectrum appears at a temperature T*
              higher than Tc, while phase coherence, and superconductivity, are established
              at Tc. This individual investigator project will probe the relationship of the
              pseudogap to the superconducting gap. As doping is increased, the project will
              investigate if T* continues to decrease below the superconducting transition
              temperature Tc - making the pseudogap independent of the superconducting gap -
              or whether T* becomes Tc beyond optimal doping.  Determining the behavior of
              the pseudogap will provide experimental evidence for which of several theories
              apply to these materials.  It is very difficult to determine whether there are
              two gaps of different origin below Tc if the gaps have the same magnitude. This
              project will use angle resolved photoemission with circularly polarized light.
              The PI recently showed that this technique provides evidence that the state
              below T* is rather unusual, it appears to break time reversal symmetry. 
              Therefore, using this technique it would be possible to separate the two gaps,
              and help determine their origin.  The students involved with this project will
              be exposed to international collaborations and to performing research at
              national facilities.  They will receive training that will prepare them for
              future scientific careers.

High temperature superconductors (HTSCs) were
              discovered in 1987.  They loose all resistance to electrical current at
              temperatures near that of liquid air. It is still not understood how they work.
              Superconducting materials discovered earlier are understood, and when they
              superconduct, a gap appears in the energies available to the electrons. This
              gap suppresses the energy loss mechanism in current transport. However, in the
              HTSCs, the gap appears before the material becomes a superconductor, and
              understanding this phenomenon is essential to understanding how the new HTSCs
              work. This gap, called a pseudogap, since it is not yet a superconducting gap,
              changes size according to how many charge carriers have been put in the
              material. Two of the most significant theories for the HTSCs propose different
              roles for the pseudogap. In one, the pseudogap is a direct manifestation of the
              superconducting gap that will appear at lower temperatures, while in the other
              it is a manifestation of a change in some unusual order, which indirectly leads
              to superconductivity. This work aims to determine which point of view applies.
              In this new order, time reversal symmetry is broken, which can be explained in
              terms of a movie: normally, when a movie of the electrons moving in the solid
              is played backwards, the electrons will return to their starting position. But
              when time reversal is broken and the movie is played backwards, the electrons
              will not return to the starting position, but will end at a different place.
              This very strange behavior appears to be found in the pseudogap state, and its
              study will allow the researchers to determine the origin of the pseudogap. The
              students involved with this project will be exposed to international
              collaborations and to performing research at national facilities.  They will
              receive training that will prepare them for future scientific careers.

