Title       : Parallel Cortical Pathways Through the Pulvinar/LP Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9728089

Award Number: 9728089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha E. Bickford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                            LAY ABSTRACT                        Principal
              Investigator:  Bickford, Martha            Proposal Number:         IBN-
              9728089            PARALLEL CORTICAL PATHWAYS THROUGH THE PULVINAR COMPLEX     
                   Most  sensory  signals  must  pass through  the  dorsal  thalamus   
              before  they  are consciously recognized in the cortex.  It  has  been    known
               for  a  number  of years that sensory signals  from  peripheral    receptors
              are segregated, and travel in parallel pathways through  the    relay  nuclei 
              of  the dorsal thalamus, to primary  sensory  areas  of    cortex.   The  
              study   of  parallel  pathways  in   sensory   system,    particularly   in  
              the  visual  system,  has  provided   a   key   to    understanding  how  the 
              brain  codes the  wide  variety  of  incoming    information. The realization
              that features such as color,  motion,  or    contrast  are coded by separate
              subcortical cell types has provided  a    valuable  conceptual framework for
              studies of how visual  signals  are    perceived  by  the  brain.  This
              proposal tests  the  hypothesis  that    similar  parallel  pathways  exist  in
               areas  of  the  thalamus  that    associate information from a variety of
              cortical areas. In this  case,    the  proposed  parallel  pathways  originate 
              in  cortex,  and  remain    segregated  in  the  thalamus through synaptic 
              contacts  on  distinct    classes   of  thalamocortical  neurons,  which 
              project  to  different    cortical  laminae.  This  idea will be  tested  in 
              the  pulvinar  and    lateral posterior nuclei, which receive input from two
              types of  layer    V  cortical  cells, and contain at least two morphologically
               distinct    types  of thalamocortical cells. It is proposed that separate
              cortical    axons  contact separate classes of thalamocortical cells that 
              project    to  different  cortical  lamina. The proposed anatomical 
              experiments,    which   involve   the   injection  of  neuroanatomical  
              tracers   and    irnmunocytochemistry,  wi ll test the concept  that  parallel 
              pathways    are  utilized  in the processing of internal cortical signals.  It 
              is    anticipated  that, similar to the study of parallel sensory  pathways,   
              this   information  will  provide  a  fruitful  starting   point   for   
              deciphering  the  function  of  the  pulvinar  and  lateral  posterior   
              nuclei.
