Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF) Actions in Fish: Role
               of IGF Binding Protein-3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9728911

Award Number: 9728911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cunming Duan cduan@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728911  Duan  The proposed project involves studying the molecular mechanisms
              by which insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), peptide growth factors/hormones
              which are essential for normal growth and development, act to control embryonic
              tissue formation and differentiation in vivo.  Recent studies utilizing
              cultured mammalian cells suggest that the bioactivity of IGFs could be
              modulated by specific, high-affinity IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs) in vitro. 
              The in vivo role of each IGFBP in controlling the availability of IGFs in
              specific embryonic tissues has not been determined.  Research in this area has
              relied heavily on rodent models, and attempts have been hampered by the
              inaccessibility of the mammalian fetus which is enclosed in the uterus.  In
              this project, Dr. Duan proposes to utilize a model teleost fish, the zebrafish
              (Danio rerio) to test the hypothesis that the access of IGFs to specific
              embryonic tissues is regulated by specific IGFBPs expressed locally and that
              this regulation is crucial for normal tissue growth and differentiation.  The
              accessible, transparent and fast-developing embryos and the availability of
              numerous genetic mutants make zebrafish particularly suited for investigating
              the developmental role of IGFs/IGFBPs and the underlying mechanisms.  The
              specific aims of the proposal are to: 1) determine the structure and biological
              activities of zebrafish IGFBP-3; 2) determine the developmental expression
              patterns of IGFBP-3 together with IGFs and the IGF-1 receptor; 3) determine the
              role of IGFBP-3 in controlling IGF actions in developing zebrafish embryos. 
              The expected results should provide direct evidence for the in vivo role of
              IGFBP-3 in controlling IGF actions in a vertebrate embryo and will further our
              understanding of how the IGF system acts to control growth and development in
              vertebrates.  Determination of the structures of fish IGFBP-3 and development
              of the corresponding protein, cDNA probe and antiserum will make available, for
              the first time, valuable tools for  investigation of IGFBP actions in a teleost
              fish.  Information gained from these studies may prove to be valuable to
              aquaculture for efficient production of animal protein to meet the needs of a
              continually growing human population.
