Title       : RUI: Developmental Regulation of Hepatic Beta2-Adrenergic Receptor Gene
               Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9728212

Award Number: 9728212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Baeyens dabaeyens@ualr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9728212  Baeyens  Many hormones and drugs initiate their actions on cells by
              binding to specific cell surface receptors located in the plasma membrane. For
              the catecholamines, epinephrine and norepinephrine, the receptors are known as
              adrenergic receptors (ARs) and include two major types termed alpha1- and
              beta-ARs. Epinephrine and norepinephrine have important effects on liver
              metabolism including glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Liver cells express
              both alpha- and beta2-AR subtypes that work by different second messenger
              systems to transduce catecholamine stimulation into biological effects. Both
              alpha1- and beta2-ARs regulate liver metabolism by promoting glycogenolysis
              through increased phosphorylase activity. Catecholamine control of glucose
              metabolism is age-dependent in male rat liver. In fetal and young male rats
              (less than 14 days old), epinephrine works through beta2-ARs to activate
              phosphorylase, while in adult male rats epinephrine acts almost exclusively
              through alpha1-ARs to increase phosphorylase activity. The changes in receptor
              levels with development are mirrored by changes in beta2-AR mRNA levels. There
              appears to be a multilevel regulatory control of beta2-AR gene expression in
              the developing rat liver since both the transcription rate of the beta2-AR gene
              and the stability of beta2-AR mRNA decline during early postnatal development
              in male rat hepatocytes. The working hypothesis upon which this research is
              based is that beta2-AR gene expression is dynamically regulated during early
              liver development at both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels.
              The goal of this study is to determine the nature of the mechanisms responsible
              for controlling beta2-AR gene expression during early hepatic development. To
              examine the basic transcriptional control mechanisms regulating beta2-AR gene
              expression in male rat hepatocytes during early development, key cis-element(s)
              will be located on the beta2-AR gene by transfecting hepatocytes of different
              ages with constructs cons isting of various parts of the regulatory region of
              the beta2-AR gene. Further characterization of key cis-elements and interacting
              trans-factors present in fetal and early postnatal hepatic nuclear extracts
              will be done using standard molecular techniques including gel mobility shift
              and DNase footprinting assays. To investigate the post-transcriptional control
              of beta2-AR gene expression during development, proteins that interact with and
              alter beta2-AR mRNA stability will be examined. One such protein, designated
              p85, is found only in postnatal hepatic cytosol and may serve as a
              destabilizing element. Using cross-linking techniques the binding site for p85
              on the beta2-AR transcript will be precisely identified. Mechanisms by which
              p85 regulates transcript stability will be investigated by mutating bases on
              the beta2-AR gene which give rise to the binding site of p85 on beta2-AR mRNA.
              Following transfection of hepatocytes of different developmental ages with the
              mutated gene, total mRNA and beta2-AR receptor numbers will be determined.   
              The primary purpose of this study is to determine why the liver beta2-AR gene
              switches off during early postnatal development. The rate at which the
              information is copied from the DNA into messenger RNA may decrease after birth
              or the mRNA may be less stable after birth. This study should lead to a better
              understanding of the mechanisms underlying the changes in gene expression that
              occur during mammalian development.
