Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of RNA Editing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9728737

Award Number: 9728737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Reenan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reenan  9728737   Adenosine to inosine (A to I) RNA editing has emerged as a
              novel mechanism for regulating protein activity through alterations in a
              protein's primary amino-acid sequence.  Mammalian RNA editases, such as DRADA
              and RED1, have been identified and shown to modify mRNA by hydrolytic
              deamination of certain adenosine residues to inosine.  This reaction occurs via
              a double-stranded (ds) RNA intermediate.  The goal of this research is to
              examine the process of A to I RNA editing in a model genetic system, Drosophila
              melanogaster.  Preliminary results from this laboratory have identified RNA
              editing sites in transcripts of the para locus, which encodes a voltage-gated
              sodium channel.  In addition, a candidate editase gene has been cloned from
              Drosophila, DRED-1 (Drosophila RNA editase-1).  Experiments will be performed
              to address the nature of para RNA editing sites through in vivo and in vitro
              experiments using purified DRED-1 protein and synthetic para RNA substrates. 
              Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to identify cis-acting regulatory
              sequences necessary for efficient RNA editing.  In order to address whether the
              DRED-1 protein is essential for viability, site directed transposon mutagenesis
              of the DRED-1 locus will be performed.  These experiments, in addition to
              determining the effect of DRED-1 knockouts, will address the necessity of
              DRED-1 activity for editing of para.  Another approach, targeted tissue
              specific expression of a dominant negative DRED-1 protein, will address the
              effects of negating DRED-1 activity in selected tissues.  Lastly, the
              investigator will utilize immunolocalization of the DRED-1 protein to
              Drosophila salivary gland polytene chromosomes to identify new targets for the
              process of RNA editing.     The process whereby information encoded by genes is
              used to direct the synthesis of proteins is crucial to the proper development
              and function of all organisms.  This research project will examine an important
              phenomenon called RNA editing, in which the infor mation in messenger RNAs,
              which are copies from genes, is changed or edited, resulting in a change in the
              final protein product.  The changes in protein structure resulting from
              messenger RNA editing, can have a profound influence on a protein's function. 
              This research will utilize a very powerful experimental system, the fruit fly
              Drosophila melanogaster, to dissect the role of RNA editing in the function of
              a complex organism, examining effects ranging from development to adult
              behavior.
