Title       : SGER: The Effects of Dietary Fatty Acid Sequences on Hibernation and Lipid
               Mobilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9728962

Award Number: 9728962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Frank frank@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Frank  9728962       The ecological limitations on successful hibernation and 
              subsequent over-winter survival by small mammals are poorly  understood. How
              natural selection influences the evolution of  hibernation is thus unknown.
              Recent laboratory studies with 8  rodent species and 2 marsupials have revealed
              that the level of  unsaturated fatty acids in the diet detE:D~dne; the
              hibernation  ability of small mammals. In these studies, it was found that 
              there is an optimal level of linoleic acid (a polyunsaturated  fatty acid) that
              must be present in the diet for maximal  hibernation ability, above or below
              which hibernation  performance is greatly compromised. It has also been shown
              that  high levels of oleic acid (a monounsaturated fatty acid) are  also
              required in the diet for proper hibernation. Mammals can  synthesize
              ~K~K~nrirburabed fatty acids, but they are incapable  of synthesizing
              polyunsaturated fatty acids.       Although the biochemical basis of this
              influence of dietary  fatty acids on hibernation ability unknown, it is quite
              clear  that these findings have strong ecological implications which  may
              explain the biogeographical distribution of hibernating  mammals, and the role
              of dietary specialization in the  evolution of hibernation. Despite this
              potential, there have  been no studies to date examining how the natural diets
              of  hibernating mammals vary in fatty acid composition, or how this  affects
              over-winter survival under natural conditions.                     The PI
              predicts that dietary fatty acid  composition influences the over-winter
              survival of free-ranging  S. lateralis, and that this influence is more
              pronounced in  areas where the hibernation period is longer.       These
              hypotheses will be tested in field and laboratory  studies involving S.
              lateralis from the White Mountain of  California. This will be the first study
              to examine the  relationship between dietary fatty acid composition and the 
              over-winter survival of a free-ranging hibernator.
