Title       : Visual Attention and Perception: Locations, Objects, and Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9728628

Award Number: 9728628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathleen M. Moore CMM15@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Seeing and acting upon the visual world requires more than the passive
              registration of visual information.  Also required is intentional
              knowledge-based control over that incoming information.  The goal of this
              research is to investigate the coordination between the relatively passive
              processes of visual perception and the more active processes of visual
              attention.  Past research has shed light on many aspects of the perceptual
              organization of incoming information, including the separation of figure from
              ground, the completion of objects behind occluding surfaces, and the
              compensation for spurious information such as shadows.  The present project
              concerns when and how the active selection of information occurs relative to
              when and how the processes of perceptual organization come into play.  These
              issues will be addressed by introducing into traditional visual-attention
              paradigms manipulations for probing the state of perceptual processes.  For
              example, one such paradigm is visual search, which is a laboratory analogue for
              real-life visual tasks in which an organism searches its environment for
              interesting objects, such as mates, predators, and food.  To perform this task
              the participant must guide his or her attention through the scene in an active
              search for the desired item.  The interaction between this guidance of
              attention and the discounting of spurious changes in illumination will be
              probed by casting shadows across the display.  The results will tell us whether
              and how the guidance of attention is disrupted by spurious information like
              shadows, thereby informing us about when compensation for shadows occurs
              relative to attentional guidance.    Enhanced understanding of the coordination
              between perceptual processing and intentional control over that processing will
              be useful in a number of domains.  First, any situation in which a person must
              engage in multiple subtasks simultaneously (e.g., during driving,
              flight-control, and sports) requires this coordination.  Basing the development
              of tools for use in these situations on knowledge of the strengths and
              weaknesses of the human system will increase the probability of their success. 
              Similarly, knowledge of how humans naturally coordinate perception and
              attention will be useful for deciding how to  present information most
              effectively (e.g., for medical imaging and other complex data sets).           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
