Title       : Vibrational Potential Energy Surfaces and Molecular Structures In Electronic
               Excited States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a9728809

Award Number: 9728809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $541931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaan Laane laane@mail.chem.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Prof. Jaan Laane of   Texas
              A&M University in his continuing studies of molecules with   large-amplitude
              vibrations.  He will use fluorescence excitation   spectroscopy, sensitized
              phosphorescence excitation spectroscopy and   two-photon spectroscopy with
              photon or ionization detection to map the   energy levels of the excited
              states.  He will focus on cyclic and   multicyclic carbonyl compounds and
              aromatic molecules, especially those   molecules with two chromophores and
              closely lying electronic states or   those molecules exhibiting interesting
              structural changes such as   photoracemization or photoisomerization.  Laane
              will also use dispersed   fluorescence and far-IR and Raman spectroscopies to
              obtain complementary   information on the ground state surfaces, and molecular
              mechanics (MM3)   and ab initio calculations to predict potential energy
              surfaces and   structures.    An improved understanding of electronic excited
              states is important for   providing a better perspective of photochemical and
              other important   chemical processes as well as on chemical bonding and
              structure in   general.  Determination of the potential energy surfaces for the
              excited   states will provide detailed insight into the energetics and
              interactions   associated with these states.  The experimental work to be
              carried out   here will provide the data necessary for calculating the
              potential energy   surfaces and will also further help improve our experimental
              procedures   for collecting this type of spectroscopic information.  Results on
                molecules in triplet states or on molecules that undergo interesting  
              structural changes upon absorption should provide fundamental information  
              that has not been readily attained in the past.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
