Title       : Functional Studies of Flightin, a Thick Filament Protein of Drosophila Flight
               Muscles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9728868

Award Number: 9728868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim O. Vigoreaux jvigorea@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Maughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728868  Vigoreaux    Lay Abstract    The goal of this project is to determine
              the functional properties of flightin, a protein associated with the thick
              filaments of insect flight muscle.  This protein is interesting because it may
              be involved in some of the special properties of this muscle, namely its very
              rapid beating.  Unlike a typical vertebrate muscle cell which contracts and
              relaxes in a cycle coordinated with a rise and then fall in the concentration
              of intracellular calcium, insect flight muscle undergoes continuing rapid
              cycles of contraction and relaxation while the calcium concentration remains
              high.  Flightin is found tightly associated with the myosin thick filaments of
              the insect cells.  Flightin may simply stabilize the highly organized filament
              architecture in the cells or may be involved in a fundamentally different type
              of contraction control during the interaction of actin and myosin.  Flightin or
              a relative may also be found in other muscle cell types where it may have very
              different or related functional properties.    The project will address three
              specific questions to understand flightin function in the fruit fly, Drosophila
              melanogaster, chosen for its many advantages as a powerful model system.  (1)
              Are mutant flight muscle cells that lack flightin less stable than normal cells
              when these cells contract?   This would be expected if flightin plays a basic
              structural role to stabilize the highly ordered arrays of actin and myosin
              filament assemblies?  (2) What is the precise way flightin interacts with the
              myosin filament?  Detailed analysis of binding should elucidate how flightin
              might stabilize filament structure or control actin-myosin interaction since
              many details of the actin and myosin structures are already known.  (3) What
              role does phosphorylation of the flightin molecule play in controlling its
              activity?  Since the molecule can exist in phosphorylated and
              non-phosphorylated states, by analogy to other phosphorylated proteins whose
              state of phosphorylation c an be enzymatically controlled, it is very likely
              that these different states are also functionally different.  The principal
              investigator, who was instrumental in the discovery of flightin, will purify
              flightin to study its binding properties, sites of phosphorylation, and other
              biochemical properties.  He and his co-principal investigator will integrate
              results from a variety of other techniques and approaches, including electron
              microscopy, molecular and classical genetics, and physiological techniques, to
              provide clear and coherent answers to these questions.  ***
