Title       : Spectoscopic Studies of Hydrogen Bonding in Size-and Conformation-Selected
               Biomolecule-(water)n Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2001   
File        : a9728636

Award Number: 9728636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Zwier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Timothy Zwier of Purdue University is supported by the Experimental   Physical
              Chemistry Program to study hydrogen bonding networks present in   aromatic
              amino acid-(water)n clusters, in model DNA base-(water)n   clusters, and in
              model DNA base pairs.  A variety of experimental methods   will be exploited
              including resonant two-photon ionization (R2PI), UV-UV   and IR-UV hole-burning
              spectroscopies, resonant ion-dip infrared   spectroscopy (RIDIRS) and cavity
              ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS).  Ab   initio calculations will also be carried
              out for comparison purposes and   to aid in spectral assignment.   It is a long
              step from an isolated single hydrogen bond in the water   dimer to the
              intricate and complex hydrogen-bonded networks in liquid   water and ice.  One
              of the reasons is that H-bonds are strongly   cooperative.  Quantitative
              descriptions of the H-bonding using   pairwise-additive intermolecular
              potentials fail to account for even the   most basic properties of small
              gas-phase clusters, much less the bulk   condensed phase.  The strength of
              individual hydrogen bonds depends   sensitively on the number, strength and
              orientation of the hydrogen bonds   in the H-bonded network.  The experimental
              study of such H-bonded   networks is fraught with difficulty, largely because
              as the cluster size   grows, so does the number of species present in the
              sample, masking the   desired spectrum of a single species.  The need for
              better experimental   probes is the primary motivation for these studies.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
