Title       : Ca2+ Mediated Mechanisms Regulating Neuronal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9728728

Award Number: 9728728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Holliday   (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Figlewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9728728  HOLLIDAY     There is much evidence indicating that the  development of
              undifferentiated cells into neurons is dependent  both upon intrinsic patterns
              of gene expression as well as on  interactions with neighboring cells,
              including electrical  signaling.  Early in neuronal differentiation, the
              elevation of  intracellular calcium ions carries much of the electrical signal.
               Calcium elevation is one of the first steps in the activation of a  large
              variety of cellular signal transduction cascades in all cell  types and is
              therefore very likely to be involved in regulating  gene expression and other
              "experience-dependent" mechanisms that  regulate development.  There is
              accumulating evidence that  precisely timed changes in the cellular mechanisms
              that produce  transient increases in intracellular calcium may underlie the 
              "critical periods" of neuronal development.       This project is designed to
              determine how the alteration of  the level of expression of specific calcium
              ion regulatory  proteins affects transient calcium signaling and subsequent 
              neuronal development.  Two calcium regulatory proteins will be  separately
              investigated: a calcium buffering protein (calbindin)  and an intracellular
              calcium induced calcium release channel  (CICR).  The level of these proteins
              will be experimentally  manipulated by the introduction DNA constructs that
              either produce  additional target protein or specifically reduce endogenous
              target  protein expression.  The experiments will be performed in a well- 
              controlled and characterized culture system of rat cerebellar  granule neurons.
               Since intracellular calcium homeostasis is  tightly controlled by a variety of
              mechanisms, alteration of one  target may trigger compensatory changes in other
              regulatory  mechanisms.  Therefore, the physiological consequences of changing 
              protein expression will be measured with imaging techniques that  directly
              measure intracellular calcium ion concentrations, both at  rest and during
              stimulation.  The developmental  consequences of  changes in target protein
              expression will be assessed by measuring  the acquisition of several
              developmental markers.       The results of these studies will refine our
              understanding of  how calcium transients regulate neuronal development at the
              single  cell level, and develop tools to more definitively test hypotheses 
              about the mechanisms regulating neuronal synaptic organization.  The long-range
              goal of this project is to transiently manipulate  calcium regulatory
              mechanisms during development in vivo to  determine whether perturbations of
              calcium levels, during  sensitive defined in vitro, will result in
              developmental delays or  permanent changes in the mature central nervous
              system.
