Title       : Investigation of a Meiotic Recombination Hotspot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9728557

Award Number: 9728557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Malone robert-malone@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728557  Malone    Meiosis is a required part of the life cycle for most
              eucaryotes; it is necessary for the production of haploid gametes.  It has
              evolutionary importance as well, since much of the variation upon which natural
              selection acts is created during meiosis.  There are a number of unique steps
              in meiosis, one of which is high levels of genetic recombination. 
              Recombination is also required for proper chromosome pairing and for a proper
              first meiotic chromosome segregation.  This research focuses on a region (a
              "hotspot") around the HIS2 gene in S. cerevisiae (baker's yeast) where
              recombination occurs frequently in meiosis.  Correlated with meiotic
              recombination at HIS2 are high levels of two meiosis-specific double strand DNA
              breaks (DSBs).  The distribution and properties of such breaks in meiosis, both
              at specific hotspots and along whole yeast chromosomes, is consistent with
              their role as intermediates in meiotic recombination.    This project has two
              aims: 1  To finish the analysis of the cis-acting sequences required, and the
              breaks that occur, at HIS2, and 2  To define and study the trans-factors
              responsible for the HIS2 hotspot.  The questions asked about the HIS2 hotspot
              in part of the research include:  1  How much DNA is sufficient for a hotspot
              to be recognized wherever it is located?  2  Is the transcriptional
              interference hypothesis correct at HIS2?  3  Is there a clear site (not
              sequence) specificity for DSB sites?  3  Is there competition between natural
              break sites, and does it occur in cis and/or in trans?  4  How many actual
              breaks occur in the region of the DSB?  5  Are the ends of the DSBs at hotspots
              flush or do they have 5' overlaps?  Data from other hotspots gives two
              different answers. 6  Are all break sites (even those in coding regions)
              located in "open" chromatin regions?    The second part of this research is
              aimed at finding factors which affect the HIS2 hotspot, but not recombination
              generally  i.e., which create (or antagonize) the recombinogenic environ ment
              at HIS2 .  Such factors might include at least three types of gene products: 1 
              Factors required for the long range chromatin structure of the region, 2 
              Factors required for short range chromatin structure at the DSB sites, and 3 
              Factors specific to the HIS2 locus not involved in chromatin structure.  Any of
              these three types might affect other hotspots as well, and experiments will be
              conducted to ask that question.
