Title       : Structure and Fertilization Function Studies of Egg CorticalGranule
               Hexosaminidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9728447

Award Number: 9728447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Hedrick jlhedrick@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              LeAnn L. Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728447  Hedrick  The long term goal of this research is to determine the
              macromolecular  composition, the biosynthesis, and the fertilization function
              of egg  cortical granule components. The macromolecular components of the
              cortical  granules modify the molecular structure and the supramolecular
              architecture  of the egg envelope.  This modification maintains the diploid
              state of the  fertilized egg chromosomes by preventing additional sperm from
              fusing with  the egg.  The enzyme beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase was identified
              in the  cortical granules of eggs from the frog Xenopus laevis. 
              N-acetylglucosamine   residues of the egg envelope glycoproteins may function
              in sperm binding to   the egg.  Their enzymatic removal may prevent additional
              sperm from fusing   with egg.  The specific objectives of the research are to
              provide evidence for   this proposal by: 1) determining the protein structure
              of the egg enzyme using   recombinant DNA cloning methods, 2) identifying egg
              envelope glycoproteins that   are substrates for the enzyme, 3) determining the
              monosaccharide structure(s)   of the carbohydrate moiety of these
              glycoproteins, and 4) relating this structural   information to its biological
              role by: a) causing the glycosidic hydrolysis of    envelope glycoproteins with
              exogenously added enzyme, and b) preventing the  glycosidic hydrolysis of
              envelope glycoprotein by endogenously released  enzyme using specific
              inhibitors of beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase activity.     This research will
              identify the molecules involved in sperm-egg binding and  how modification of
              the envelope glycoproteins by an enzyme released from  the egg alters the
              structure of the molecules outside the egg. Accomplishing   this research will
              provide a molecular understanding as to how an egg   enzyme's protein structure
              determines its specific action on  its egg envelope   substrate, and how
              glycosidic modification of the envelope prevents sperm-egg   interactions. 
              From this understanding of the structure-function relations  of the   molecules
              involved in fertilization may come information relevant to regulating  
              fertilization and early developmental events.
