Title       : Neurosteroids: Synthesis and Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9728261

Award Number: 9728261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vassilios Papadopoulos papadopv@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              97-28261  Papadopoulos    The specific interactions of steroids with binding
              sites in the brain together with the rapid effects of various steroids on
              neuronal function has prompted the investigation of the steroidogenic potential
              of central nervous system structures.  Indeed recent evidence indicates that
              the brain could function as an independent endocrine organ similar to the
              steroid synthesizing organs of the body (e.g. gonads, adrenals, placenta). 
              These steroids hormones produced by the brain are termed "neurosteroids". 
              Neurosteroids, such as pregnenolone and DHEA (dehyroepiandrosterone)  have been
              shown to control neuronal development, aging, communication, and regulate
              numerous neuroendocrine and behavioral functions, including learning and
              memory.  While there is strong evidence that pregnenolone is indeed synthesized
              by specific cells in the brain, there is little data on local synthesis of 
              DHEA .  Dr. Papadopoulos has found that glial cells are capable of synthesizing
              DHEA, the actual mechanism is different than reported in peripheral tissues. 
              Dr. Papadoupoulos will now fully examine the local synthesis of DHEA in the
              brain.  He will look for changes of the brain levels of both DHEA and
              pregnenolone over development and aging, and determine how gender affects the
              levels.  In addition, he will identify how these two neurosteroids are
              distributed in the brain and the factors that regulate their synthesis.  DHEA
              and pregnenolone are used today as over the counter medications and food
              supplements for enhancing the brain performance and prevent the onset of
              aging-related diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and other types of dementia.
               More specifically, DHEA has been termed the "fountain of youth". 
              Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of DHEA and pregnenolone formation in
              the brain is paramount to all further speculation and hypotheses about DHEA and
              pregnenolone and their role in normal and pathologic brain function.
