Title       : CRB: Shifts in the Genetic Load in Response to Inbreeding and Population Size in
               Brassica rapa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9728855

Award Number: 9728855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Waller dmwaller@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9728855  Waller             Small populations face many hazards including the
              loss of genetic  variation and the genetic effects of inbreeding.  Most
              populations   experience moderate to severe inbreeding depression which occurs
              when   accumulated deleterious mutations are exposed via inbreeding. 
              Populations   with a prior history of inbreeding, however, may experience less
              inbreeding   depression if their load of mutations has already been expressed
              and   selected out of the population.  Some scientists argue that such
              selection   can effectively eliminate inbreeding depression, allowing
              opportunities to   purge threatened populations of their load via intentional
              inbreeding.   Others argue from theory that purging will be weak and
              ineffective under   most circumstances and may actually increase the number of
              mildly   deleterious mutations fixed in small populations.  This project will
              explore   just how effectively selection can purge real populations of their  
              inbreeding depression.  To save space and allow rapid progress, the  
              investigator will use strains of a small plant in the cabbage family  
              (Brassica rapa) that has been bred to grow quickly in the laboratory.  
              Multiple lines will be subjected to maximal inbreeding via  
              self-fertilization, while other populations of various size will experience  
              alternating selfing and outcrossing or pure outcrossing for six generations.   
              The investigator will then estimate how much inbreeding depression has  
              declined in each treatment by comparing the size and performance of   seedlings
              derived from self- and cross-fertilized seeds from the first,   third, and
              sixth generations.  In addition, he will examine whether the high   fitness
              expected in seedlings derived from crosses among the inbred lines is  
              maintained over subsequent generations of random mating (a result suggesting  
              that purging was effective) or deteriorates (reflecting the decay of  
              temporary hybrid vigor).  To address another controversy, the investigator  
              will also compar e the amount of inbreeding depression observed when plants  
              are grown under different growing conditions.          These experiments should
              demonstrate how quickly and completely  inbreeding can purge populations of
              their genetic load.  Empirical results   like these should help to resolve the
              controversy over how effective   purging can be and how quickly it can operate.
               Such results will help us   to understand how mating systems that involve a
              mixture of selfing and   outcrossing evolve.  They will also illuminate the
              genetic hazards faced by   small populations and demonstrate whether
              intentional inbreeding can   provide a useful breeding strategy for small
              populations in threatened or   endangered species.
