Title       : Assembly and Function of the Cyanobacterial Water-Oxidation Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9728754

Award Number: 9728754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Burnap burnap@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728754  Burnap  The focus of this project is on the structure and assembly of
              the catalytic site of the photosynthetic water-oxidation reaction.  The work
              combines molecular genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches to clarify
              the process of photoactivation, which is the sequential light-dependent
              assembly of the catalytic tetramer of manganese atoms that forms the core of
              the water-oxidation complex.  Photoactivation represents a fascinating problem
              of metalloprotein assembly.  It is a multi-quantum process involving a sequence
              of kinetically resolvable molecular rearrangements that are stabilized by the
              photooxidation of manganese and binding of calcium.  The molecular events
              occurring during this process remain obscure and the major object of this
              research is to define these events in terms of the influence of the protein
              groups providing the coordination environment for the incoming manganese and
              calcium ions during the assembly sequence.  The research is facilitated by the
              availability of numerous partially impaired site-directed mutants of putative
              manganese and calcium ligands in the intrinsic portion of the complex and
              mutants of the extrinsic polypeptides, which have been shown to modulate the
              efficiency of the assembly process. Polarographic and fluorescence methods of
              monitoring the assembly process are utilized.  Earlier studies of
              photoactivation using intact mutant cyanobacterial cells are now extended to in
              vitro studies where analysis of the cofactor requirements of normal and
              genetically modified reaction center core complexes can be studied in greater
              detail.    Photosynthesis is a globally important process that has a number of
              crucial unresolved features.  Among the most puzzling aspects of the
              photosynthetic mechanism is oxygen production by the PSII water-splitting
              enzyme. PSII is of critical importance from both the agricultural and
              ecological perspectives because it is responsible both for generating the vast
              majority of hydrogen used to fix carbon into the earth's  biosphere and for
              releasing oxygen necessary for respiration.  The understanding of this process
              takes on added importance given the recognition of anthropomorphic changes such
              as global warming and ozone depletion because PSII is potentially quite
              sensitive to these environmental stresses.  The project is basic research into
              the enzyme mechanism of PSII and because PSII is also a membrane protein, the
              knowledge gained from this project should also positively impact the field of
              membrane biology, which has many important applications.
