Title       : Quinate, Focal Point of Upstream Metabolism Leading to Lignin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9728619

Award Number: 9728619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy A. Jensen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Bonner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728619  Jensen and Bonner  Quinic acid is one of the most abundant natural
              products in the biosphere. It is accumulated in some tissues of woody plants,
              e.g., newly forming needles of conifers, in amounts equaling up to 10% of the
              total dry weight. Quinic acid is exceedingly active as an intermediate which
              possesses alternative metabolic fates. In xylem-forming cells it is mainly
              transformed to phenylpropanoid precursors of lignin. In autotrophic cells, on
              the other hand, quinic acid is an effective precursor of other phenolic
              compounds - the most noteworthy ones being chlorogenic acid, gallic acid and
              protocatechuic acid. Chlorogenic acid and gallic acid confer resistance to
              herbivore predation and phytopathogenic microorganisms. Protocatechuic acid is
              catabolized to central intermediates and can serve as a carbon-source reserve
              during dark metabolism. Finally, quinic acid is a highly soluble, readily
              transported metabolite which can serve as a versatile precursor of aromatic
              amino acids in different tissue compartments. Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), the
              experimental system, is under intensive study by others in order to understand
              and manipulate lignin content. Therefore, many biological and molecular-genetic
              resources are available to support this project, including a tissue-culture
              system which is lignin-inducible. The goal  of this research is to elucidate
              the nature of the interfacing upstream metabolism which delivers
              L-phenylalanine to the phenylpropanoid metabolic section. It will focus upon
              three quinate dehydrogenase proteins: nQDH-NADP and nQDH-NAD in needle tissue
              and xQDH-NADP in xylem-forming cells. NQDH-NADP appears to be trifunctional,
              having catalytic domains which carry out the overall conversion of quinate to
              protocatechuate. The enzymes will be purified, used to raise specific
              antibodies, and characterized for physical and catalytic properties. cDNA
              clones corresponding to each QDH will be obtained by immunoscreening. Specific
              antibody will be used for immunogold EM cytoloca lization. Regulation will be
              examined by monitoring levels of enzyme activity, amounts of protein, and
              transcript abundance in response to developmental and environmental cues.   
              The longterm objective is to understand how this entire metabolic network is
              differentially regulated to accomplish the dynamic alternative molecular fates
              of quinate. This is expected to provide ultimately a rational basis for
              biotechnological manipulations designed to modify lignin content by alteration
              of flux toward and away from quinate in different cellular compartments and in
              different specialized tissues.
