Title       : Improvement of Long-Term Storage of The Field Museum's Bird and Mammal Genetic
               Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9728985

Award Number: 9728985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shannon J. Hackett shackett@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Bates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence R. Heaney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The research collections of birds and mammals at The Field  Museum rank among
              the world's largest and most  comprehensive.  Both include virtually all
              families, most  genera and about 85% and 65% of the world's known bird and 
              mammal species, respectively.  A century of international  collecting activity
              has enriched these collections with  tropical taxa that are poorly represented
              elsewhere.  Currently, the catalogued collections include more than  420,000
              bird specimens and 160,000 mammal specimens. All of  these specimens have been 
              curated, installed, and entered  into computer databases; computer records have
              been verified  against specimen labels and shelf-and drawercontents for all 
              but a small fraction of each collection. Encyclopedic  coverage and
              high-quality modern preparations of these  collections attract heavy research
              use.  Both Bird and  Mammal collections rank among the nation's most heavily 
              utilized collections in terms of numbers of scientific  visitors and number and
              size of specimen loans; information  on these collections is now available over
              the Internet, and  more will be made available by the end of 1997.  The impact 
              of these collections on the scientific community can be  gauged by the number
              of publications appearing each year  that are based entirely or in part on the
              Field Museum's  collections.  Since 1980, the Bird and Mammal collections  and
              facilities have served as the basis for more than a 1200  articles.    Bird and
              Mammal personnel continue to build the collections  via active field programs
              in the Neotropics, Africa,  Madagascar, and Southeast Asia, as well as in the
              United  States.  In contrast to historic collections modern  collections have
              attempted to accommodate the diversity of  approaches to systematic zoology by
              preserving a wide range  of preparation types, now often including tissues for
              gentic  analyses.  Since 1976 some 12,000 tubes of avian tissues and  10,000
              tubes of mammal tissues have been received.    This project will assist in the
              tra nsfer of the frozen  tissue collections to new, expanded and safer storage.
               The  two collections, which will remain separate, will be  deposited in a
              newly-established storage facility,  consisting of liquid nitrogen storage
              vessels.  The new  installation will increase capacity for archival storage 
              from 25,000 tubes to 60,000 tubes.  As tubes are transferred  from one storage
              system to another, the project will (1)  verify existing database record for
              each tissue tube,  (2)  determine the unique catalogue number in Bird and
              Mammal  catalogues that corresponds to each field number, (3)  generate and
              affix a bar-coded and numbered label to each  tube, and (4) record its location
              in the new storage system.  The end result will be that these collections will
              be  archived at a temperature at which we can be assured no  degradation will
              occur, and through the use of the bar-  coding label system, these collections
              will be more-  effectively labeled and immediately connected to the 
              computerized databases of our main collections.  Thus,  handling this valuable
              material will be more efficient and  less harmful to long-term preservation.
