Title       : Maintaining Self-Esteem in Upward Social Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9728635

Award Number: 9728635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Alicke alicke@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research on social comparison has shown that it is very common for people to
              compare their own performance and ability with that of others. In many
              situations, people engage in a spontaneous comparison with others. In other
              cases, the comparisons are made by others, such as when siblings are compared
              by their parents, students by their teachers, and employees by their employers.
              The sheer number of social comparison opportunities that spontaneously arise
              ensures that people will sometimes  compare unfavorably. Comparisons with
              superior performers are potentially threatening to self-esteem, especially when
              the outperformance is clear and unambiguous. When defensive explanations are
              difficult to maintain, people have recourse to an explanation that can protect
              their self-esteem: exaggerating the outperformer's ability. This is an
              effective attributional strategy because it is believable and it allows the
              inferior performer to appear unselfish. This phenomenon is referred to as the
              `genius effect.` By viewing the outperformer as unusually talented, inferior
              performers can benefit from the outperformer's knowledge without suffering
              undue damage to their own perceived competence. If the genius effect is a
              pervasive social comparison strategy, it suggests a greater, and more salutary,
              role for upward comparisons than has previously been recognized in social
              comparison theory. Indeed, it seems more adaptive to exaggerate the ability of
              superior performers than to derogate or avoid them. Furthermore,
              unrealistically favorable evaluations may be more beneficial to social
              relationships than derogatory ones. The genius effect also helps explain how
              people are able to maintain unrealistically positive self-images. The social
              psychology literature indicates that people evaluate themselves more favorably
              than an average peer on most dimensions. Relatively little research has been
              directed, however, at discovering how people maintain these self-images in the
              face of contradictory social comparisons. The genius effect suggests what may
              be a pervasive strategy for maintaining an unrealistically favorable self-image
              following upward comparisons: exaggerate the talents and attributes of people
              who fare better on the comparison dimension.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
