Title       : Regulation of Pathogenicity Factors in Erwinia carotovora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9728505

Award Number: 9728505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. English EnglishJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arun K. Chatterjee  (Principal Investigator former)
              David W. Emerich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Chatterjee  9728505  Erwinia carotovora subspecies carotovora (Ecc), a
              gram-negative bacterial plant pathogen, produces various extracellular enzymes
              (= exoenzymes) such as pectate lyase (Pel), polygalacturonase (Peh), pecin
              lyase (Pnl), cellulase (Cel) and protease (Prt) as well as HarpinEcc, an
              elicitor of the hypersensitive reaction.  A long term goal of this research is
              to elucidate the genetic and molecular mechanisms that, by controlling the
              production of such exoenzymes and HarpinEcc, affect the outcome of bacterial
              plant interactions.  Based upon recent findings with Ecc strain 71, it is
              thought that rsmA, aepH and kdgR specify the key components of a regulatory
              circuit which controls the production of exoenzymes, HarpinEcc and secondary
              metabolites as well as the cell density (quorum) sensing signal,
              N-acyl-L-homoserine lactone (AHL).  The current model for regulation postulates
              the following events:  RsmA (Regulator of secondary metabolism), a RNA-binding
              protein, promotes message decay.  KdgR (repressor of genes for Pel as well as
              pectate catabolism) binds aepH (activator of exoenzyme and secondary metabolite
              production) DNA and negatively controls aepH RNA levels.  In the absence of
              aepH RNA, RsmA remains fully active, promoting message decay.  As the level of
              active KdgR drops, aepH transcription is stimulated, producing a 479 base RNA
              species which bind RsmA, thereby depleting the pool of free RsmA.  The
              formation of RsmA:aepH RNA complex creates a favorable ribonucleoprotein
              conformation that facilitates RNA processing.  AepH' RNA, the 259 base
              processed product, negatively controls RsmA levels by affecting translation or
              turnover of RsmA.  Thus, aepH' RNA is postulated to primarily act via RsmA. 
              The major thrust of this project is to produce fundamental knowledge of this
              novel regulatory system controlling exoenzyme production.  The specific
              objectives are to:  examine the effects of RsmA on transcripts of exoenzyme
              genes and their regulator genes; elucidate the role of KdgR i n aepH
              expression; examine processing of aepH RNA; and elucidate the role of the
              processed aepH' RNA on RsmA production.  Since RsmA and aepH play pivotal roles
              in the production of exoenzymes and secondary metabolites (i.e., antibiotics,
              pigments, polysaccharides) in several other bacteria, this research has broad
              ramifications.  From a practical perspective, the emerging knowledge could be
              exploited to manipulate the levels of bacterial products useful in various
              biotechnological applications, including biological control of plant diseases.
