Title       : Mechanism Underlying Temperature Regulation of the Drosophila Circadian Clock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9728695

Award Number: 9728695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac Edery edery@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728695  Edery      Project Description (Mechanism underlying temperature
              regulation of  the Drosophila circadian clock).    A  wide range of organisms,
              from bacteria to humans, display  daily  rhythms  in  physiological and
              behavioral phenomena. These  rhythms  are  controlled  by  a biological time
              keeping  device  termed  the  circadian   (~24  hours)  'clock'.  Malfunctions 
              in  this   timing  mechanism  are  associated  with  numerous  disorders  in  
              humans,  including manic-depression, seasonal affective disorders (SAD), and 
              chronic sleep problems in the elderly. In addition, modern ailments  such  as 
              increased rates of accidents during rotating  work  shift  schedules and
              symptoms associated with 'jet-lag' are manifestations  of  the  strong 
              influence  that circadian  clocks  have  on  human  physiology  and 
              performance. Moreover, it is well documented  that  the  efficacy of many
              drugs, including those used for chemotherapy,  is  highly dependent on the time
              of drug delivery. A major goal  in  the  study  of daily rhythms is to try and
              understand how circadian  clocks  function.  To this end we are using the 
              powerful  genetics  available  in  the fruitfly as a model animal system to 
              study  the  mechanism  underlying  circadian  rhythms.  Interestingly,   recent
               findings  demonstrate that the circadian clocks in fruit flies  and  humans  
              are  very  similar.  Funding  from  the  National  Science  Foundation (NSF)
              will be used to identify the individual components  that  are required for the
              assembly of a functional biological time  keeping  device. A main objective for
              the funding from  NSF  is  to  support graduate and undergraduate students who
              will participate in  the  development and execution of the research goals. As 
              a  result  young  scientists  will  be  trained in the  latest  techniques  in 
              biotechnology,   biochemistry  and  genetics.  Furthermore,   these  students  
              will  be  exposed  to  a  wide  spectrum  of  scientific  disciplines  in  the 
              life  sciences,  inc luding  neurobiology  and  behavior.  By  participating 
              in NSF  funded  research  at  Rutgers  University  students  will  also have 
              the  opportunity  to  attend  seminars and interact with other students and
              faculty. Finally,  it  is  anticipated  that findings from the research
              supported  by  NSF  will  be  published in peer-reviewed science journals and 
              as  such  will  contribute to a better appreciation in the general public  of 
              the  important role that circadian rhythms have on human physiology  and
              behavior.
