Title       : Mechanisms of Spontaneous Mutation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9728315

Award Number: 9728315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9728315  Foster  When populations of cells are subjected to non-lethal
              selective pressure, mutations arise even though the cells are not dividing.
              Because this process appeared to produce only useful, not neutral or
              deleterious, mutations it has been called "directed" or "adaptive" mutation. In
              a strain of Escherichia coli  that cannot utilize lactose (Lac-) but that
              reverts to lactose utilization (Lac+) when lactose is its sole energy and
              carbon source, adaptive mutation consists of two components. (i) A highly
              efficient recombination-dependent mutational mechanism occurring on the F'
              episome that carries the Lac- allele; and, (ii) a less efficient unknown
              mechanism giving rise to mutations elsewhere in the genome. Both selected and
              nonselected mutations arise in the Lac- population, but nonselected mutations
              appear to be enriched in the Lac+ population, suggesting that the Lac+ cells
              have passed though a transient period of hypermutation. The research will
              investigate these two components of adaptive mutation. The aims of the research
              are:  i. To further investigate the recombination-dependent mechanism that
              produces Lac+ mutations on the episome, ii. To test if different sites on the
              chromosome are differentially mutable and if a recombination-dependent
              mechanism produces mutations on the chromosome, and iii., to test the transient
              hypermutation hypothesis and determine the genetic and physiological
              requirements for hypermutation. The first project will focus on the mutagenic
              mechanism occurring on the episome. Experiments will test whether recombination
              functions are required to initiate a localized burst of DNA synthesis or to
              initiate or sustain replication of the entire episome. Also, whether the DNA
              synthesis that occurs is error-prone will be determined. The second project
              will focus on mutagenic mechanisms on the chromosome. The mutability of the
              Lac- allele inserted at various places on the chromosome will be determined.
              Experiments will test whether proximity to sites of frequent r ecombination is
              an important determinant of mutability. These two projects will establish the
              general importance of the recombination-dependent mutagenic mechanism and
              determine why the episome is particularly mutable. The third project will
              confirm or refute the transient hypermutation hypothesis by measuring, free of
              phenotypic artifacts, the frequency of nonselected mutations. Experiments will
              also test whether selected and nonselected mutations are produced by the same
              mutagenic mechanism.   This research has several implications for evolution. 
              First, a recombination-dependent mechanism could be an important source of
              spontaneous mutations in E. coli and other organisms. If recombination events
              are accompanied by mutations, then recombination increases variation not only
              by recombining existing alleles, but also by creating new ones. Second, this
              mutagenic mechanism is highly active on the F episome. Because F can recombine
              with the bacterial chromosome and thereby pickup and transfer bacterial genes,
              this mutational mechanism may be important in the evolution of species that
              carry conjugal plasmids. Third, if nutritionally deprived cells enter into a
              state of hypermutation, this would provide a mechanism for adaptive evolution
              under adverse conditions. Spontaneous mutations are probably the most important
              source of variation upon which natural selection acts.  This search will
              provide new insights into the way that spontaneous mutations arise.
