Title       : Thioredoxin Control of Transcription during the Cell Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9728782

Award Number: 9728782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary F. Merrill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Mathews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728782  Merrill  All eucaryotic cells possess a mechanism for inducing the
              transcription of a specific class of genes at the G1/S boundary of the cell
              cycle.  In yeast, short cis-acting elements termed MCBs have been implicated in
              G1/S gene induction.  Similar elements, termed E2F sites, have been implicated
              in higher eucaryotes.  The genes are induced shortly after cells commit to the
              cell cycle, and the mechanism linking gene induction to the commitment decision
              has been the subject of increasingly intense research. In a genetic screen for
              mutations that allow MCB reporter gene expression in yeast lacking the MCB
              transcription factor Swi6, all thirty of the mutations isolated mapped to a
              single gene - TRRI - encoding thioredoxin reductase. Deleting TRRI or deleting
              the yeast thioredoxin genes TRXI and TRX2 also strongly activated MCB reporter
              gene expression.  The trrl mutations did not increase the asynchronous cell
              levels or eliminate the periodicity of several endogenous MCB gene mRNAs,
              however, peak mRNA levels occurred earlier in the mutants.  Conditions expected
              to oxidize thioredoxin (exposure to H202) induced MCB gene expression, whereas
              conditions expected to conserve reduced thioredoxin (exposure to hydroxyurea)
              inhibited MCB gene expression.  The results indicate that thioredoxin oxidation
              contributes to MCB element activation.  Thioredoxin oxidation may either
              inactivate a negative regulator of MCB activity, or activate a positive
              regulator.  One goal of the project is to test the hypothesis that a transient
              episode of RNR-mediated oxidation of thioredoxin contributes to MCB gene
              activation at G1/S.  RNR-mediated oxidation of thioredoxin neatly explains how
              gene induction could be coupled to replication initiation.  The prediction that
              MCB gene induction should be blccked if DNA replication is inhibited will be
              tested using (-factor-synchronized dbf4 cells that cannot initiate replication
              at the nonpermissive temperature.  The prediction that thioredoxin should
              become more oxidize d at G1/S will be tested in (-factor-synchronized dbf4
              cells incubated at the permissive and nonpermissive temperature. The in vivo
              redox state of thioredoxin will be determined by a method involving
              immunoblotting after differential alkylation.  As asynchronous cell
              measurements indicate the dNTP pool in yeast is only a small fraction of the
              size needed for genome replication, increased reduction of ribonucleotides must
              occur near the G1/S border.  To determine whether increased ribonucleotide
              reduction is due to allosteric or non-allosteric mechanisms, RNR protein, RNA
              activity, and dNTP pools sizes will be measured in synchronized cells.  In
              addition to testing a specific model for  RNR involvement in transcriptional
              control at G1/S, the experiments will yield fundamental information about
              biochemical changes that occur during the cell cycle.  A second goal of the
              research is to identify downstream mediators of the thioredoxin/MCB regulation
              pathway.  Three specific proteins that are potential mediators of the
              thioredoxin effect on MCB activity will be evaluated by determining whether
              trr1 mutations activate MCB genes in yeast lacking the SW14, SKN7, or YAP1
              genes.  Once genetic approaches have identified a protein suspected of
              mediating the thioredoxin effect, in vitro biochemical experiments will
              investigate whether the protein has oxidation-prone thiols that are efficiently
              reduced by thioredoxin, and site-directed mutagenesis experiments will evaluate
              the effect of modifying specific cysteines on protein function in vivo.   
              Several genes are preferentially expressed at about the time that cells begin
              replicating their DNA.  The planned experiments test the idea that DNA
              replication itself is the switch that turns on gene expression.  To replace the
              DNA precursors consumed by the replication process, the cell must rapidly
              reduce ribonucleotides to the deoxyribonucleotide form. The probable source of
              electrons during ribonucleotide reduction is thioredoxin - a protein that
              maintains other  proteins in their reduced state.  Thus, DNA replication may
              trigger an episode of thioredoxin oxidation, which in turn may oxidize control
              proteins that regulate transcription.
