Title       : Cytoplasmic Dynein Isoforms in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9728207

Award Number: 9728207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Asai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728207  Asai    Intracellular motility -- the ability to move subcellular
              structures from place to place within a cell -- is a critical fundamental
              property of organisms.  Microtubules and their motors represent one of the two
              major mechanisms of intracellular motility in eukaryotes.  While microtubule
              motors are implicated in many functions, it is not clear to what extent
              intracellular motility is regulated by utilizing a specific motor (i.e.,
              isoform) for a specific task.  In the case of cilia or flagella, there are
              approximately 12 separate dynein isoforms which each generate specific forces
              at specific sites within the complex flagellar structure that together produce
              the characteristic flagellar beating.  Most eukaryotes also express multiple
              cytoplasmic dyneins.  In this case, however, a key problem is to determine the
              contributions of each dynein isoform in a multi-dynein environment.  This
              project will test the hypothesis that cytoplasmic dyneins are functionally
              specialized.  If cytoplasmic dyneins are specialized, then it is anticipated
              that their intracellular locations are distinct, the elimination of a single
              isoform will give rise to a specific phenotype, and the biochemical and
              motility properties of the individual isoforms are different.  The project
              focuses on two cytoplasmic dynein isoforms, DHC1a and DHC1b, which are
              expressed in all cells with multiple dyneins.      The ciliated protozoan
              Tetrahymena, in which targeted gene replacement can be combined with
              large-scale protein biochemistry and immunocytochemistry, is an exceptional
              system in which to study dynein isoforms.  Tetrahymena expresses more than 15
              dynein heavy chains, including DHC1a and DHC1b.  Dr. Asai and his colleagues
              have isolated Tetrahymena transformants in which the DHC1a and 1b genes have
              been separately knocked out.  This provides the opportunity to determine the in
              vivo activities of an individual dynein in the context of other dyneins, then
              to isolate that dynein isoform and evaluate it in vitro.    Th e examination of
              the knockout lines demonstrates that the two cytoplasmic dyneins are
              responsible for separate sets of tasks in vivo:  DHC1a is required for
              micronuclear segregation in vegetatively growing cells, and is also required
              for phagocytosis; DNC1b participates in the normal organization of the cortical
              microtubule cytoskeleton and in the distribution of intracellular membranous
              organelles.  Thus, the preliminary results support the hypothesis that the
              cytoplasmic dyneins are functionally specialized.    The present project builds
              on these preliminary results and aims at defining mechanisms for
              specialization.  Three questions will guide the work.  (1) What are the in vivo
              tasks performed by DHC1a and 1b?  the phenotypes of the dynein knockouts will
              be evaluated in a series of experiments that focus on cellular organization,
              secretion, ciliogenesis, and nuclear migrations during conjugation.  (2) Where
              are dyneins 1a and 1b in the cell, and can one isoform substitute for the loss
              of the other?  (3) How do dyneins 1a and 1b compare in terms of accessory
              proteins and motor activities in vitro?  Utilizing the targeted gene
              replacement technology, tagged dynein genes will be constructed in order to
              affinity-purify individual dyneins and then examine the isolated dyneins.  It
              is expected that functional specialization in vivo will be based on specific
              properties detected in vitro.      With these three questions serving as a
              framework, the following specific aims will be pursued: 1, to assemble the
              tools for the project (characterizing the 1a and 1b genes and making
              isoform-specific peptide antibodies); 2, to determine the in vivo functions of
              the 1a and 1b dyneins by evaluating dynein knockouts, focusing on cellular
              architecture, secretion, nuclear movements, and ciliogenesis; 3, to compare the
              expression of 1a and 1b in wildtype and in dynein knockouts; 4, to
              affinity-purify individual dyneins; and 5, if time permits, to characterize the
              isolated dyneins in terms of associated proteins and  in vitro motilities.
