Title       : Regulation of Phospholipase D1 in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9728143

Award Number: 9728143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Dolan dolanjw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9728143  Dolan           Phospholipase D (PLD) is an enzyme ubiquitously
              expressed among organisms from yeast to man.  In mammals, PLD is activated by
              many different mechanisms in response to numerous stimuli.  Activating stimuli
              include growth factors which implicates PLD in the control of cellular
              proliferation.  PLD is also involved in the differentiation of certain
              mammalian cell types.  In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the PLD1 gene has
              been shown to code for a PLD that is activated at both the level of the gene
              and of the protein.  Cells that lack this enzyme are unable to differentiate to
              form spores, thus implicating PLD in the regulation of a developmental pathway
              that includes control of cell proliferation.  These features of PLD function in
              both higher and lower organisms indicating that this enzyme plays critical
              roles in the control of processes that are of paramount importance to the cell.
                    Currently little is known concerning the mechanisms and factors involved
              in the regulation of yeast PLD1.  Preliminary studies from this laboratory
              indicate that the product of the IME4 gene, which is required for the formation
              of spores, is able to stimulate PLD1 activity and therefore may be an important
              regulator of PLD1.  Experiments will be done to further characterize the role
              of IME4 in PLD1 regulation.  Since preliminary studies in other labs indicate
              that PLD1 transcription is induced during sporulation, this investigator will
              analyze the DNA sequences that control the transcription of the PLD1 gene in
              order to identify essential regulatory elements.  S. Cerevisiae has been an
              extremely useful model system for the study of signal transduction.  The
              investigation of the regulation of yeast PLD1 and its subsequent use as a
              paradigm for exploring mammalian PLD action, will facilitate the elucidation of
              the roles of PLD.  The proposed studies will provide strong background
              information pertaining to the transcriptional regulation of PLD1.  The facility
              of genetic analysis of trans criptional control in yeast will expand our
              understanding of this aspect of PLD regulation.        This research is looking
              at the regulation of phospholipase D in yeast.  PLD is an enzyme which
              hydrolyzes membrane phospholipids to form phosphatidic acid.  In yeast, cells
              lacking PLD are unable to undergo meiosis and sporulation.  In mammals the
              enzyme is activated by agents which indicate its role in cell proliferation.
              Since genetic analysis of regulatory processes can be readily done in yeast
              these studies will provide important basic information about this enzyme.   
              ***
