Title       : Role of Heteromeric Protein - Protein Interactions in Differential Gene
               Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9728186

Award Number: 9728186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Senear dfsenear@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728186  Senear  The goal of this research is to understand the combinatorial
              mechanism(s) of differential gene expression in the E. coli CytR regulon, a
              gene family consisting of nine unlinked transcriptional units. The
              transcriptional units are regulated coordinately by the interplay of just two
              regulatory proteins: ( 1 ) cyclic-AMP receptor protein (CRP) a widely used
              transcriptional activator in bacteria; (2) CytR, a regulon-specific repressor
              and a member the LacI family of homologous repressors. A key feature of the
              regulation is that the different cistrons differ from one another in extents of
              activation, repression and induction. Similar to the situation in eukaryotes,
              this differential regulation is achieved by nesting levels of local repression,
              mediated by CytR on the more global regulation mediated by CRP. An unusual
              feature of most CytR regulated promoters is that they contain tandem CRP sites,
              which are believed to activate transcription via different mechanisms. Unlike
              most bacterial repressors, CytR does not repress transcription independently,
              but instead modulates CRP-mediated activation by binding to arrays of DNA sites
              that result in both cooperative and competitive binding interactions between
              CytR and CRP. The number and arrangement of CytR sites varies substantially
              among CytR regulated promoters and this appears to contribute significantly to
              their differential regulation. The objectives of the research are: 1) to
              understand the roles of cooperative and competitive interactions between CRP
              and CytR in mediating differential activation of RNA Polymerase; 2) to
              determine the role of CytR-CRP interactions in cooperative DNA binding. To
              accomplish the first, a systematic comparison of the energetics of interaction
              among CRP, CytR and two CytR-regulated promoters will be made. These data will
              be combined with results of both steady state and pre-steady state assays of
              transcription initiation to develop a comprehensive kinetic model of
              differential gene regulation. To accompli sh the latter, solution interactions
              and the effect of cytidine binding to CytR thereon will be investigated by
              analytic al ultracentrifugation.    Coordinate regulation of multiple, unlinked
              genes is fundamental to genetic expression. At the transcriptional level, this
              is controlled by cooperative, site-specific assembly of regulatory, protein-DNA
              complexes. A common mechanism uses a combinatorial strategy, involving both
              relatively common regulatory proteins and also proteins that are specific to
              either the gene, the tissue or cell type, or the development stage of the
              organism. By binding to variable arrays of DNA site, as are generally found in
              different genes, the same regulatory proteins can form very different
              protein-DNA complexes. In this manner, genes can be differentially expressed
              even while controlled by a similar complement of regulatory proteins. In
              addition, whole programs of gene expression are easily controlled by changing
              the activity of one or a few factors. The  CytR regulon is a particularly
              important system to understand at a molecular level because it addresses many
              basic issues of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic gene regulation, such as
              coordinate gene regulation, the mechanism(s) of CRP-mediated activation, and
              how interactions among different regulatory proteins control the cooperative
              assembly of protein-DNA complexes.
