Title       : Ensuring Coordination and Consistency in Implementing the Presidential Awards
               for Excellence in Mathematics and Science Teaching Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9728365

Award Number: 9728365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Keller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Council St Sci Supervsors
	      Colorado Department of Education
	      Denver, CO  80203    /   -

NSF Program : 7345      PRES AWARDS FOR EXCEL IN SCIEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9728365  Kellor    Project Description    Since 1983, the National Science
              Foundation has administered the Presidential Awards for Excellence in
              Mathematics and Science Teaching Program (PAEMST) on behalf of the White House.
                 The Council of State Science Supervisors (CSSS) proposes to conduct a
              conference for state and jurisdictional level science and mathematics
              coordinators, who have as part of their responsibilities, the implementation of
              the PAEMST Program at the state level.  CSSS is uniquely qualified to conduct
              the conference, as they are the membership organization for the science
              supervisors in all fifty states.    PAEMST recognizes outstanding mathematics
              and science teachers K-12.  Recognition begins with the selection of state and
              jurisdictional finalists in the categories of elementary science, secondary
              science, elementary mathematics, and secondary mathematics.  Finalists' names
              are forwarded to NSF where a national selection committee, composed of
              outstanding mathematicians, scientists, and educators, recommends awardees in
              each category.  These names are then forwarded to the White House for final
              approval.  This is an extremely important effort, as there are several issues
              that need attention by the state and jurisdictional chairs for the PAEMST
              program, such as consistency and fairness in selecting state finalists, efforts
              to increase the participation of underserved minority teachers, appropriate
              recognition and later utilization of awardees at the state level, connecting
              awardees at the state and national levels with significant education reform
              efforts in mathematics and science.  This conference  provides the only forum
              for state and jurisdictional chairs to meet and  create plans to address these
              issues.
