Title       : A Genetic Approach to Mapping Activation Target Surfaces on E. coli RNA
               Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9728765

Award Number: 9728765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Hochschild   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  MCB9728765  Hochschild    Many transcriptional activators in prokaryotes are
              known to bind near a promoter and contact RNA polymerase (RNAP).  The study of
              natural activators has not, however, established whether a protein-protein
              contact between a DNA-bound activator and RNAP suffices to activate
              transcription.  Recent work in the Principal Investigator's lab has shown that
              contact between a DNA-bound protein and a heterologous protein domain fused to
              RNAP can elicit transcriptional activation, suggesting that contact between a
              DNA-bound protein and any accessible surface of RNAP will activate
              transcription.  A main objective of this research is to critically evaluate
              this hypothesis and to generate a genetic map of the surfaces of E. coli RNAP
              that are potentially accessible to DNA-bound activator proteins.    To this
              end, a genetic method will be employed to screen random peptides for those that
              activate transcription when fused to a DNA-bound protein positioned upstream of
              a promoter.  Genetic and complementary biochemical methods will be used to
              identify the sites on RNAP that are contacted by these peptides.  As well as
              defining the accessible surfaces of RNAP, these artificial peptide activators
              may prove useful as biological reagents in their own right.  Specifically, they
              will be used to generate a panel of in vivo inhibitors that may facilitate the
              identification of activation target sites for natural activators in E. coli.   
              These studies should provide a view of the surface of E. coli RNAP as seen by
              transcriptional activators.  In addition to offering new insight into the
              interactions of RNAP with regulators that control its function, the results of
              these investigations should be generally relevant to the study of
              protein-protein and peptide-protein interactions.
