Title       : Hormonal Control of Pupal Commitment of Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9728727

Award Number: 9728727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Frederik Nijhout hfn@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728727  Nijhout  Metamorphosis is one of the critical periods in insects
              development, during which an immature larva transforms into a mature adult
              insect.  Understanding the mechanisms that control metamorphosis is of critical
              importance to many areas of insect physiology and development.  Dr. Nijhout's
              current understanding of the hormonal control of metamorphosis rests largely on
              information derived from studies on the epidermis and general body wall. The PI
              has found in recent years that metamorphosis of the imaginal disks, the
              structures  that give rise to the legs, wings, antennae, and mouthparts of the
              adult insect, appear to be controlled in a manner quite different from that of
              the general epidermis.  In particular, these structures begin the developmental
              process of metamorphosis much earlier than the general epidermis.  Imaginal
              disks begin metamorphosis at a time when the level of juvenile hormone (the
              hormone that controls the progress of development of insects) is present at
              high levels in the blood and is still actively inhibiting metamorphosis of the
              epidermis.  The PI has developed a series of investigations to test an array of
              alternative hypotheses that could explain this divergence of physiological
              control of development of epidermis and imaginal disks.  Among others, the PI
              will study the relative roles of juvenile hormone and ecdysone (the molting
              hormone) in controlling the expression patterns of genes associated with the
              early stages of metamorphic development, the relative sensitivities of imaginal
              disks and epidermis to these developmental hormones, and the role of cell-cell
              communication signals in determining the timing and spatial pattern of the
              developmental commitment to metamorphosis in these tissues.  By providing a
              comparative understanding of the control of development of epidermis and
              imaginal disks, these studies will provide a deeper insight into the mechanisms
              that control of insect metamorphosis.
