Title       : Methionine Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9728661

Award Number: 9728661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Leustek leustek@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9728215  Leustek   The topic of this project is the developmental regulation
              of Met biosynthesis in higher plants, focusing primarily on the key enzyme
              cystathionine (-synthase (CS), and with some emphasis on threonine synthase
              (TS) and homoserine kinase (HK).     The goal is to study how Met synthesis is
              regulated in cells and tissues during development in the model vascular plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana. Using a reporter gene method it was determined that
              expression from the CS promoter is not equal in all cells. In seedlings the CS
              promoter is highly active in meristems and the vascular tissues of roots and
              cotyledons. The activity is significantly lower in mesophyll cells. But in this
              cell type it is induced by treatment of seedlings with Thr & Lys (inhibitors of
              Met synthesis), and is repressed by Met-feeding. Promoter activity in the
              vascular tissues is unaffected by these treatments. In mature plants the CS
              promoter is active primarily in vascular tissue of leaves, the flower stalk,
              floral receptacle and anthers; and is inactive in siliques and developing
              seeds.  Inhibition of CS expression with antisense-RNA causes a severe growth
              defect that can be partially restored by Met-feeding. The phenotype of these
              plants resembles that of A. thaliana with reduced levels of DNA methylation.   
              The next phase of the project will center on further exploration of the
              reporter gene results. The possible role of substrate competition in regulating
              Met synthesis will be explored by studying CS and TS expression in parallel.
              Both will be analyzed by measurement of in situ mRNA and protein. The affect of
              Met and its metabolites on cell specific expression will be studied in two
              ways: through analysis of CS and TS in plants that have been treated with
              agents that perturb Met synthesis, and through analysis of A. thaliana mutant
              lines with elevated levels of Met or with lower levels of S-adenosylmethionine.
              The subcellular localization of the CS enzyme in plant cells will be explored
              and the kinetic propert ies of the recombinant CS enzyme will be analyzed in
              order to determine whether enzyme regulation plays any role regulating Met
              synthesis.  Finally, the cDNA encoding HK will be cloned, the goal being to
              study the HK enzyme and to study how expression of HK is regulated.    The
              amino acid methionine is of vital importance to all living organisms being
              intimately involved in every aspect of metabolism. Animals are unable to
              produce methionine and they must obtain it from their diet. Yet, most crop
              plants do not contain sufficient amounts of this key nutrient. One reason may
              be that plants control precisely the amount of methionine that they make.
              Understanding how this regulation takes place could lead to methods for
              improving the nutritional value of crops by increasing their methionine
              content.
