Title       : 3-Ketoacyl Synthases: Modification and Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9728786

Award Number: 9728786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan G. Jaworski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9728786  Jaworski         3-Ketoacyl synthases (KAS) catalyze Claissen
              condensation reactions in a variety of areas of metabolism. The malonyl-CoA and
              malonyl-acy  carrier protein (ACP) dependent KASs utilized in fatty acid,
              polyketide and flavanoid biosynthesis play a major role in determining the
              final products of these pathways. The two enzymes to be studied in this project
              are 3-ketoacy1-ACPIII (KAS Ill) from spinach and fatty acid elongase KAS from
              Arabidopsis. KAS III catalyzes the initial condensation reaction of plant and
              bacterial fatty acid synthesis, utilizing acetyl-CoA and malonyl-ACP. The fatty
              acid elongase KAS encoded for by FAE1 is a membrane-bound enzyme that utilizes
              malonyl-CoA and is involved with 20:1 and 22:1 fatty acid synthesis in oil
              seeds. The specific objectives of the project are: 1. Site-directed mutagenesis
              of KAS III.  Highly conserved amino acid residues of the spinach KAS Ill will
              be substituted either by neutral amino acids, e.g. alanine, or by amino acids
              similar to the conserved residue. With each substitution, the partial reactions
              relating to this condensing enzyme' s mechanism will be analyzed. These
              reactions include 1. acety1-CoA binding, 2. acetylation of the active site, 2.
              malonyl-ACP binding, 4. malonyl decarboxylation, 5. condensation, and 6. acetyl
              transacylation (Fig. 3). The objective is to determine the effect of highly
              conserved residues on each part of the KAS III mechanism. 2. Engineering and
              mutagenesis of fatty acid elongase KAS. The identity of the active site cys
              will be confirmed by substituting conserved cys with alanine and serine. The
              effect of altering residues in the C-terminus region that are conserved with
              KAS III and chalcone synthase will also be determined. 3. Initiate
              determination of the 3-D structure of KAS III. Spinach KAS Ill has been
              expressed in E. coli and purified to homogeneity. This material will be used in
              an attempt to grow crystals, and, if successful, determine the 3-dimensional
              structure of KAS III.       Si gnificance. KAS III and the fatty acid elongase
              KAS belong to a class of enzymes that have profound effects on primary and
              secondary metabolism. In fatty acid, polyketide, and flavanoid synthesis, the
              condensing enzymes that take part in this metabolism are one the major
              determinants of the products of each pathway. For example, the composition of
              very long chain fatty acids in the seeds of A. thaliana, rape and jojoba can be
              directly related to the substrate specificity of the fatty acid elongase KAS
              found in each. Because the substrate specificities of condensing enzymes play
              such a key role in metabolism, it is important to elucidate which structural
              features of KASs affect this aspect of the enzymes' activities. However, the
              mechanisms for the Claissen condensation that fatty acid KASs catalyze are, in
              all cases, poorly understood. Limited information has been obtained for only a
              small number of related enzymes that also carry out Claissen condensations,
              viz. thiolases.
