Title       : Dynamic Regulation of Integrin Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9728122

Award Number: 9728122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy R. Hantgan rhantgan@wfubmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Weisel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Lyles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728122  Hantgan  The objective of this research is to answer a central question
              in cell biology:  What structural changes convert "inert" integrins into
              "activated" high affinity receptors?  Integrins are a superfamily of
              membrane-bound proteins that, when activated, regulate many essential cellular
              processes.  Despite major advances in molecular biology, the structural bases
              for integrin activation are not well understood. This work will test the new
              hypothesis that activation is a dynamic multistep process, leading to integrin
              clusters that form tight multivalent links with adhesive proteins.  Central to
              this research is a novel positive feedback mechanism in which receptor
              occupancy promotes self-association and self-association promotes high-affinity
              receptor ligand:interactions.  The hypotheses that follow will be tested by
              biophysical studies of the prototypical integrin, the human platelet IIb-beta-3
              complex.  Hypothesis 1: The IIb-beta-3  integrin is an inherently "sticky"
              protein; i.e., these receptors self-associate to form higher order  
              (IIb-beta-3)n oligomers.  Hypothesis 2: "Activated" IIb-beta-3 complexes
              exhibit an even greater tendency to oligomerize.  A corollary of this
              hypothesis is that receptor occupancy induces a conformational change in
              IIb-beta-3, one which enhances self-association. Hypothesis 3: High molecular
              weight adhesive proteins, such as the dimeric macromolecule fibrinogen, bind
              tightly to (IIb-beta-3)n oligomers, by forming multiple ligand:receptor
              contacts.       This research focuses on the question: How do living cells
              recognize each other? Many mammalian cells use large protein molecules, termed
              integrins, that protrude from their surface as  "molecular velcro". Smaller
              molecules, termed ligands, then adhere to the integrins and cause cells to
              clump. This investigation's goal is to understand the steps that control cell
              clumping at the molecular level, by exploring how integrin molecules become
              "sticky".  Optical measurements will determine what events cau se to ligands to
              stick to integrins and slow down their movement. This data will provide new
              insights into how integrins work as "molecular glue".
