Title       : Curatorial Upgrade of the Zoology Section of the University of Colorado Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9728995

Award Number: 9728995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63583              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan de Queiroz dequeiro@stripe.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shi-Kuei Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosanne L. Humphrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Zoology Section of the University of Colorado Museum  (UCM) contains the
              largest vertebrate and non-entomological  invertebrate collections in Colorado,
              with geographical  strengths in the Rocky Mountains and Great Plains regions, 
              and particular taxonomic strengths in molluscs, amphibians,  and reptiles.  The
              university's increased commitment to the  Zoology Section (and the UCM as a
              whole) is evidenced by the  creation of new positions for a Curator of
              Vertebrates and a  Collection Manager, both of which were filled within the 
              last four years. The current project will continue  enhancements of the Zoology
              Section's research and teaching  functions by augmenting the current inadequate
              specimen  storage facilitaties, and eliminating the remaining specimen 
              backlog.  Specifically, the project will (1) obtain 46  museum cabinets and 25
              shelving units to house the backlog  and inadequately housed catalogued
              specimens, and account  for collections growth over the next decade; (2)
              increase  the Collection Manager position from 75% to fulltime in  order to
              process the backlog in the next two years.  A  permanent fulltime Collection
              Manager will allow the  collections to be maintained properly, speed
              computerization  of the specimen database, and increase access to the 
              collections.    This project will maintain the physical integrity of the 
              Zoology Section's holdings, provide access for researchers  and educators to
              the currently inaccessible backlog,  facilitate access to specimens already
              catalogued, and,  through dissemination of the results of the project, 
              increase awareness of the Zoology Section in the research  community.  The
              proposed enhancements of the section are in  accord with the recommendations of
              a recent Institute of  Museum Studies Collections Assessment Program review. 
              In  addition, the curators of the various Sections within the  UCM have
              recommended that priority be given to the Zoology  and Paleobiology Section. 
              Finally the project is especially  timely because of the up coming move of the
              Zoology Section  to a newly renovated building, planned for the year 2001;  the
              move will be facilitated by the presence of appropriate  storage facilities for
              all specimens, and  by elimination of  the specimen backlog.
