Title       : Thermodynamic Models for Macromolecular Crystallization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9728240

Award Number: 9728240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pui Shing Ho hops@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Karplus  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728240  Ho    The primary objective of the current research is to develop a
              testable thermodynamic model to describe macromolecular crystallization.  This
              project will use a heptanucleotide crystal system that is unique, in that the
              thermodynamics of crystallization can be studied using a crystallographic
              titration assay.  This experimental system is a series of heptanucleotides that
              form duplexes.  The individual strands are distinct in the lattice, and can be
              accurately quantified crystallographically or chromatographically.  By varying
              the ratio of the two strands in the crystallization solutions, we can determine
              the energies of interaction between duplexes during crystallization. 
              Transitions between lattice types were observed from initial studies to be
              highly cooperative.  Thus, the assay has led to estimates for the energies and
              cooperativity for interactions between the DNA duplexes that form the initial
              seed crystal.  The proposed studies are to derive a model to accurately
              describe this  crystallization titration, accurately determine the parameters
              for this model, then extend the model to be more generally applicable to other
              crystal systems.  The models will be validated by monitoring the effects of
              concentrations on the strand compositions of the crystals.      X-ray
              crystallography has contributed significantly to our understanding of
              macromolecular structure and function, particularly at the atomic level. 
              However, the method is entirely dependent on the ability to grow diffraction
              quality single crystals.  Although a number of recent tools have been developed
              to facilitate the crystallization of macromolecules, the actual process of
              crystallization remains poorly understood.   The result of the proposed studies
              will be a thermodynamic model that should be useful as a tool for the rational
              design of crystallization studies. The model will be generally useful as a
              predictive tool for crystallizing nucleic acids and proteins.  The model will
              incorporate measurable properties of mo lecules to predict the probabilities
              for seed formation versus crystal growth, and conditions that may favor these
              two processes.
