Title       : Environmental Influences on Commitment of Mouse Mid-Hindbrain Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9728287

Award Number: 9728287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Turnbull   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexanderia L. Joyner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9728287  TURNBULL      A persistent question in developmental neurobiology is
              when and how neuronal cells become committed to become particular cell types.
              Transplantation of cells and tissues from one region of the embryonic brain to
              another provides a method to test whether neural cells take on the
              characteristics of their new environment, or maintain the characteristics of
              their region of origin.  In the past, these methods have been used in chick
              embryos, which are relatively easily accessible at embryonic stages.  These
              studies have shown that tissue grafts from the mid-hindbrain, or early stage
              brainstem region maintain characteristics of the mid-hindbrain even after
              transplantation to far removed regions of the embryonic forebrain.  Testing the
              commitment of mammalian neural cells through transplantation has been more
              difficult, because of the inaccessibility of embryos encased in the maternal
              uterus.  Dr. Turnbull has recently developed a high resolution ultrasound
              imaging system which allows in utero image-guided transplantation of early
              stage neural cells between specific regions of the embryonic mouse brain. 
              Using this system to transplant cells between embryonic mid-hindbrain and
              forebrain regions, Dr. Turnbull's laboratory has determined that a
              subpopulation of mouse mid-hindbrain cells are capable of taking on
              characteristics of the forebrain after transplantation, at embryonic  stages
              significantly later than would have been predicted from previous experiments in
              the chick.  Dr. Turnbull and his coworkers will now use this approach to
              characterize the embryonic stages at which cells from the mouse midbrain and
              cerebellum become committed to a mid-hindbrain fate.  In addition,
              transplantation experiments will be conducted using neural cells from mouse
              mutant strains, in which alterations in specific genes are known to disrupt
              normal development of the early mid-hindbrain region.  By comparing ultimate
              fates of transplanted normal cells versus cells obtained from defined mutant m
              ouse strains, these investigators will determine the role of several genes in
              committing mid-hindbrain cells to the fate of their region of origin.  The
              experimental techniques being developed in this project, combining direct
              embryonic manipulations with the extensive genetic information and defined
              mutant strains available in the mouse, will provide a powerful new approach for
              studying developmental processes and genetic interactions in the mammalian
              nervous system.
