Title       : RUI: The Isolation and Characterization of Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Proteins
               Associated with E2A in Plasma Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9728774

Award Number: 9728774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Vierra cvierra@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Vierra 

The importance of E2A proteins as potent regulators of early B cell
              formation is well established, but their role in the mature B- to plasma cell
              transition remains unclear.  Recently, a new E2A-containing E-box binding
              species, designated P-E2A, has been detected during the mature B- to plasma
              cell transition. The objectives of the research include 1) investigating the
              transcriptional components and role of the stage-specific E2A-containing
              complex, P-E2A; 2) identifying other protein(s) that interact with E2A in
              plasma cells; 3) characterizing these E2A-interacting protein(s).  To
              accomplish these specific goals, protein-protein interactional cloning systems
              will be performed to delineate the molecular components of P-E2A and other
              E2A-interacting protein complexes unique to plasma cells.  The retrieval of
              genes encoding potential E2A-interacting proteins will be subsequently analyzed
              using a broad spectrum of genetic and biochemical techniques, including gene
              cloning and sequencing, RNA- and immunoblotting, electrophoretic-mobility shift
              analyses, and DNA transfections in a variety of cultured cells.  Other
              E2A-interacting proteins restricted to cell types distinct from plasma cells
              have been identified and demonstrated to be important transcriptional
              regulators of processes such as cellular differentiation and proliferation. 
              This project will determine whether E2A-interacting transcription factors found
              in plasma cells play a similar role in processes such as plasma cell formation
              or cell-specific gene expression e.g. antibody gene transcription.  The results
              of these studies will identify transcription factors whose pattern of
              expression is restricted to the plasma cell lineage and will provide data that
              will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that govern cell-restricted
              eukaryotic gene expression.  E2A proteins are critical transcriptional
              regulators of the immune system.  In particular, E2A gene products are required
              for the development of specialized cells that synthesize antibodies.  This
              project will enhance the knowledge of E2A-associating proteins and provide
              insight into how interactions between E2A and  various regulatory proteins
              result in the formation of DNA-protein complexes that regulate antibody
              production in plasma cells.

