Title       : Affinity Labeling of Nucleotide Sites in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9728202

Award Number: 9728202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta F. Colman rfcolman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Colman  9728202    1.  Technical    Nucleotides have a multi-functional role in
              cellular metabolism:  involved in kinase reactions, participate in
              dehydrogenase reactions as part of the coenzyme molecule, function as
              regulators of many allosteric enzymes, engaged (through the effects of cyclic
              AMP) in the action of several hormones, and contribute to the aggregation of
              platelets.  This study is aimed to develop tools for a systematic exploration
              of the amino acid residues in the nucleotide sites of proteins.  The general
              approach of affinity is used, with reagents previously synthesized in this
              laboratory and new reagents which incorporate, at various positions of the
              purine or ribose ring alkylating agents capable of reacting covalently with the
              protein; the nucleotide moiety thus provides the specificity for chemical
              modification of the proteins within the binding sites.  The effects of these
              nucleotide alkylating agents are examined on several enzymes; adenylosuccinate
              synthetase and adenylosuccinate lyase, which catalyze successive reactions in
              the conversion of inosine monophosphate to AMP; and cyclic AMP
              phosphodiesterases, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of cAMP to form 5' - AMP. 
              For each protein, the kinetics of the affinity labeling reaction is examined,
              the extent of reagent incorporation determined and the radioactive peptides
              isolated from proteolytic digests of labeled enzyme and identified with the
              modified residue.  The catalytic and ligand binding properties as well as the
              conformational characteristics of the modified enzymes are also evaluated.  For
              most of these enzymes, the results of these enzymes in solution are compared
              with their determined crystal structures.  The nucleotide analogs,
              fluorosulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides, have been tested on more than 50 proteins;
              with results promising for its general applicability to other enzymes.  They
              are useful for the detection of nucleotide binding proteins expressed by
              cloning.  The significance of this may rest with providing the k nowledge base
              for rational design of specific inhibitors  targeted to particular
              nucleotide-requiring enzymes.    2.  Non-technical    Nucleotides have a
              multifunctional role in cellular metabolism, such as participating in enzymatic
              reactions, activating regulatory enzymes, and serving as "second messenger"
              like cyclic AMP.  This study is aimed to develop the tools which allow a
              systematic exploration of the enzyme which binds nucleotides.  A general
              approach of "affinity labeling" is used to attach a nucleotide moiety of the
              new reagent compound to a specific binding site on the protein, irreversibly,
              so that the binding site can be isolated and characterized.  The effects of
              nucleotide alkylating agents on two purine nucleotide biosynthesis enzymes and
              on an enzyme important in the degradation of nucleotide cyclic AMP are studied.
               Nucleotide analogues such as fluorsulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides which react to
              proteins at specific sites are specifically probed.  For biotechnology, these
              molecules can be used to detect expression of cloned proteins, and to provide
              the knowledge base for rational design of inhibitors for nucleotide-requiring
              enzymes.
