Title       : Development of Synapses in Hippocampal Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9728003

Award Number: 9728003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deanna L. Benson deanna.benson@mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728003  BENSON     The long term goal of this research is to  understand how
              the axons of neurons are guided to particular parts  of their target cells, and
              once there, how they assemble synaptic  contacts.  Several classes of adhesion
              molecules, such as  cadherins, integrins and members of the immunoglobulin
              superfamily  are known to generate junctions between cells, and recent research
               has shown that these same molecules are also localized at synaptic  junctions
              in the central nervous system (CNS).  These new data  strongly suggest that the
              mechanisms by which pre- and  postsynaptic membranes adhere to one another in
              the CNS may be  substantially similar to those that generate intercellular 
              adhesion in other, non-neural tissues.  Consistent with this  hypothesis is the
              following evidence:  Immunolocalization of N-  and E-cadherin at synaptic
              junctions; the tight adhesive nature of  cadherins and their resultant
              intermembrane distances correlate  well with biochemical properties and
              calculated intermembrane  distances described for synapses; and both synapse
              formation and  targeting to the appropriate cellular domain (somata, dendritic 
              shafts, spines) occur in the absence of neural activity.  Synapse  development
              and organization are well-characterized in the rat  hippocampus and in
              hippocampal neurons grown in culture.  Together  they make an excellent model
              system in which to examine  interneuronal synapse formation and targeting.  The
              first aim of  Dr. Benson's research is to test the hypothesis that cadherin 
              incorporation is critical for synapse formation.  This will be  accomplished by
              examining the deposition of cadherins at synapses  in cultured hippocampal
              neurons in relation to other well-  characterized synaptic markers, in the
              presence and absence of  inhibitors and antisense oligonucleotides that block
              the  production of cadherins.  The second aim is to examine the  relationship
              between different cadherins and functionally distinct  synapses. 
              Co-localization of cadherins or ca tenins and  transmitter-specific synaptic
              markers will be assessed in vivo and  in vitro.  Together, data from these aims
              will be used to describe  the dynamics of cadherin localization during synapse
              development  and will have broad implications for the mechanisms underlying 
              synapse assembly in CNS.
