Title       : Protein Translational Mobility and Concentration Near Membrane Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2000   
File        : a9728116

Award Number: 9728116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Thompson nlt@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728116  Thompson  Total internal reflection with fluorescence correlation
              spectroscopy will be used to determine the factors which govern the
              translational mobilities and concentrations of fluorescent proteins adjacent to
              single phospholipid bilayers deposited on transparent planar substrates.  An
              argon ion laser beam will be internally reflected at the substrate/solution
              interface, creating an evanescent field that extends only a small distance into
              the adjacent solution.  Along with the evanescent depth, an aperture placed at
              an intermediate image plane of an optical microscope will define a small volume
              next to the membrane surface.  The fluorescence arising from molecules within
              this small volume, collected with a high aperture objective and detected with a
              fast silicon avalanche photodiode, will fluctuate with time as individual
              fluorescent proteins move in and out of the observed volume.  The normalized
              fluorescence fluctuation autocorrelation function will provide information
              about solute translational mobility and concentration.  A large variety of
              biological processes involve the interactions of molecules in solution, such as
              proteins, with receptor molecules present on the surfaces of biological cells. 
              The details of these interactions, which result in specific biological
              behavior, are predicted to depend strongly on the concentrations and movements
              of the proteins in solution directly adjacent to the cell surfaces.  These two
              properties, concentration and translational mobility, will be measured for
              fluorescent proteins next to models of cell surfaces constructed on transparent
              planar surfaces, by using newly developed methods that employ laser excitation
              and optical microscopy.  The results will be used to expand the current level
              of general knowledge about how cells detect and respond to their environments,
              giving rise to biological function.
