Title       : Compensatory Adjustments in Plant Nutrient Uptake: Varying Responses to Rising
               Atmospheric CO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9728785

Award Number: 9728785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hormoz BassiriRad hormoz@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Lussenhop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent P. Gutschick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1095,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              BassiriRad  9728785            Nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are nutrients
              that most often  limit plant production in natural and agricultural ecosystems.
              Limited  availability of these nutrients is also a major factor influencing 
              long-term plant and ecosystem responses to rising atmospheric CO2  levels i.e.,
              the commonly observed short-term increase in plant biomass  may not be
              sustained over the long-term unless availability and/or  acquisition capacity
              for nutrients increases in concert with carbon (C)  gain. Therefore, it is
              critical to obtain a mechanistic understanding  of whether elevated CO2 can
              elicit compensatory adjustments that would  circumvent nutrient limitation of
              plant growth. Compensatory adjustment  such as (a) increased mycorrhizal
              development, (b) increased root N and  P absorption capacity, and (c) root
              growth can enable plants to meet  increased nutrient demand under high CO2 yet
              the extent of these  adjustments in response to CO2 enrichment is unknown.   
              In  addressing how nutrient availability could interact with plants and 
              ecosystem  responses to high CO2 several questions must be  considered:  Will
              plant demand for N and P increase in response to CO2 enrichment  ?  (Demand  as
               a  concept  requires careful definition  on  temporal  and  spatial  scales
              which will be addressed here.) If nutrient demand  does  increase  under 
              elevated  C02,  what compensatory  adjustment(s)  will  plants make to overcome
              this greater demand? Will N and P uptake  scale  properly  with  measured 
              changes in relative  growth  rate  (RGR)  and  photosynthetic N and P utility?
              Does growth nutrient status affect  the  magnitude of the compensatory
              adjustments in response to CO2? Do  these  compensatory  mechanisms scale with
              CO2-induced changes  in  stages  of  development? Do plants of various
              functional groups e.g.,  C3  vs.  C4,  woody  vs.  herbaceous  vs.  grasses, 
              or  arbuscular  mycorrhizae  vs.  ectomycorrhizae differ in their nutrient
              uptake responses  to  elevated  CO2?  Does   a  better  plant capacity to scale
              up  nutrient  uptake  at  elevated CO2 confer enhanced competitive ability?    
                 The  proposed  research  will  address  these  questions  with   an 
              emphasis on root and mycorrhizal N and P uptake kinetics. The  PI  will  use 
              both field and laboratory approaches to test our hypotheses  under  the  most 
              realistic  conditions  possible.  The  field  work  will  be  conducted  at 
              six  currently funded national FACE  sites  providing  a  comprehensive  cross
              comparison of different ecosystems and  functional  groups. At each field site,
              N and P uptake capacity will be measured on  intact roots of mature plants
              subjected to factorial combination of two  CO2  treatments  in the presence or
              absence of mycorrhizas.  The  field  experiments  will provide a unique
              opportunity to compare the  response  of   these  compensatory  adjustments  to
               elevated  CO2  levels  among  different ecosystems, life forms, and functional
              groups of plants in  a  competitive  setting. Greenhouse-laboratory experiments
               using  species  similar  to  those  from  the  field will  examine  the  more 
              detailed  questions  related to adjustments in uptake kinetics, relative 
              changes  in  root  vs.  mycorrhizal  uptake kinetics,  and  plant 
              physiological  demand.  The  data  will be integrated into a comprehensive 
              functional  balance   model  which  will  incorporate  physiological  and  
              biomass  allocation parameters.
