Title       : Generations of Metachronal Motor Patterns in Segmented Nervous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9728791

Award Number: 9728791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Mulloney bcmulloney@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                         Normal  locomotion in vertebrates and anlaropods is  a  complex 
              behavior,  and  the  neural mechanisms that coordinate  their  limbs  during 
              locomotion  are  not  known  with  any  certainty.  Rhythmic  movements  of the
              swimmerets of crayfish are known to be coordinated  by  neural networks in
              their segmental ganglia, and the analysis  of  the intersegmental circuit that
              coordinates movements of neighboring  swimmerets  holds  promise of new
              insights  into  neural  mechanisms  controlling  locomotion.  This proposal 
              presents  new  ideas  about  intersegmental  coordination in the swimmeret
              system.  These  follow  the  recent demonstration that an older hypothesis,
              which postulated  an  increased  excitability  of  local  circuits  in 
              segments  that  normally  lead each cycle of movements, was incorrect;  these 
              local  circuits   do  not  differ  in  their  excitability.  Instead,   the 
              intersegmental   circuit  that  coordinates   them   is   polarized. 
              Preliminary  physiological results show that axons of ascending  and 
              descending coordinating interneurons can be isolated separately,  so  the 
              predictions of the coupled-oscillator model will be  tested  by  selectively 
              interrupting these axons and comparing  the  system'  s  subsequent 
              performance  with  the  prediction.  The  proposal  also  presents  a new
              cellular model of the coordinating circuit  that  is  based  on  published
              descriptions of individual coordinating  units.  The  cellular model was
              developed by testing the performance of many  alternative  patterns of
              connections with components  of  the  local  circuits in each ganglion that
              coordinating interneurons might make.  To  test this new model, its responses
              to non-uniform excitation  of  local  circuits  will  be  compared with  the 
              swimmeret  system'  s  responses to non-uniform excitation of individual
              ganglia.  To  test  the  cellular model' s predictions, the neurons that are
              targets  of  individual    coordinating    interneurons    will     be     ma
              pped  electrophysiologically. In experimental preparations, firing of each 
              interneuron will be perturbed with injected currents. The system'  s  response 
              to these perturbations will be measured and compared  with  simulations of the
              same perturbations in the model.
