Title       : REU: Responses to Artificial Selection for Voluntary Activity in House Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9728434

Award Number: 9728434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Garland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9728434  T. Garland Jr.  Responses to artificial selection for voluntary
              activity in  house mice    Non-Technical Summary      During the course of
              evolution, changes in behavior,  morphology, and physiology occur in some
              correlated fashion.  Natural selection that leads to changes in one trait also 
              produces changes in other traits.  Artificial selection,  where individuals
              possessing extreme values for some trait  are mated with one another over many
              generations, has been  used to establish lines of house mice that have a 120% 
              greater level of voluntary activity.  Using four such lines,  along with
              control lines that were not subjected to  selection, this research will explore
              the morphological and  physiological changes that are correlated with this
              change  in behavior.  It will explore traits such as oxygen  consumption, heart
              mass and blood hemoglobin levels to  determine differences in locomotor
              performance capabilities.  In addition, function of the endocrine system, limb
              bone  proportions, muscle fiber types and the activities of key  enzymes in
              both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism will be  examined.  This research will
              bring to bear a wide array of  sophisticated, modern methodology from the
              fields of  functional morphology, respiratory physiology, endocrinology  and
              genetics to these truly integrative studies of the  evolution of behavior.     
              The selected lines produced by this research will be made  available to  other
              researchers and will provide an important model system  for studying effects of
              voluntary activity in behavior on  physical fitness, health, lifespan and other
              aspects of life  history in mammals.  This project constitutes a pioneering 
              study upon which this potential for future research rests.
