Title       : Genetic Control of Male Meiosis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9728772

Award Number: 9728772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728772  Ma  Meiosis is a specialized form of cell division that is essential
              for the sexual reproduction of all eukaryotic organisms. Plants are excellent
              systems to study meiosis because the cells that undergo meiosis are easily
              accessible and multiple male meioses occur nearly synchronously. A male sterile
              mutant has been isolated from Arabidopsis, 1176-306, whose phenotype is the
              production of microspores of variable size and containing variable amounts of
              DNA. The mutated gene has been identified and characterized. The protein
              encoded by the gene has strong similarity to human and yeast SKP1 proteins,
              which are known to be regulators of the mitotic cell cycle, but have not yet
              been determined to be involved in the meiotic cycle. It is proposed that the
              Arabidopsis SKP1 gene is essential for male meiosis. That hypothesis will be
              tested by characterizing the Arabidopsis skp1 mutant in detail using genetic,
              cytological and biochemical methods and by analyzing the SKP1 gene and gene
              product using molecular, cell biological and biochemical approaches. The
              existing mutants will be characterized using fluorescence microscopy and the
              SKP1 RNA and protein expression patterns determined using in situ hybridization
              and immunolocalization. Possible SKP1 function in mitosis at other stages will
              be tested. Genetic interactions between SKP1 and other genes will be determined
              and interactions at the protein level investigated. Suppressors and enhancers
              of the skp1 mutants will be identified. Other alleles of the SKP1 locus as well
              as other related genes will be isolated and characterized.    These studies
              will result in greater insight into the genetic control of meiosis at the
              molecular level, a mechanism which is central to sexual reproduction in all
              organisms, including plants.
