Title       : Stimulus Encoding and Feature Extraction in Neuronal Spike Trains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9728731

Award Number: 9728731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Metzner metzner@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-28731  METZNER and KOCH      The long term goal of this project is to
              determine how higher  order nerve cells ("neurons") within the central nervous
              system  extract behaviorally relevant features from their sensory input, a 
              task common to all sensory systems. To address this question, we  will focus on
              the question of how information is encoded at the  primary sensory neuron level
              and subsequently processed by higher  order neurons in the electrosensory
              system of weakly electric  fish. These weakly electric fish produce a
              sinusoidally varying  weak electric field in their environments using a
              specialized  "electric organ."  Electrosensory receptor cells located along the
               body of the fish detect modulations in the amplitude of the  electrical field
              produced by the presence of nearby objects.  Primary sensory neurons 
              ("P-receptor afferents") transmit this  information to the next level of the
              sensory pathway, the  electrosensory lateral line lobe (ELL). There,
              behaviorally  relevant features are extracted and encoded in the spike trains
              of  pyramidal cells, the output neurons of the ELL. The mechanisms  underlying
              this feature extraction will be investigated by  combining neurophysiological,
              neuroanatomical and computational  data analysis techniques.  Major aims are:
              First, to characterize  the accuracy and robustness of P-receptor afferent
              responses (the  "nerve impulses" or "spikes" electrical fields cause) to time- 
              varying modulations of electric field amplitude and second to  perform
              simultaneous recordings from several pyramidal cells  during presentation of
              the same stimuli. Accuracy and robustness  of the impulse firing of primary
              sensory neurons will be studied  using recently developed measures of
              "distance" between spike  trains and standard signal processing techniques. The
              responses of  pyramidal cells will be analyzed using signal detection
              techniques  adapted to multiple spike train data. The proposed project is 
              designed as a group proposal: experiments will be conducted  in the  laboratory
              of Dr. Metzner (UCR) and the computational analysis in  the laboratory of Dr.
              Koch with participation of Dr. Gabbiani  (both Caltech). This combination of
              neuroethological and  computational/information theoretical approaches will
              clarify the  nature of early sensory processing in a model sensory system 
              ideally suited for this kind of analysis. In particular, this work  is expected
              to lead to a quantitative understanding of the code  used to represent and
              transmit sensory information across multiple  neurons.
