Title       : RUI: Regulation of Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9728179

Award Number: 9728179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel Sterne-Marr sternemarr@siena.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Siena College
	      515 Loudon Road
	      Loudonville, NY  12211    518/783-2300

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9728179  Sterne-Marr              G protein coupled receptors are membrane
              bound proteins which convert light and  hormonal signals into intracellular
              messages.  Uncoupling of the receptor from its immediate downstream signal
              transducer, the G protein, occurs rapidly following exposure to a stimulus and
              results in cessation of response to the hormone (desensitization).  Receptor
              phosphorylation by the (adrenergic receptor kinase ( ARK) is hormone-dependent
              and promotes G protein/receptor uncoupling.  Prior to hormone treatment  ARK
              exists in an inactive state.  Upon activation of the receptor by hormone, the
              catalytic activity of the kinase is stimulated and the receptor is
              phosphorylated, resulting in desensitization.  Little is known about the
              structure of ARK, the molecular interactions which maintain the pre-active
              kinase in its basal state, and the conformation changes which convert the
              pre-active kinase into an active enzyme.  The goals of this project are to
              understand how interactions within the  ARK protein maintain this molecule in
              an inactive form and how interactions between  ARK and a hormone stimulated
              receptor induce  ARK activation.  The techniques of mass spectrometry, chemical
              cross-linking and random targeted mutagenesis will be used to identify the
              amino acids in  ARK which keep this protein in the pre-active form.  Fusion
              proteins, site-directed mutagenesis, enzyme assays and  ARK /receptor binding
              assays will be used to identify regions that interact with the receptors. 
              Since  ARK is a member of a family of G protein coupled receptor kinases which
              regulate G protein-coupled receptors, it provides a good model to study the
              structure and activation of this class of proteins.               The
              interaction of a hormone or neurotransmitter with a specific receptor on the
              surface of a target cell initiates a chemical signaling event.  A molecule
              known st a G protein, because it binds GTP, interacts with the receptor and
              downstream signaling molecules and a specific response  occurs.  To terminate
              the signal a specific protein, the adrenergic receptor kinase ( ARK) adds a
              phosphate group to the receptors.  This research is directed at the mechanisms
              by which this protein becomes activated and interacts with the receptor.  These
              studies will provide new information about activation of this class of
              proteins.    ***
