Title       : The Bacterial Cell-Surface in Sinorhizobium-Soybean Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9728564

Award Number: 9728564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley L. Reuhs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reuhs
     Soybeans account for the majority of cultured legumes and the
              effective nodulation of these legumes is the subject of considerable research.
              Wild-type Sinorhizobium fredii USDA257 does not infect the roots of most North
              American soybean cultivars. However, a mutation in the nolXWBTUV gene region
              extends the host range of this bacterium and allows it to nodulate many
              domestic soybean cultivars, including Williams. Interestingly, the infection of
              Williams soybean by the mutants is blocked if the wild-type strain is present
              in the inoculum, and preliminary results show that the nol mutations directly
              affect the expression of bacterial cell surface polysaccharides. The goal of
              this project, therefore, is to determine the structural changes that are
              associated with the nol mutations and to identify the factor(s) produced by
              wild-type cells that limit its host range. In addition, two novel
              polysaccharides, which are abnormally expressed in the nol mutants and may be
              bacteroid-specific surface components, will be structurally characterized.
              Monoclonal antibodies will be raised against these polysaccharides and used to
              probe for their distribution in bacteroids from many S. fredii host plants.
              These objectives are part of a broader goal of understanding the role of the
              bacterial cell surface in the infection and differentiation process, which
              ultimately lead to bacteroid development and N2 fixation. This project may also
              provide new insights into the function of the microbial cell surface components
              in plant-pathogen interactions, as the nol gene region is homologous to the hrp
              genes of Xanthomonas and Pseudomonas.
     Biological nitrogen fixation in the
              legume-rhizobia symbiosis is an important part of worldwide agriculture, and
              the nitrogen-enrichment of cultivated soils by microorganisms that form a
              symbiotic relationship with legumes (e.g. bean, pea, soybean, and alfalfa) is a
              renewable source of environmentally safe fertilizer. To exploit and improve
              this resource and to reduce the requirement for potentially harmful chemical
              fertilizers, the mechanisms of the infection process that allow the bacteria to
              form N2-fixing nodules on the plant root must be understood. The molecular
              basis for infection and nodule development determines, in part, the
              compatibility of a bacterial cell with a potential host plant and, therefore,
              the efficiency of nitrogen fixation.


