Title       : Genetic Analysis of Mouse Cortical Development and Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9728742

Award Number: 9728742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuqing Li y-li4@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728742 LI     During the development of many sensory systems in vertebrates,
              the sensory periphery (e.g. the body surface, or retina of the eye) must become
              properly mapped in the central nervous system.  Previous research has shown
              that some aspects of this mapping depend on neural activity to match up the
              central maps to individual differences in the sensory periphery.  Dr. Li's
              research is to understand how neural activity regulates the formation of
              specific synaptic connections in brain maps that represent the whiskers on a
              mouse's face . In the past, Dr. Li and his colleagues developed a line of
              transgenic mice without NMDA receptors (a subtype of glutamate receptor in the
              brain) to study activity-dependent synaptic refinement.  Their work on the
              whisker-to-barrel, or trigeminal, sensory system has shown that the formation
              of the whisker-related neural maps in brainstem trigeminal nuclei requires NMDA
              receptor activity.  However, it has been unsettled whether the development of
              whisker-related patterns requires NMDA receptor activation at the higher levels
              (thalamus and cerebral cortex) along the trigeminal neuraxis.  In order to
              resolve this issue, Dr. Li and his colleagues will use the Cre/LoxP technique
              to delete one subtype of NMDA receptor in the developing cortex.  They have
              recently created a line of transgenic mice that can inactivate tagged genes
              specifically in the developing cerebral cortex by the restricted expression of
              a bacterial recombinase enzyme (cre).  When crossed with other transgenic mice
              in which the NR2B subunit of the NMDA receptor has been inserted between two
              LoxP sites, the cre-mediated recombination will delete the NR1/NR2B subtype of
              NMDA receptors in the cerebral cortex.  They will then study the development
              and plasticity of whisker-related neuronal patterns in the cerebral cortex.  In
              collaboration with other researchers, Dr. Li's  group uses gene targeting
              technology, axonal tracing, whole-cell patch clamp and extracellular recording
              techniques combined wi th histochemical detection methods to reveal the
              anatomical and functional organization of the whisker-to-barrel sensory system
              in these genetically altered mice.  This multidisciplinary research should lead
              to a comprehensive understanding of the molecular and cellular mechanisms of
              cortical development and plasticity.
