Title       : Neural and Hormonal Substrates of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9728883

Award Number: 9728883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynwood G. Clemens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9728883  Clemens    A major biological issue is understanding the nature of sex
              differences and similarities in the regulation of behavior.  One of the
              problems that arises in comparing males and females is that we often use
              different measurement scales for males than we use for females.  Moreover,
              scientists tend to focus their attention only on the differences between the
              sexes.  Dr. Clemens notes that when functional units of behavior that are
              comparable between males and females are used, then general principles emerge
              that can apply to both genders.  Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical tools
              to examine neural activity, he will determine whether males and females have
              evolved forebrain mechanisms that respond similarly to the same contextual
              features of a situation.  On the other hand, Dr. Clemens also notes substantial
              physiological differences exist in the peripheral nervous system of males and
              females which emerge as a result of endocrine processes during early
              development.  He will use a variety of biological and behavioral techniques to
              investigate underlying mechanisms.  These experiments will allow him to specify
              with great precision, exactly which cells in the central nervous system are
              active during different phases of the physiological and behavioral process in
              both males and females.  The results from these fundamental studies could
              provide a new framework within which to view sex differences and similarities
              in the neuroendocrine substrates of behavior.  Moreover, the findings could
              lead to a better understanding of how complex patterns of peripheral neural
              activity are integrated and controlled by the central nervous system.
