Title       : Molecular and Cellular Structure of Gap Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9728338

Award Number: 9728338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina E. Sosinsky gsosinsky@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728338  Sosinsky      This project is to study the detailed structure of gap
              junctions and their role in intercellular communication.  Gap junctions are
              formed between the plasma membrane of apposed epithelial cells and other animal
              cell types.  The junctions provide a direct aqueous channel through which ions
              and small molecules can pass between the cells.  A gap junction is composed of
              paired connexons (one from each cell) each of which is a homohexamer made up of
              protein subunits called connexins.  There are several connexin isoforms (16 in
              human cells) that constitute the connexin family.  All connexin isoforms share
              a basic conformation when assembled in a connexon.  However, not all connexons
              can pair and form functional channels with all the other connexons composed of
              dissimilar connexin subunits. This may allow different cell types expressing
              specific isoforms to form junctions selectively with only cells of the same
              type.  Studies that are proposed will test an hypothesis for the molecular
              basis of connexon pairing that could account for this selectivity.  Preliminary
              evidence from cryo-electron microscopy and three-dimensional reconstructions
              using two isoforms indicates that the surface contours of the extracellular
              face of different connexons are different for the two isoforms.  The hypothesis
              is that during pairing there is a reciprocal fit of the apposed faces that
              accounts for the specificity of pairing.  To test the hypothesis, the
              high-resolution connexon structures that result from four other isoforms will
              be analyzed.  In addition, correlative light and electron microscopy will be
              used to detail the steps of gap junction assembly and disassembly.  A final
              portion of the project will involve the characterization of specialized
              intracellular gap junctions ("reflexive junctions") that form within Schwann
              cells of the nervous system.  The studies are highly significant in that they
              would likely provide important insights into the structural and functional
              differences among the g ap junctions that form in different tissues.  ***
