Title       : Self-Centering Activity of Cytoplasm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9728259

Award Number: 9728259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir I. Rodionov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728259  Rodionov    Microtubules (MTs) are structural elements (cytoskeleton)
              of the cell.  They have multiple functions, including maintaining cell shape
              and serving as tracks for the movement of other subcellular structures or
              organelles.  The movement of subcellular structures along MTs is catalyzed by
              unidirectional protein "motors" that move either to the "plus-end" of the MTs
              (i.e., kinesin) or to the "minus-end" (i.e., dynein).  In many cell types, the
              MTs are arranged in a radial array that supports traffic from the middle of the
              cell to the periphery.  It had generally been assumed that the organization of
              this radial array of MTs is a result of nucleation at the centrosome; however,
              it is now becoming clear that the MT array can self-organize, and that
              alternative cellular mechanisms exist which position the focal point of radial
              MTs at the center of a cell.  The objective of this research is to elucidate
              the mechanism of self-organization and centering of the radial array of
              cytoplasmic MTs.     Cytoplasmic fragments of fish melanophores (the cells in
              fish skin that make it possible for fishes to change color) provide an
              excellent model system for the study of the self-centering mechanism.  In
              melanophores, thousands of pigment granules move along radial MTs by means of
              molecular motors to the cell center to form a tight aggregate (causing the skin
              to appear light) or to the periphery to redisperse uniformly throughout the
              cytoplasm (causing the skin to appear dark).   When cytoplasmic fragments of
              melanophores are produced by microsurgery, the MTs organize into a radial array
              of correct polarity orientation (plus ends outwards) and the pigment aggregates
              in the center, even in the absence of a centrosome.  This organization of MTs
              into a radial array is fast and depends on the activity of a minus end motor
              (dynein).  These observations allowed the development of a model for the
              self-centering activity of melanophore fragments.    In the model, pigment
              aggregation itself induces form ation of the radial MT array.  Each pigment
              granule during aggregation interacts with more than one MT, and unidirectional
              transport of granules brings MT minus ends together.  Nucleation of MTs at the
              pigment aggregate contributes to self-organization.  Information about the
              position of the focal point of radial MTs is derived from interaction of MT
              ends with the surface.  The driving force for relocation to the center is
              provided by MT motors at the pigment aggregate or at the surface, coupled with
              the addition or loss of MT subunits.  The imbalance of forces which drives
              relocation of the pigment aggregate to the center is produced by the greater
              effective number of MTs which connect the aggregate to the closest edge.     
              The major statements of the model will be tested by a combination of cell,
              structural and immunochemical methodologies.  The following are the specific
              aims of the project:  (i) to test MT transport and nucleation models of
              self-organization of MTs into a radial array.  Photobleaching and
              photoactivation will be used to examine the behavior of MTs during formation of
              radial MTs and at steady state.  (ii) to test if asymmetry in effective MT
              number drives relocation of the pigment aggregate to the center.  Digital
              fluorescence  imaging will be used to test if selective stabilization of MTs at
              the surface causes the increase in MT number which explains the imbalance of
              forces driving centering.  (iii) to determine if MT asters of reversed polarity
              form in melanophore fragments with dispersed pigment after disruption of the
              actin cytoskeleton and stimulation of a plus-end directed motor.  Drugs which
              interfere with the uniform distribution of pigment granules will be employed to
              test a major statement of the model that transport of pigment granules induces
              self-organization of the radial MT array.    This research will increase our
              understanding of general principles of self-organization and positioning of
              microtubule arrays within cells.
