Title       : SGER: Laboratory Studies on the Influence of Small-Scale Turbulance on Encounter
               and Feeding of Aquatic Predators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9728750

Award Number: 9728750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Miller miller@cbl.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor S. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence P. Sanford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Dr. Thomas Miller and associates will develop, construct and test a novel
              apparatus that generates small-scale turbulence of similar characteristics to
              those observed in the coastal ocean.  The objective in developing the apparatus
              is to provide the capability to test hypotheses regarding the role of
              small-scale turbulence in regulating the feeding ecology of planktonic
              predators.  This capability will vastly improve out abilities to understanding
              the role of small-scale physical processes as they influence life in the sea. 
              Two versions of the apparatus will be constructed that differ in volume.  To
              test the efficacy of the instrumentation, the flow fields in the apparatus will
              be characterized using acoustic and laser doppler velocimeters.  The ability to
              document the effects of small-scale turbulence on foraging of planktonic
              predators depends on the ability to quantify foraging behavior. 3-D videography
              will be used to quantify predator and prey behaviors.    The planned initial
              research that will be facilitated by this small grant for exploratory research
              will focus on four questions: a)  Can we accurately measure prey concentrations
              from video images alone?; b) Can we estimate rates of attack and encounter from
              video recordings?; c) Can we estimate feeding rates from video recordings?; and
              d) Can we accurately measure prey behavior with our video system?  These
              questions will be addressed in a series of controlled experiments involving
              striped bass larvae, Morone saxatilis, and the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi as
              predators, and brine shrimp nauplii, Artemia sp., and copepodites of Eurtemora
              sp. as prey.  Behavior-based estimates of encounter, attack and feeding rates
              will be compared with independent estimates derived from analyzes of the
              functional responses of predators within the chamber.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
