Title       : A SMET Regional Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9728375

Award Number: 9728375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Rissing ATSWR@ASUACAD  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donovan L. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to plan, conduct and assess a "Shaping the Future"
              regional workshop the purpose of which would be able to improve the science,
              mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) education at the undergraduate
              level within the state of Arizona.  This workshop would have as invitees teams
              of faculty and administrators from three public universities and and the
              community colleges within the state, along with appropriate representatives of
              government agencies and the K-12 system.  The proposed workshop would be one
              and one half days in length and tentatively set for January 1998.  A steering
              committee with representation from each of the three state universities and the
              community college districts will be formed to work with a meeting facilitator
              so that the meeting format would best address the Shaping the Future:  New
              Expectations for Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering
              and Technology report (NSF 96-139) goals as they relate to:  SMET faculty :
              Building "a sense of wonder and the excitement of discovery, plus communication
              and teamwork, critical thinking, and life-long learning skills into (SMET)
              learning experiences".  SMET departments: Setting "departmental goals and
              accept responsibility for undergraduate learning, with measurable expectations
              for all students... offer a (SMET) curriculum engaging the broadest spectrum of
              ... use technology effectively to enhance... work collaboratively with
              departments of education, the K-12 teachers".  Governing boards and
              administrators:  Reexamining "institutional missions in light of needs in
              undergraduate SME&T education; provide strong programs of faculty
              development;...(and) reduce organizational rigidities".  During the meeting,
              facilitated discussions will be used to address these issues.  A review of how
              each institution (or district) is approaching the issues will also be
              conducted.  The meeting results will be  summarized in a report and captured on
              a state-wide SMET web page.  The steering committee will  be reconvened in the
              late spring or early summer of 1998 to assess the progress made on all campuses
              and to plan appropriate follow-up SMET activity.  *
