Title       : Genetic Analysis of Radiation Response in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9728125

Award Number: 9728125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Mount mount@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Mount   MCB 978125  Plants are constantly exposed to UV-B light from the sun
              and oxygen as a product of metabolism and both can and do damage DNA. Hence,
              plants are likely to utilize efficient mechanisms for repairing these types of
              DNA damage. Mutants of Arabidopsis that are abnormally sensitive to UV light
              have been isolated and found to comprise several complementation groups that
              map in different locations. Two genes, which have been tentatively identified
              as encoding products which are involved in the pathway for nucleotide excision
              repair of UV damage are under study.  An attempt to positionally clone UVH1 and
              UVH3 is underway. Preliminary evidence suggests that the UVH1 locus may be a
              homolog of the human XP-B gene, a gene which is one of the several
              complementation groups involved in the human genetic disease xeroderma
              pigmentosum, as well as the yeast Rad 25 gene. The cloning of these genes will
              be completed, complementation tests performed and mutant genes sequenced. A
              radioimmune assay and complementation of the appropriate yeast mutants will
              further explore the function of the genes.  The response to changing
              environmental conditions such as variation in UV light intensity and
              oxygen-production by the modification of transcriptional regulation will be
              investigated. Additional Arabidopsis excision repair genes will be identified,
              characterized and mapped.    Plants can be expected to require highly efficient
              mechanisms for removal and repair of DNA damage since they are constantly
              exposed to sunlight and molecular oxygen, both factors known to cause DNA
              damage. Since the reproductive organs of plants are developmentally derived
              from undifferentiated somatic tissues, that task becomes even more critical in
              plants. Information derived from this on-going study will give greater insight
              into that repair process.
