Title       : Degradation of a Developmental Myosin Heavy Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9728924

Award Number: 9728924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie I. Rushbrook jrushbrook@netmail.hsckblyn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728924
Rushbrook
	At any point in time, a cellular protein is in a state of
              flux which represents the balance between synthesis and degradation.  While
              much has been learned about the two main degradation systems, the calpains and
              the ATP-dependent proteasome, there is no overall consensus on their relative
              importance or how they might interact.  A myosin heavy chain (HC) protein
              transition in the developing avian pectoralis major muscle provides a
              particularly attractive model system.  HC IV is expressed between 19-days in
              ovo and 3-days posthatch.  Between 3- and 5-days posthatch, it is dramatically
              replaced by HC V.  The half-life of HC IV is in markedly less that that of
              adult myosin which is approximately 30 days.  The adult HC is methylated at
              four positions, monomethyl Lys-36, trimethyl Lys-131 and -552 and 3-methyl
              His-756.  The functions of these modifications are obscure.  HC IV at 2-days
              posthatch and the isoforms which precede it in the embryo completely lack
              modification of Lys-36.  The entering HC V at 5-days posthatch, however, is
              clearly methylated at this position.  These observations suggest a role for
              methylation of Lys-36 in protection of the HC against degradation.  Lys-131 is
              not methylated in HC V at 5-days posthatch, ruling out such a role.  The
              methylation states of Lys-552 and His-756 during the transition are unknown. 
              The project incorporates the following hypothesis.  Gradual increase in
              cytosolic [Ca2+] in the days after hatching results in a calpain-mediated
              degradation of unmethylated HC IV at a site which activates a PEST sequence. 
              This leads to ubiquitination and degradation via the proteasome system. 
              Methylation at Lys-36 and possibly other residues, with the appearance of
              isoform V at 5-days posthatch, leads to conformational changes which stabilize
              against calpain clevage.  The goals of the project are:  1.  To complete
              information regarding methylation changes associated with the HC IV ->
              transition.  2.  To determine whether HCs IV and V in the posthatch PM are
              differentially susceptible to clevage by calpain.  3.  To determine whether the
              ATP-dependent proteasome system is involved in HC IV degradation.  4.  To carry
              out preliminary characterization of the methylase(s) which appear during the
              transition from HC IV to HC V.

	In muscle cells, specialized proteins form
              long filaments which overlap slightly.   When the muscle is stimulated to
              contract, the overlap of the filaments increases, shortening the muscle.  In a
              healthy person, these proteins are constanly being synthesized and degraded. 
              In times of disease and famine, their breakdown rate increases to provide small
              molecules that the body uses for energy.  While two major systems exist for
              degradation of cellular proteins, the calpains and the proteasome, there is no
              agreement as to their relative importance.  In this project, the cellular
              mechanism for degradation of a muscle protein which appears for a very short
              time during development will be determined.  In addition, usual differences in
              structure between it an its more mature counterparts will be investigated as
              the possible origin of the strikingly greater degradation rate for the
              developmental form.

