Title       : Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks in Mouse Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9728333

Award Number: 9728333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Jasin m-jasin@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jasin  9728333  Double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) induce recombination,
              especially between homologous chromosomes, which raises a number of questions
              relating to the mechanisms and products of recombination. This proposal
              addresses some of the key questions. A major objective is to understand the
              mechanism of DSB-induced gene conversion by examining events in mismatch repair
              deficient cells. The hypothesis is that the cellular mismatch repair system
              plays a role in DSB-induced recombination between diverged DNAs and influences
              the length of gene conversion tracts which have been observed. It will also be
              determined if DSBs overcome some of the barrier to recombination between
              diverged sequences. The second major objective is to determine if allelic
              recombination is associated with long conversion tracts and/or crossing-over,
              both of which may lead to large regions of chromosomal homozygosity. Induction
              of recombination between two different chromosomes will also be examined. In
              this study, the bipartite I-Sce I system will be utilized in mouse embryonic
              stem (ES) cells which are diploid, rapidly proliferating cells and are of
              importance in creating germ-line mutations.    The repair of damaged DNA is
              important for the maintenance of genomic integrity in all organisms. Unrepaired
              or imprecisely repaired DNA can lead to mutagenesis, cell death or cell
              transformation. DNA damage resulting in single- and double-strand DNA breaks
              can occur from both exogenous insults, such as ionizing radiation and drug
              therapies and endogenous metabolic pathways, including DNA replication and
              recombination. The understanding that is gained about normal cellular DSB
              repair processes, in particular, repair by homologous recombination, is key to
              basic science studies and has relevance to health and medicine.
