Title       : Biochemical Properties of gpNu1, a Phage Lambda Protein Required for Viral
               Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9728550

Award Number: 9728550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Catalano carlos.catalano@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Catalano  9728550  1. Technical  Packaging of DNA within an empty pre-formed
              capsid proceeds through an  ordered progression of nucleoprotein intermediates
              requires terminase, an  enzyme common to all of the double-stranded DNA
              bacteriophages.  The enzyme  subunits, gpNu1 and gpA, assemble onto a
              multi-element DNA binding site  generating a nucleoprotein complex, excising a
              single genome from the concatamer and inserting it into the capsid. This study
              examines, at the molecular level, the biochemical and biophysical properties of
              the lambda phage 1 gpNu1 protein which are responsible for the cooperative
              assembly and unusual stability of the nucleoprotein intermediates involved. The
              aims are to understand the roles of gpNu1 self-association interactions and
              gpNu1 gpA protein protein interactions in the assembly and stability of the
              nucleoprotein complexes critical to the assembly.  The experiments are designed
              to provide a detailed understanding of the thermodynamic linkages between gpNu1
              self-association and cooperative binding to DNA, and to the subsequent assembly
              of gpA and a catalytically competent genome packaging complex.  This study also
              seeks to define functional domains within the gpNu1  polypeptide which are
              responsible for the observed oligomerization of gpNu1,  for gpNu1 gpA
              interactions, and for cooperative binding to DNA. Since the terminase enzyme is
              common to many double-stranded DNA viruses, findings from this study may be
              generally applicable to the understanding of other viral assembly and packing
              mechanisms.  2. Non-Technical  A variety of biological processes require the
              assembly of multiple proteins  onto specific sites within the chromosomes of
              cells and/or viruses.  Many of  these complexes initially assemble as stable
              intermediates which are  subsequently transformed into highly mobile biological
              machines.  Elaborate  nucleoprotein (DNA and protein) complexes are responsible
              for critical  biological processes including the replication of chromosomes,
              the synthesis  of  messenger RNA, and the assembly of infectious viruses.  This
              study is to elucidate the process of viral assembly within the cell and the
              complex process of viral chromosome packaging, specifically in the involvement
              of  the terminase enzyme, the multi-protein machines which insert the viral
              chromosome within a protective protein shell in bacteriophage lambda, a virus
              which infects the bacteria E. coli. This enzyme, which is common to many
              double-stranded DNA viruses, is an integral part of an ordered series of
              nucleoprotein complexes which are critical to viral assembly.  Experiments are
              carried out to examine the biochemical and biophysical properties of gpNu1, a
              phage l packaging protein, which are responsible for the assembly and unusual
              stability of the nucleoprotein intermediates involved in viral chromosome
              packaging.  Importantly, the data derived from these studies will additionally
              yield insight into the basic principles driving the assembly of stable
              nucleoprotein complexes involved in a variety of biological processes critical
              to both viral and cellular replication.
