Title       : Modulation of Sensory Transmission by Virally Delivered Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9728736

Award Number: 9728736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Wilson sw@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The somatic sensory system carries information on touch,  temperature and
              pain to the brain.  Nerve cells innervating the  skin called 'first-order'
              neurons send signals to the spinal cord  segments, where they make functional
              connections called synapses  to neurons that carry information up and down the
              spinal column.  Biochemical compounds called neurotransmitters are released by
              the  first-order cells to activate or inhibit these target 'second-  order'
              cells, and an important class of these signaling molecules  is known as
              peptides.  This project addresses the role of the  peptides enkephalin,
              neuropeptide Y (NPY), and calcitonin-gene  related peptide (CGRP) in this
              neurotransmission.  Particular  genes or anti-sense constructs will be
              delivered by a novel  methodology utilizing modified viruses, to increase or
              decrease  the production of these peptides in the first-order sensory  neurons.
               Molecular analysis of gene expression, a behavioral  assay for sensation, and
              pharmacological manipulation will  determine how the peptides act, and what
              receptor molecules on the  cell surface membranes are responsible for their
              action.  Results  are expected to clarify how enkephalins and NPY inhibit
              sensory  transmission, while CGRP facilitates it.     This project will have
              impact beyond simply somatosensory  transmission, because it will clarify
              mechanisms of action for  particular neurotransmitters used in other parts of
              the brain, and  the gene-delivery methods to be perfected here will provide a 
              powerful tool to study the roles of other molecular components in  neuronal
              function.
