Title       : Genomic Molecular Evolution in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9728230

Award Number: 9728230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Milkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Milkman  9728230       The intent of this project is to relate several molecular
              and population properties to the diversity and evolution of the E. coli species
              genome.  Evidence is increasing that a high proportion of the E. coli genome
              consists of genes imported over tens of millions of years from phylogenetically
              distant (but physically close) sources. Since the genome size must be limited,
              some existing genes must be eliminated from each chromosome -- but not
              necessarily the same genes from every chromosome. For each gene added
              relatively quickly to the species, 100 genes (for example) might decline in
              frequency by 1%. This would lead to abundant presence/absence variation (in
              addition to allelic variation, already well known). The complete E. coli strain
              MG1655 DNA sequence has revealed many genes whose specific function is not
              known. Some (not all) of these may have reduced value and disappear from
              individual lines without leaving the species altogether. In a diverse set of
              strains, PCR and Southern hybridization will test for presence/absence
              polymorphism. Now in the two hypervariable regions, replacements are selected
              which carry novel variants (O-antigens or restriction-modification systems)
              until they are no longer rare. This results in a downward gradient of
              replacement rates outward from the selected common anchor point, since
              replacements vary in length. Using 11 strains relatively recently diverged from
              a common ancestor, a place near the well-defined hypervariable rfb region is
              chosen in which each individual strain acquires, during the period since
              divergence, about one distinct replacement from more distant strains.
              Sequencing defines the end of the replacement. Finally, since bacterial
              chromosomes are dividing progressively though the entire cell cycle, fragments
              of incoming DNA can be incorporated into one or another nascent chromosome and
              detected by the restriction analysis of PCR fragments amplified from
              segregating daughter colonies identified by standard markers.     This  project
              exploits the completion of one E. coli genome, which defines in ultimate detail
              the entire genetic content of a representative member of the species. As a
              biological species cannot be described fully without a complete organism, a
              species genome cannot be fully described from a fragmentary set of  genes. Now,
              given the available analytic tools, including biochemical methods and
              population genetic theory, the structural diversity (DNA sequence variation,
              including presence/absence), mechanisms of change (transfer of DNA to an E.
              coli cell from a different member of the species or from outside the species;
              production of several variant types after a single transfer; various forms of
              natural selection), and the dynamics of change (rates of DNA transfer as a
              function of chromosomal region , clonal sweeps -- the multiplication and spread
              of genome-wide clones, as well as smaller regions of the chromosome) can be 
              considered and addressed experimentally. This leads to a clearer understanding
              of the specific genetic properties of various sorts of E. coli as well as the
              genetic properties common to the entire species. Many of the results should be
              applicable to higher organisms.
