Title       : Enzyme Structure-Function Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9728162

Award Number: 9728162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. James Remington jim@uoxray.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728162  Remington  The primary focus of this investigation will be to determine
              three dimensional structures of enzymes that catalyze the deprotonation of a
              simple carbon acid, acetylCoenzyme A, as a first step in the overall reaction. 
              The enzymes are allosteric (regulated) Azotobacter citrate synthase and
              Escherichia coli malate synthase, which are unrelated in amino acid sequence
              but catalyze virtually identical reactions.  A wide variety of acetylCoenzyme A
              substrate analogs, that vary in their ability to mimic proposed reaction
              intermediates, are available or are straightforward to synthesize.  The
              structures of complexes of these analogs with the two enzymes will be
              determined by high resolution X-ray crystallography, and the results will be
              compared to those already obtained for the same compounds bound to
              nonallosteric chicken citrate synthase, which have been determined at up to
              1.5A resolution.  In addition, some active-site mutants of chicken citrate
              synthase will be created and their structures determined in order to ascertain
              the functional role of certain amino acids.  A minor focus of this project, the
              structure of yeast serine carboxypeptidase in complex with an extremely tight
              binding, new class of cytosolic proteinase inhibitor (25 kDa Ic, Ki = 10-10 M)
              will be determined.  The complex has been crystallized and the structure will
              be determined by standard molecular replacement methods using the known
              structure of serine carboxypeptidase.  The significance of the major focus of
              the project is that it is not understood how an enzyme can deprotonate a carbon
              atom without using unusual cofactors.  This reaction does not take place in
              solution under physiological conditions in the absence of a catalyst.  By
              "freezing" two unrelated enzymes that catalyze this reaction as the first step
              and comparing their structures, new insight will be generated as to the exact
              nature of the intermediate(s), leading to a more complete understanding of this
              crucial reaction.  Compounds that are rela ted to the different proposed
              intermediates, but are unable to complete subsequent steps of the reaction, are
              available to make this study straightforward.  The second approach will be to
              compare the active site structures of  regulated citrate synthases with those
              of unregulated citrate synthases.  Structural changes at the active site caused
              by the external effector (NADH) should yield additional clues as to how the
              intermediate is generated and thus how the reaction is catalyzed.  Finally,
              mutant citrate synthases have already been generated that are severely impaired
              in one or more aspects of catalysis, and their structures, which have yet to be
              determined, are expected to be very informative.  The significance of the minor
              focus of this project is that the serine carboxypeptidase inhibitor Ic has
              multiple roles in the cell as defined by genetic analysis, but is of unknown
              structure.  Completion  of the three dimensional structure of the complex of
              serine carboxypeptidase with the inhibitor will therefore reveal a novel
              structure, expanding the database of protein folds in general, and will
              additionally lead to a deeper understanding of the catalytic mechanism of
              serine carboxypeptidases, and how they recognize their unique substrates.
