Title       : The Contractile Vacuole Complex of Dictyostelium discoideum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9728403

Award Number: 9728403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Clarke clarkem@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728403  Clarke    Abstract    All eukaryotic cells contain a multi-subunit
              enzyme called the vacuolar proton pump or V-ATPase which transports protons
              across cellular membranes.  In mammals this enzyme is needed for kidney
              function, uptake of neurotransmitter molecules, acidification of intracellular
              compartments such as endosomes and lysosomes, and bone resorption.  The present
              study uses a simple amoeboid cell, Dictyostelium, to explore the functions of
              the V-ATPase.  These cells contain a V-ATPase similar to that in mammals.  The
              pump is enriched in a specialized organelle called the contractile vacuole
              complex, which sequesters and then expels excess fluid from the cell, much as
              the kidney does in higher organisms.  Using Dictyostelium cells, it is possible
              to explore the functions of the V-ATPase by altering the genes that encode its
              subunits.  The gene for a large transmembrane subunit of the V-ATPase, whose
              function is poorly understood, has been cloned.  Attempts to disrupt this gene
              (vatM) or to block its function by antisense mutagenesis have not been
              successful and argue that this is an essential gene.  However, a conditional
              mutant has been created by replacing the promotor of the gene with a different
              promotor to change how the expression of the gene is regulated.  Under
              conditions that greatly reduce the expression of this mutant gene, cells that
              carry the gene grow poorly and mislocalize other proton pump subunits.  These
              mutant cells, deficient in active proton pumps, will be used to determine the
              roles of the V-ATPase in pH homeostasis and the acidification of the endosomal
              and lysosomal compartments in Dictyostelium.  Antibody probes for proton pump
              subunits and for other components of the contractile vacuoles and endosomes
              will be used to monitor the organization of these compartments and their
              interrelationships.  In addition, fluorescent versions of these proteins will
              be prepared as tracers to observe the dynamics of these compartments in living
              cells.  In other experiment s, the redistribution of proton pumps from internal
              compartments to the plasma membrane will be examined since this also occurs in
              mammalian cells where these pumps are found.  The studies as a whole will
              explore several important features and functions of the V-ATPase in a model
              cell system that resembles mammalian cells but is more amenable to molecular
              genetic manipulation.
