Title       : RUI: Vaccinia Virus dUTPase: Role in DNA Replication, Regulation by
               Phosphorylation, and Substrate Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a9728474

Award Number: 9728474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Roseman nroseman@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9728474  Roseman  1. Technical  Vaccinia replication occurs in the cytoplasm of
              infected cells with a high degree of independence from host functions, since
              virus encodes most, if not all, of the enzymes required for DNA metabolism and
              replication, including the deoxyuridine triphosphatase (dUTPase). dUTPase helps
              maintain the fidelity of DNA replication by lowering the dUTP pool, high levels
              of dU incorporation into replicating DNA is a lethal event due to the excision
              repair process which causes double-strand breaks.  It provides also the
              precursor for TMP production by thymidylate synthetase. dUTPase deficient
              viruses exhibit reduced replication and/or pathogenicity. The vaccinia enzyme
              has high amino acid identity to its human homologue (63%).  This study explores
              the role of phosphorylation in the regulation of both viral and human dUTPase
              activities. This is achieved by identifying the phosphorylated site(s) by
              peptide mapping and phosphoamino acid analysis. The effect of mutation at these
              sites on enzyme activity is analyzed in vitro and in vivo. Also studied is
              whether the vaccinia enzyme is a substrate for either of two virally encoded
              protein kinases. The function of this enzyme in DNA synthesis and replication
              fidelity is assessed by using dUTPase deficient virus with  -galactosidase as a
              marker. The role of a critical amino acid in the uracil binding motif that
              differs from that in the vaccinia protein is assessed by mutagenesis. Nickel
              affinity chromatography in conjunction with His-tagged is used in enzyme
              purification.     2. Non-technical    Vaccinia virus replication occurs in the
              cytoplasm of infected cells with a high degree of independence from host
              functions.  This is in part due to the fact that the virus encodes most, if not
              all, of the enzymes required for DNA metabolism and replication, including the
              deoxyuridine triphosphatase (dUTPase) enzyme.  This enzyme helps maintain the
              fidelity of DNA replication and provides a precursor for DNA replication.  It
              is essential in a  number of organisms, and dUTPase deficient viruses exhibit
              reduced replication and/or pathogenicity. The vaccinia enzyme has a high amino
              acid identity to its human homologue (63%). This study thus explores the
              regulation of both viral and human dUTPase activities and the role of other
              viral enzymes in this regulation.  Mutagenesis approach is used to assess the
              role of the enzyme in viral DNA synthesis and replication fidelity, and of
              critical amino acids in the uracil binding site that differs between the human
              and the vaccinia UTPase.
