Title       : Developmental Consequences of Mutations in the Steel Growth Factor of Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a9728428

Award Number: 9728428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen S. Schumaker                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Bedell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Intercellular communication is essential to the development of numerous cell
              types in every metazoan studied. Often, such communication is achieved through
              the action of growth factors (GFs) that are expressed by cells adjacent to
              their target cells, and that bind to and activate specific receptors located on
              the surface of the target cell. The receptor then activates a series of
              downstream signaling molecules that ultimately act to alter gene expression and
              cellular functions. In lower eukaryotes, the analysis of mutants that are
              defective for various signaling molecules have provided valuable information
              about structure-function relationships of different signaling molecules and
              about interactions between different components of signaling pathways. However,
              similar genetic analyses in higher eukaryotes are usually much more limited. 
              The proposed research focuses on the role of mast cell growth factor (Mgf), the
              ligand for the Kit receptor tyrosine kinase, in development of several cell
              lineages in mice. Both Mgf and Kit are highly conserved in all vertebrates and
              are structurally and functionally related to other GFs and receptors.
              Interestingly, the Mgf/Kit pathway is required for development of diverse types
              of cells, including erythrocytes, mast cells, melanocytes and germ cells. While
              many functions of Mgf and Kit in these different cells must overlap, there is
              accumulating evidence for some cell-restricted functions. A powerful genetic
              resource for studying this pathway is a large collection (>40) of different
              mouse alleles at the locus encoding Mgf, called Steel (SI), and the locus
              encoding Kit, called Dominant spotting (W). Such large allelic series are
              unusual in the mouse, as only a few other loci in the mouse have more than one
              or two mutant alleles. Furthermore, this is the only mammalian receptor-ligand
              pair where large numbers of mutant alleles of each gene are available. The
              studies described in this proposal are aimed at understanding the molecular and
              developmental deficiencies in 16 different SI mutants. Based on the results of
              these studies, future experiments will characterize the biochemical defect(s)
              associated with each mutant. Ultimately, all of these studies should provide a
              wealth of information on the functions of this important signaling molecule
              during in viva development of diverse types of cells.
