Title       : Pattern Formation in the Drosophila Eye Disc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9728140

Award Number: 9728140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica Treisman treisman@saturn.med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Treisman  9728140        The Drosophila eye consists of a highly ordered array
              of identical sub-units, each containing a defined set of photoreceptors.
              Photoreceptor differentiation begins at the posterior margin of the larval eye
              imaginal disc and gradually progresses anteriorly, in a process which requires
              the activity of hedgehog (hh) protein secreted by the differentiated
              photoreceptors. The initiation of differentiation is driven by the TGF-Beta
              family member decapentaplegic (dpp), which is expressed at the posterior and
              lateral margins of the eye disc. The inhibitory effect of the Wnt family member
              wingless (wg), present at the lateral margins, restricts initiation to the
              posterior margin. The mechanisms by which wg inhibits the function of dpp
              laterally and dpp prevents the expression of wg posteriorly are not understood.
              Dr. Treisman proposes to determine the molecular basis for their effects on
              each other by studying the effects of loss of function or ectopic activity of
              components of the dpp and wg signaling pathways. She will then investigate
              whether dpp and wg are regulated by, and mediate the effects of, five genes
              that are required for eye formation. She has also conducted a screen for new
              mutations affecting the size and shape of the eye, which may affect genes
              required for eye disc specification or patterning. This screen was done by
              making clones of homozygous mutant cells in the eyes of phenotypically wild
              type heterozygous flies, allowing us to examine the role in eye development of
              genes that are also required in the embryo. Dr. Treisman plans to characterize
              these mutations and clone the novel genes that are required for cells in the
              eye disc to develop as retinal tissue. The observed structural and functional
              homology between the Pax-6 proteins encoded by Drosophila eyeless, mouse Small
              eye and human Aniridia confirms the similarity of the basic mechanisms
              underlying eye development in flies and vertebrates. This research is expected
              to identify novel molecules which are li kely to function in the development of
              vertebrates as well as of Drosophila.
