Title       : RUI: The Synthesis and Degradation of a Unique Bacterial Polymer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9728609

Award Number: 9728609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Allen mallen@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adele J. Wolfson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy H. Kolodny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9728609  Allen  The objective of the research is to study the synthesis and
              degradation of the only known nonprotein polymer whose function is the storage
              of nitrogen, using a multidisciplinary approach involving three faculty members
              and undergraduate women students in chemistry, biological chemistry and
              biological sciences.   The metabolism of cyanophycin (multi-L-arginyl poly
              L-aspartic acid ) will be investigated by enzyme analysis and purification and
              by in vivo and in vitro NMR  spectroscopy after labeling cyanobacteria with 15
              N-labeled nitrogen sources.  Nitrogen metabolism will be studied during normal
              growth and during growth under various conditions of nutrient stress. 
              Experiments will be designed to determine whether cyanophycin has a dynamic
              role in cyanobacterial metabolism.    Cyanophycin is the only known nonprotein
              polymer whose function is the storage of   nitrogen.  Little is known about
              mechanisms of its synthesis and degradation although it accumulates in large
              amounts during nutrient stress and during nitrogen fixation.  It is mobilized
              when cyanobacteria are starved for nitrogen.  If cyanophycin is an obligatory
              intermediate in the flow of nitrogen into the metabolic pool, its role in
              cyanobacterial metabolism will be central.  It is therefore important to
              understand regulatory strategies and how storage is integrated with
              intermediary metabolism.  These studies will also help define how macronutrient
              limitation and stress alter metabolic fluxes in cells.  The strategy of
              accumulating nitrogen when it is available and using it later must impart an
              important selective advantage to the organism employing that strategy.  Studies
              of the mechanisms involved in specific environmental responses will provide new
              information about gene regulation and pathways leading from the sensing of
              environmental signals to the regulation of enzymatic activities.
