Title       : Receptor Internalization: Endogenous Regulation of Opioid Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9728491

Award Number: 9728491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Micevych pmicevych@npimain.medsch.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Sinchak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Micevych,  9728491    Receptors are plasma membrane associated molecules that 
              recognize intercellular signals.  G-protein-coupled  receptors are perhaps the
              most diverse family of membrane  bound receptors and mediate important
              functions in the  nervous system such as development, timing of puberty and 
              menopause, and nociception.  Dr. Micevych has been  interested in studying the
              mechanisms of cellular regulation  of neuropeptide receptors that belong to a
              class of G-  protein coupled receptors.  A new methodology, termed  "receptor
              internalization" presents a novel approach for the  visualization of receptor
              activation.  Internalization is  the sequestration of agonist-receptor
              complexes into  endosomal compartments within cells.  This is important  since
              removal of receptors from the plasma membrane prevents  further stimulation by
              intercellular signals.  An  internalized distribution of receptors is a marker
              of  activated receptors while a plasma membrane distribution  indicates no
              activation.  Dr. Micevych is developing and  refining the immunocytochemical
              techniques that will allow  him to monitor the activation of specific receptors
              on  individual cells or even single dendrites.  He will use this  methodology
              to define the neurochemical signature by which  the gonadal steroids estrogen
              and progesterone affect brain  activity to regulate reproductive behavior. 
              Specifically,  Dr. Micevych will use a combination of confocal fluorescence 
              and brightfield microscopy to determine the role of two  recently discovered
              endogenous opioid peptides, endomorphin-  1 and orphanin FQ/nociceptin, and
              their receptors in the  regulation of steroid-induced reproductive behavior. 
              This  exciting and novel method for the visualization of receptor  activation
              of discrete neurons will provide a better general  understanding of receptor
              function and neural circuits as  well as shed new light on the mechanisms by
              which estrogen  and progesterone act to stimulate neural circuits that 
              underlie behavior.
