Title       : Computerization of Mollusk Collections at the Academy of Natural Sciences of
               Philadelphia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9728996

Award Number: 9728996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Rosenberg rosenberg@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will support completion of computerization of  the recent mollusk
              collection at the Academy of Natural  Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP).  This is
              the oldest mollusk  collections in the country, and the and the second largest 
              catalogued one in the world.  It currently has about 440,000  catalogued lots
              containing about 12 million specimens,  including about 40,000 lots preserved
              in alcohol that  provide excellent material for anatomical and DNA studies. 
              ANSP has specimens from virtually all parts of the world; it  is unrivaled for
              shallow-water marine mollusks from the  tropical Indo-Pacific.  Other strengths
              are shallow-water  Western Atlantic mollusks, and worldwide freshwater and land
               molluasks. Many of the land and freshwater mollusks  represent species now
              threatened, endangered or extinct.    Perhaps the most important part of the
              collection is  the12,000 lots of type specimens from more than 400 
              researchers.  These are the specimens used in the naming of  species; they
              serve as standards of comparison for  confirming the species identities.  ANSP
              through the  research activities of staff and purchase and trade over  more
              than 150 years has assembled one of the world's largest  collections of
              molluscan type specimens.  The collection is  used by scientists throughout the
              world.  In the past five  years, almost 300 loans totaling more than 28,000
              specimens  have been made, and more than 200 scientific article have 
              acknowledged use  of collection resources.    Mollusks are excellent indicators
              for studying the health of  ecosystems.  They comprise the most diverse animal
              phylum  after the arthropods, with more than 100,000 species, and  are abundant
              in terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats.  Although less diverse than
              arthropods, mollusks have three  advantages over them for environmental
              studies. 1) Mollusk  shells have accretionary growth, and incorporate isotopes 
              and chemicals from the environment into their shells thereby  providing a
              direct record of environmenta l change.  Arthropods shed the exoskeleton,
              losing this record of  change 2)  Adult mollusks are  generally poor at
              dispersing, so their shells reflect local  environmental conditions. 3) Mollusk
              shells persist after  the death of the animal, showing what species previously 
              occurred at a site, unlike arthropod exoskeletons which  rapidly decay.  High
              diversity, accretionary growth, low  dispersal, and persistence of shells
              combine to make  mollusks premier organisms for monitoring environmental 
              health.  Mollusk shells themselves provide the materials for  chemical and
              isotopic analyses that can determine causes of  faunal change.   
              Computerization of the collections will help in determining  changes in the
              historical distribution patterns of mollusk  species.  Little such information
              is currently available,  but is needed not only by scientists conducting basic 
              systematic and ecological research on mollusks, but to  provide baseline data
              for monitoring the health of  ecosystems.
