Title       : Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9728805

Award Number: 9728805
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4992104            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rae Zimmerman rae.zimmerman@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Sparrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1057,1338,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Title: CMS 97-28805  P.I.:  Rae Zimmerman and Roy Sparrow, New York University 
              "Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems"  The current state of
              infrastructure services and facilities  relative to public expectations
              underscores the need for an  institutional mechanism to bring together diverse
              groups to  provide an integrative framework for infrastructure.  New  York
              University, with three collaborators - Cornell  University, the University of
              Southern California, and the  Polytechnic University of New York - will
              establish an  Institute for Civil Infrastructure Systems (ICIS) within  NYU's
              Wagner School of Public Service.  This Institute  builds on partnering
              institution expertise in infrastructure  engineering, management, and social
              science, and  incorporates a diverse set of participating organizations  and
              individuals.      The Institute's vision is to facilitate, build partnerships 
              and networks, supported by a strong educational initiative  and information
              technology to organize and transfer  information to the CIS community. The ICIS
              will be an  incubator for ideas and a marketplace for information to  promote
              connectivity.  It is a new approach, combining  technical and social science
              expertise critical to the  future direction of American's infrastructure.     
              The ICIS strategic plan is organized around sustainability  and coordinated
              renewal, education and learning, community  awareness and participation,
              performance measurement  assessments, and research needs assessment programs. 
              Sustainability is central to other program operations.  ICIS  outputs include
              white papers, and electronic information  system to support connectivity;
              conferences/forums to set  ICIS agendas; and demonstration/pilot projects for
              education  and community outreach.  Self-evaluation and development  functions
              are included.  The organization includes a  director, and executive committee
              coordinating program work  and technical advisory, management oversight, and 
              development boards.  The ICIS is chartered  by NSF to  function for up to five
              years with NSF support.      ***
