Title       : Protein Diffusion and Interaction in Concentrated DNA Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9728165

Award Number: 9728165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor A. Bloomfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728165  Bloomfield  DNA functions in crowded, strongly interacting solutions,
              mainly while interacting with proteins.  The equilibrium and dynamic aspects of
              protein-DNA interactions are strongly influenced by the environment. When the
              volume occupancy of a solution reaches more than thirty percent, as it does
              within cells, simple extrapolations from dilute solution behavior become
              totally inadequate.  The goal in this project is to develop a better
              experimental and theoretical understanding of the ways in which high
              concentrations of DNA and other polymers influence the diffusional dynamics of
              proteins which bind to DNA.  The three specific aim are (1) To characterize the
              diffusional motion of proteins within a crowded DNA environment and in DNA
              solutions which also contain crowding agents such as dextran, Ficoll, and PEG,
              so as to understand the effects of excluded volume, ionic interactions, and
              specific binding interactions. (2) To determine how crowding influences the
              relative importance of one-dimensional and three-dimensional diffusion in the
              action of restriction enzymes.  (3) To use Brownian dynamics simulation of
              protein diffusion in crowded DNA solutions, to gain insight into the ways in
              which ionic strength-dependent volume exclusion and nonspecific binding affect
              the search of regulatory proteins for their specific binding sites.  The major
              tools will be fluorescence photobleaching recovery and dynamic light scattering
              to measure diffusion, gel electrophoresis to follow kinetics of restriction
              enzyme action, and Brownian dynamics to simulate diffusion in complex,
              interacting systems.  The general significance of this research is to gain
              insight into the effect of the crowded, strongly interacting conditions
              prevailing inside cells, and how these conditions affect the dynamic diffusion
              and reaction processes involved in gene regulation.  ***
