Title       : Role of the HEMR Receptor in Utilization of Heme-Protein Complexes by Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9728215

Award Number: 9728215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Stojiljkovic stojiljk@microbiol.microbio.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728215  Stojiljkovic   Biosynthesis of heme in bacteria requires a significant
              amount of cell energy and uses 1 to 10% of the total cell iron content. The
              high energy costs of heme biosynthesis coupled with the constant famine which
              bacteria face in their natural environments has favored the development of heme
              scavenging systems. Gram-negative bacteria express heme-specific outer membrane
              receptors that allow usage of heme compounds as sources of iron and porphyrin.
              Protein domains and amino acid residues involved in binding, extraction, and
              transport of heme by any heme receptor are currently unknown. The Y.
              enterocolitica HemR receptor will be studied as the model of a heme-specific
              outer membrane receptor. HemR is unique among Gram-negative receptors since it
              enables usage of a wide variety of heme-protein complexes. In aim 1 of the
              project the role of conserved histidine residues and "FRAP" and "NPNL" boxes in
              HemR function will be studied by site-directed mutagenesis and epitope tagging.
              In aim 2 of the project the molecular basis for the extraordinarily broad
              spectrum of usable HemR ligands will be studied using PCR mutagenesis and toxic
              compounds that specifically inhibit growth of HemR+ cells. Research described
              under aim 3 of the project will quantify defects in ligand and TonB binding by
              the mutant HemR receptors and will study the mechanism by which the HemR
              receptor releases heme from heme-protein complexes in vitro. These studies
              will, for the first time for any heme receptor, identify and characterize
              receptor domains that are involved in binding and utilization of different
              heme-protein complexes and determine the mechanism by which heme receptors
              extract heme from different protein complexes.     The heme molecule is one of
              the most important enzyme cofactors in nature. Heme is an essential cofactor in
              oxygen transport, oxygen metabolism, and electron transfer in the majority of
              living beings. Because of the importance of the heme molecule, the majority of
              organisms have develo ped systems for heme scavenging from the environment.
              Although ubiquitous in nature, these systems are poorly understood. The goal of
              this project is to understand the mechanism of action and identify functionally
              important protein domains of the first bacterial heme receptor to be
              characterized, the HemR of Y. enterocolitica.
