Title       : Identification of Proteins Affecting Assembly, Regulation, and Function of
               Thylakoid Protein Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9728400

Award Number: 9728400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem F. Vermaas WIM@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project will utilize the genomic sequence of the cyanobacterium
              Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (accessible through
              http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano.html) to functionally identify "new"
              proteins involved in the regulation, assembly and function of protein complexes
              that catalyze electron transfer in thylakoid membranes of this cyanobacterium.
              This project involves positive selection for spontaneous mutants (1) in which
              photosystem II activity is decreased or abolished, or (2) in which regulation
              of expression of particular genes has been modified. Positive selection will
              occur by screening for high-light tolerance of the Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803
              strain that lacks photosystem I; this strain is sensitive to high light but can
              be propagated at high light intensity if photosystem II is impaired or if rates
              of electron transport processes in the thylakoid membrane or the regulation by
              particular redox components have been altered.
The availability of the genomic
              DNA sequence of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 provides a powerful approach to a
              rapid identification of the location of spontaneous mutations that lead to
              high-light tolerance of the photosystem I-less strain. DNA from these
              positively selected mutants will be fragmented by restriction enzymes; each
              digest (treated with one enzyme) will be size-separated on a gel and gel slices
              (each reflecting a certain size range of DNA) will be tested for functional
              complementation of the original (high-light sensitive) strain from which the
              spontaneous mutant was derived. A complete restriction map of the Synechocystis
              sp. PCC 6803 genome has been constructed for 16 enzymes that cut this
              cyanobacterial genome 300-1000 times each. For each of the 16 restriction
              enzymes, the resulting fragments, identified through their genomic position,
              have been sorted by size and compiled into a table. Based on the size range of
              the fragments that can functionally complement for each restriction enzyme, an
              appropriate size range of restriction fragments can be selected from each
              table. These restriction fragments (each identified through their position on
              the genome) are pooled, and are then sorted according to the genomic nucleotide
              number at the end of each fragment. Upon inspection of this sorted list,
              clusters of nucleotide numbers can be identified. Generally only a single
              cluster can be found in which there is one representative from each of the
              selected size regions for each of the enzymes. By identifying the region that
              is common between all sequences in this cluster, the domain carrying the
              mutation of interest (generally not longer than 2 kbp) can be determined. The
              domain of interest will be amplified by PCR, the mutation will be determined,
              and mutations in unknown genes can thus be simply mapped and identified, even
              without cloning.
Some of the complementing secondary mutations may be in known
              genes, but others will be in open reading frames for which no function is known
              yet. These open reading frames will be of particular interest as the results
              obtained will help to assign a role to these known sequences with unknown
              function. This method already has led to the identification of an open reading
              frame that is similar to ycf39 from chloroplasts and that affects photosystem
              II function in mutants. The next part of the project will be the preliminary
              analysis of the role of open reading frames that were identified. The types of
              analysis will depend on the open reading frame and on the phenotype of the
              mutant, but may involve the following: (1) sequence homology searches, (2)
              functional analysis of electron transport, (3) gene expression studies, and (4)
              protein synthesis and degradation measurements.
This work will lead to the
              identification of currently unknown genes whose products may be involved in
              photosystem II assembly, in electron transfer out of the plastoquinone pool in
              thylakoid membranes, or in control of regulatory processes in the cell. This is
              an open field, but rapid progress will be made now the genomic sequencing of
              Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 has been completed, enabling effective and
              comprehensive means of analysis such as the one described here. This area of
              research not only is an important complement to large-scale sequencing efforts,
              in that it provides information regarding the function of open reading frames,
              but also is expected to provide novel insights into the regulation mechanisms
              and assembly processes required for electron transport in thylakoid
              membranes.

