Title       : Chitinase-related Growth Factors in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2000     
File        : a9728197

Award Number: 9728197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bryant pjbryant@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Peter J. Bryant    Molecular and genetic methods will be used to investigate the
              functions of a newly discovered family of Imaginal Disc Growth Factors (IDGFs)
              from Drosophila. The factors were discovered in conditioned medium from
              imaginal disc cultures, and have been shown to be related to chitinases rather
              than to previously known growth factors. They cooperate with insulin to
              stimulate the proliferation, polarization and motility of imaginal disc cells
              in vitro. The first goal is to identify the functions of IDGFs in vivo by
              isolating and characterizing mutations and deficiencies in the genes encoding
              these proteins. P-element mutagenesis and radiation mutagenesis will be used to
              produce loss-of-function mutations and deficiencies of the IDGF genes, and the
              mutant phenotypes produced by single and multiple losses will be analyzed.
              Genetic methods will also be used to determine whether individual IDGFs can
              compensate for loss of other members of the family, and to test the hypothesis
              that these proteins are secreted by the fat body into the blood. The second
              goal is to test the effects of each IDGF and of combinations of IDGFs, with and
              without insulin, on cell proliferation and polarization both in cell lines and
              in larval tissues. Each IDGF will be produced in a baculoviral expression
              system. The binding of IDGFs to cells and to proteins will be studied in order
              to determine whether these proteins interact with a cell-surface receptor, and
              the possibility that they interact directly with insulin will be tested. The
              IDGFs will also be tested for chitinase activity. The third goal is to test the
              hypothesis that the expression of IDGF genes is under the control of the known
              transcription factor serpent, which has an appropriate expression pattern and
              DNA-binding properties. The discovery of these proteins opens up a variety of
              new approaches to the problem of growth control in Drosophila.
