Title       : Crystallographic Study of a Quinoprotein Electron Transfer System: Methylamine
               Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9728885

Award Number: 9728885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. S. Mathews MATHEWS@BIOCHEM.WUSTL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728885  Mathews  Structural studies will be carried out on the
              quinoprotein-electron transfer systems methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH) from
              Paracoccus denitrificans and aromatic amine dehydrogenase (AADH) by the methods
              of x-ray diffraction.  Three proteins are involved in the first system, MADH,
              amicyanin and cytochrome c551i.  MADH is an H2L2  dimer of 124 kDa and contains
              the unusual cofactor tryptophan tryptophylquinone (TTQ).  Amicyanin is a blue
              copper protein of 12.5 kDa which interacts specifically with MADH.  Cytochrome
              c551i is a 17.5 kDa protein which can accept electrons from amicyanin and
              transfer them via another cytochrome to a terminal oxidase.  The structures of
              MADH, amicyanin, the binary complex of MADH with amicyanin and the ternary
              complex of MADH, amicyanin and cytochrome c551i have been determined.  AADH is
              an H2L2 heterotetramer of 114 kDa and also contains TTQ.  Its electron acceptor
              is azurin, a blue copper protein of 15 kDa.  Structures of the native complexes
              will be refined at high resolution and those of several redox variants of the
              binary and ternary complexes will be analyzed. Mutants of amicyanin and of MADH
              in the complexes will be studied to analyze the structural changes caused by
              these mutations.  Studies of MADH and its electron transfer complexes will also
              be carried out after reaction with substrates and inhibitors and in different
              redox states.  The refinement of two native and of two inhibited forms of MADH
              from Methylophilus W3A1, which uses a cytochrome rather than amicyanin as the
              primary electron acceptor, will be completed.  A series of studies of MADH from
              two other organisms, Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 and Methylobacillus
              flagellatum KT will also be studied.  Finally, the structure of AADH and its
              putative complex with azurin will be determined and compared with the
              Paracoccus enzyme.  Electron transfer is fundamental to many biological
              processes, but is difficult to study structurally since the components are
              usually insoluble and cannot b e crystallized.  The proposed studies of the
              MADH and AADH enzyme systems will provide valuable information about this
              process.  The interaction of the various components of this soluble electron
              transport system define molecular features important for recognition and
              control of electron transfer and define likely pathways for electron flow.  The
              proposed mutational and ligand-induced perturbations of the MADH system will
              further probe this complex process.  In addition, the molecular details of
              substrate oxidation by the TTQ cofactor will shed light on how this cofactor
              functions in vivo and how it differs from other, more common redox cofactors. 
              TTQ is unusual because it is obtained directly from the fusion of two amino
              acid side chains coded by genomic DNA rather than from a separate biosynthetic
              pathway.  The MADH and AADH systems are well suited to provide an understanding
              of these important  processes at the molecular level.
