Title       : Evolution of Telencephalic Neuronal Architecture: Anatomical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9728155

Award Number: 9728155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann B. Butler abbutler@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Butler  IBN-9728155  In mammals, the neocortex which receives diverse sensory
              inputs and include sites of higher cognitive functions, forms from the
              telencephalic pallium. The highly laminar, or layered, arrangement of the
              neurons in neocortex is an exception to the way in which this brain area
              develops in most of the major radiations of vertebrates. Among the latter,
              elaboration and expansion of the telencephalic pallium has occurred
              independently over evolution and is characterized by the presence of various
              nuclear groups, i.e., the neurons are arranged in a nonlaminar manner. One
              current hypothesis (proposed by Karten) is that these nuclei in the elaborated
              pallia of nonmammals represent equivalent cell populations to the cell
              populations that form the respective laminae in mammalian neocortex. A large
              body of data on neuronal connections and histochemistry supports this
              hypothesis for the nuclear pallial groups present in birds. This proposal seeks
              to determine--by the study of the connections of pallial regions with
              anatomical tracing techniques--whether the "equivalent cell hypothesis" can be
              extended to aminote vertebrates, i.e., whether similar nuclear groups with
              similar connections can be identified in systems with elaborated telencephali
              pallia. Specifically, it is predicted that in very simple unelaborated pallia,
              only one cell population dedicated to the visual system is present. Whereas in
              elaborated and expanded pallia, two or more separate cell populations dedicated
              to visual processing are present. Such a result would support Karten's
              equivalent cell hypothesis. Further, this result would support the hypothesis
              that such multiple cell groups evolved by the process of parcellation (as
              proposed by Ebbesson), which states that a single cell group can divide over
              evolution into two or more daughter cell groups with parceled connections and
              functions.
