Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Studies of the Flora of Metalliferous Soils of
               Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9728604

Award Number: 9728604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Kruckeberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1305,5940,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Arthur
              Kruckeberg of the University of Washington in Seattle, and three Turkish
              scientists: Dr. Adil Guner of A.I. Baysal University in Bolu, and Drs. Tuna
              Ekim and Nezaket Adiguzel, of Gazi University in Ankara, Turkey.   The project
              is to examine the ecological factors and chemical behavior of metal-rich soils.
                The project has several tasks: collection of plant specimens to serve as a
              Herbarium reference material, from metal-rich soils in several areas in Turkey;
              establishment of species lists of plants that evidently possess a special
              tolerance to soils containing high concentration of heavy metals; multielement
              chemical analysis of samples of the plant species collected, identification of
              cases of strong accumulation of metals; and detailed chemical analysis of soils
              from the study area chosen to establish the degree  of abnormal metal
              concentration.  The area of research has become of interest for several
              reasons: 1. the need to increase our knowledge, on a worldwide basis, of the
              naturally occurring flora of metal-rich soils, including the identification of
              metal-accumulators, 2. the desirability of rehabilitating and revegetating
              areas laid waste by mining activities using metal-tolerant species, and 3. the
              potential for the use of metal-accumulating plants in soil-clean-up.  Scope: 
              This project will involve several research teams with complementary
              capabilities to conduct research in an important ecological and biological
              research area.  Dr. Kruckeberg and his Turkish collaborators will carry out the
              field work.  Dr. Roger Reeves, a professor of chemistry at Massey University in
              New Zealand, will participate as an expert in biogeochemical field work, and in
              nickel hyperaccumulation of a number of Turkish plant species.  This proposal
              meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of
              mutual benefit.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
