Title       : NADH Dehydrogenase (Complex I) of the African Parasite Trypanosoma brucei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9728124

Award Number: 9728124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana S. Beattie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728124  Beattie and Kiaira  The overall goal of this research is to
              characterize the putative rotenone-sensitive NADH dehydrogenase, or complex I,
              that has been shown to be present in the mitochondrion of the protozoan
              Trypanosoma brucei. T. brucei has a dual life cycle in both the bloodstream of
              the mammalian host, where the energy needs of the organism are met by
              glycolysis, and the insect vector, where a cytochrome containing electron
              transport chain is present. The observation that low activities of
              rotenone-sensitive NADH dehydrogenase are present in the long slender
              bloodstream forms that lack cyanide-sensitive respiration suggested the
              presence of NADH dehydrogenase in the bloodstream forms; however,
              immunoblotting studies with specific antibodies indicated that a subunit of
              complex I located in the membrane-spanning region of the complex was not
              present in the mitochondria of the bloodstream forms while two of the subunits
              located in the peripheral region of the complex were present. These results
              have led to the novel hypothesis that an incomplete NADH dehydrogenase with
              partial enzymatic activity but lacking the membrane portion with proton pumping
              capability may be assembled in the bloodstream forms prior to the formation of
              the complete proton-pumping complex I. To test this hypothesis the presence of
              subunits localized in the peripheral and membrane arms of NADH dehydrogenase in
              the long slender bloodstream and procyclic forms of T. brucei will be
              established and compared. Antibodies will be generated against antigenic
              synthetic peptides predicted from the gene sequence and will be used to
              immunoblot mitochondrial membranes and to immunoprecipitate these subunits from
              radiolabeled trypanosomes. The association of the subunits of NADH
              dehydrogenase into a multimeric complex will be examined by
              co-immunoprecipitation of associated subunits in the complex with an antibody
              against subunit 7, a protein localized in the connecting fragment of the
              complex.  A comparison of the number of s ubunits present in the complex of the
              long slender and procyclic forms of T. brucei will indicate whether an
              incomplete complex has been formed in the long slender bloodstream form prior
              to the formation of the complete proton pumping NADH dehydrogenase.    A
              greater understanding of the metabolism, and especially the bioenergetics of T.
              brucei, will permit the design of better and more appropriate approaches for
              control of trupanosomiasis, a disease of cattle with severe economic
              consequences to sub-Saharan Africa including Kenya. Moreover, the results of
              these proposed studies may provide information about the biogenesis of this
              most complicated complex of the mitochondrial electron transport chain.
