Title       : Molecular Basis of Sperm-Egg Binding in Frogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9728656

Award Number: 9728656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Lennarz wlennarz@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although great progress has been made in describing in detail receptor-ligand
              interactions in a wide variety of biological systems, knowledge about such
              interactions that mediate cell-cell adhesion, where the "receptor" is present
              on one cell and the "ligand" is on another, is much less developed.
              Fertilization is a specialized case of cell-cell adhesion that has a
              well-defined and profound endpoint, formation of a zygote. Two systems that
              have been studied extensively in this respect are the sea urchin and the mouse.
              A central issue to be resolved in these systems is how, following interaction
              at the extracellular coat, the sperm moves to the next stage, interacts and
              fuses with the egg plasma membrane. Remarkably, the frog, although used very
              extensively and productively to study basic phenomena related to early
              development, has received relatively little attention with respect to the
              mechanism of gamete interaction during fertilization. The frog system, perhaps
              better than any of the other biological systems under study, has the potential
              to lead to elucidation of the staged interactions of the sperm and the egg that
              culminate in fusion of the two gametes. This is the case because 1 ) the
              initial interaction of the sperm with a glycoprotein in the frog extracellular
              coat known as the vitelline envelope (VE) has been characterized and 2) the
              relationship between the VE and the plasma membrane in the frog has been well
              studied ultrastructurally by others. In this proposal a glycoprotein (gp69/64)
              found in the VE and shown to be involved in sperm binding will be further
              studied with respect to the structure of its polypeptide chain and its
              oligosaccharide chains. The role of each structural element of this
              glycoprotein in sperm binding and how this process is developmentally regulated
              will be studied. Preliminary evidence has been obtained for the presence of a
              high molecular weight glycoprotein in the plasma membrane that cross reacts
              with antibody to the VE glycoprotein , gp69/64. A study of the transition from
              VIE binding to plasma membrane binding and the molecular basis of the latter
              event will be under taken. To do this, eggs from which a portion of the VE has
              been removed to expose a "window" of the plasma membrane, as well as eggs
              completely denuded of their VE, will be studied for sperm binding. Finally,
              fusion of the plasma membrane of the sperm and egg will be investigated and the
              possible role of the cross-reactive egg plasma membrane protein in this event
              will be examined. It is anticipated that these studies will bring new insight
              into the multistep interactions between sperm and egg that culminate in
              fertilization.
