Title       : Role of Plant Transcriptional Adaptors in Cold-Regulated Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9728462

Award Number: 9728462
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Thomashow thomash6@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Triezenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728462   Thomashow   Many plants increase in freezing tolerance in response to
              low nonfreezing temperatures, a phenomenon known as cold acclimation. Recent
              evidence indicates that cold acclimation involves the induction of
              cold-regulated genes. A primary research objective is to determine how plants
              sense low temperature and process the "cold signal" to induce the expression of
              freezing tolerance genes. Toward this end, an Arabidopsis cDNA has been
              isolated that encodes a transcriptional activator that binds to the CRT/DRE
              sequence, a cold- and drought-responsive DNA regulatory element. The focus of
              this proposal is to determine how this factor, CBF I, activates transcription.
              The approach that will be taken is based on two important observations: 1)the
              transcriptional activity of CBF1 in yeast requires the action of at least three
              transcriptional adaptor proteins, ADA2, ADA3, and GCN5; and 2) Arabidopsis
              encodes a homolog of the yeast ADA2 protein. Thus, plants may have a
              transcriptional adaptor system related to the ADA complex of yeast and this
              system may be involved in cold- and drought-regulated gene expression. These
              hypotheses will be tested by: 1) defining the boundaries and key residues of
              the CBF1 activation domain; 2) determining whether the CBF1 activation domain
              interacts directly with the Arabidopsis ADA2 protein and if so, whether the
              interaction is affected by temperature or dehydration stress; 3) determining
              whether the Arabidopsis ADA2 protein interacts with homologs of the ADA3 and
              GCN5 proteins or with novel plant adaptor proteins; and 4) assessing the extent
              to which the Arabidopsis ADA2 protein is involved in plant growth and
              development and response to various environmental stresses. The results of this
              project will provide fundamental new information on the nature of the proteins
              with which plant transcriptional activators interact to stimulate
              transcription, an area about which virtually nothing is known in plants. In
              addition, they will provide significant new informat ion about cold-regulated
              gene expression and will open the door to a more globally integrated
              understanding of plant gene regulation.   Plants respond to cold stress by
              synthesizing specific proteins. This regulatory response is caused by changes
              in gene expression at the level of transcription, the process by which DNA is
              copied into RNA. These transcriptional changes are caused by interactions
              between proteins, called transcription factors, and DNA. This project will
              study proteins that interact with transcription factors, called transcriptional
              adaptors, during cold stress. Analogous proteins have been discovered in yeast,
              but this is the first indication that they exist in plants. This project will
              determine whether these proteins play a similiar role in plants and define the
              parts of the transcriptional adaptor molecule that are critical for interacting
              with the cold-activated transcription factor. This understanding may contribute
              to our understanding of how plants adapt to cold.
