Title       : Neural control of adrenocortical function.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a9728132

Award Number: 9728132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275998             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Engeland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT      IBN-9728132  PI = ENGELAND, William C.  
                       Secretion of steroid hormones by the adrenal cortex  is required to
              maintain whole body homeostasis; that is, the  ability to maintain blood
              pressure and volume, carbohydrate,  protein and fat metabolism and immune and
              nervous system  function within normal limits is dependent on adrenocortical 
              hormones.  The primary goal of the project is to  understand  the role of
              adrenal innervation in the control of steroid  secretion. The hypothesis to be
              tested is that under non-  stress conditions when reduced steroid secretion is 
              required,  neural activity is inhibitory, whereas during  stress conditions
              when elevated steroid secretion is  necessary, neural activity is excitatory. 
              The capacity for  innervation to produce both inhibitory and excitatory 
              effects suggests that neural input must be encoded  differentially; encoding
              could be dependent on the  neurotransmitter released or on the target affected.
               Experiments are designed: (1) to define the  neurotransmitters that modulate
              non-stress and stress-  induced secretion of adrenal corticosteroids and (2) to
               elucidate the adrenal site of neurotransmitter action. Rats  will undergo
              immunological, surgical, or pharmacological  sympathectomies to remove
              selectively adrenal  neurotransmitter systems. The effect of adrenal
              denervation  on non-stress steroid secretion will be assessed using in  vivo
              adrenal microdialysis, a technique developed to measure  adrenal secretion in
              awake animals. It is proposed that  circadian variation in non-stress
              steroidogenesis which is  reflected by differences in episodic secretion is
              regulated  in part by the inhibitory effects of innervation.  Episodic 
              corticosterone secretion will be assessed by time series  analysis and diurnal
              variations in adrenal sensitivity to  ACTH will be determined. It is proposed
              that adrenal neural  elements interact positively with ACTH to mediate acute 
              stress-induced increases in steroid secretio n. Neural input  could act
              directly at the adrenal cell to affect  steroidogenesis or act indirectly by
              changing adrenal blood  flow.  Experiments will assess the interaction between 
              stress and ACTH and characterize the neurotransmitter  system(s) mediating
              facilitatory control. Experiments will  also measure adrenal blood flow during
              stress using  fluorescent microspheres and define the  neurotransmitters that
              mediate stress-induced changes.  Neurotransmitter-specific  innervation will be
              monitored  using immunofluorescence histochemistry and quantitated by 
              radioimmunoassay. Effects on specific steroidogenic enzymes  will be assessed
              by measuring gene expression using in situ  hybridization and RNAse protection
              assay, by  measuring enzyme content using western analysis and by  quantifying
              enzyme activity in adrenal cells.  Results of  these experiments should
              delineate the role of autonomic  nerves as an extra-ACTH mechanism in the
              control of adrenal  corticosteroid secretion and define the neurotransmitter 
              systems involved.  Understanding the nature of the this  unique
              neural-endocrine interaction will provide a new  perspective on physiological
              regulation of  corticosteroid secretion.
