Title       : Glial-Neuronal Metabolic Interactions in Working Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9728171

Award Number: 9728171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald A. Dienel dienelgeralda@uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-28171  DIENEL      The functions of two major classes of brain cells,
              neurons and  glia, are highly specialized. Neurons carry out the signaling 
              processes, transferring information from one cell to another to  control and
              coordinate the activities of the body. Glial cells  surround neurons and have
              many important functions, including  control of the extracellular environment
              which can modify neuronal  activity thereby influencing behavior. Glial
              functions and glial-  neuronal interactions in brain are poorly understood
              because it is  very difficult to assay the activities of specific classes of 
              cells in the living brain. Brain function is often evaluated by  metabolic
              brain imaging procedures using radiolabeled glucose  analogs because there is a
              close correlation between changes in  functional activity and local rate of
              glucose utilization to  provide energy for brain work.  Functional metabolism
              is the  breakdown of compounds to extract energy for the working cell, and 
              metabolic imaging is based on local trapping of labeled products  of the
              metabolic tracer in the cell where it is metabolized; the  quantity of trapped
              label reflects the magnitude of functional  activity. Because glucose is a fuel
              for all cells, it cannot  distinguish between the functional metabolic changes
              in the  different cell types in brain. In the present study, glial-  specific 
              "reporter molecules", i.e., labeled compounds known to  be metabolized mainly
              in glial cells, will be used to measure  stimulus-induced metabolic changes in
              glial cells and evaluate  working relationships between glia and neurons.
              Experiments are  designed to test the hypothesis that metabolic activity in
              glial  cells increases in proportion to the activity of neurons when  neurons
              are stimulated by graded changes in sensory input, and  that compounds made in
              glial cells are transferred from glia to  neurons in increased quantities.
              Neurons will be activated by  changing the magnitude of a visual stimulus
              (flash rate or  intensity of a  strobe light) to cause progressive increases in
              the  signaling activity of neurons in the eye as the visual information  is
              processed in the brains of experimental rats; altered neuronal  activity is
              predicted to cause parallel changes in the activity of  glial cells in the
              visual pathway and rates of metabolism of glial  reporter molecules. Some
              compounds made in glial cells are  exported to neurons, and the quantity of
              labeled compounds  transferred and incorporated into a neuron-specific marker
              (a  neurotransmitter called GABA) will be measured, thereby permitting 
              assessment of neuronal-glial metabolic interactions in working  brain. The
              results of the proposed experiments will increase our  understanding of how
              glia obtain their energy to carry out their  work and how neurons and glia work
              together to process visual  information.  Knowledge of the cellular basis of
              metabolic brain  images will also help to form the basis for future development
              of  new brain imaging techniques to visualize and quantify glial cell  activity
              in human brain.
