Title       : Electrochemical Biosensors Based on Quinoprotein Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9728644

Award Number: 9728644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hiroyasu Tachikawa htachi@ccaix.jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor L. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface   Chemistry
              Program, focusses on the development of quinoprotein   enzyme based biosensors
              for the analysis of histamine, dopamine,   and alcohols.  Professors Tachikawa
              of Jackson State University   and Davidson of The University of Mississippi
              Medical Center and   their students will study the preparation and
              characterization   of biosensors using the enzymes methylamine dehydrogenase,  
              aromatic amine dehydrogenase, and methanol dehydrogenase.    Electrochemical
              methods, electrochemical quartz crystal   microbalance measurements, and Raman
              spectroscopy will be used   to characterize the structure and function of these
              enzyme based   biosensors. This project is unique in using oxygen and NAD  
              independent redox enzymes in biosensors and in the long-term   medical
              applications are anticipated.  This project will examine the utility of
              developing enzyme based  biosensors that use oxygen and NA independent
              quinoprotein  enzymes.  Professors Tachikawa of Jackson State University and 
              Davidson of The University of Mississippi Medical Center will  study the
              construction and characterization of these biosensors  with their students.  A
              broad, interdisciplinary approach to this  project will involve use of
              electrochemical techniques, quartz  crystal microbalance measurements, and
              Raman spectroscopy to  determine the structure and properties of these new
              biosensors.   Long-term goals focus on developing new applications for 
              quantitative and qualitative analysis in medicine.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
