Title       : Function & Regulation of the Bradyrhizobium japonicum nolA Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9728281

Award Number: 9728281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Stacey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Stacey  9728281  Recent research has identified several large families of
              bacterial global regulators. Although such global regulators are being
              extensively studied, relatively little is known about how such regulatory
              systems may interact to integrate the cellular response to the environment, and
              few model systems have been identified to study such integrated responses.
              Nodulation (nod) gene expression in Bradyrhizobium japonicum is regulated by
              members of the LysR, two-component, and MerR families of transcriptional
              regulatory proteins. Therefore, it is possible  that regulation of nod gene
              expression in B. japonicum represents an interesting and useful system in which
              to explore the interactions between these global regulatory systems. In B.
              japonicum, a LysR homologue, NodD1, is required for nod gene activation in the
              presence of plant produced isoflavones. NodV and NodW make up a second,
              independent system that activates nod gene expression upon addition of the
              isoflavone inducer. Finally, NoIA, a member of the MerR family, acts indirectly
              to repress nod gene expression and likely activates the expression of other
              genes. This research focuses primarily on the regulation and function of the
              nolA gene. Surprisingly, recent results indicate that the nolA gene encodes
              three separate proteins (termed NolAL, NolAM, and NolAs ), at least two of
              which are synthesized from separate messenger RNAs. Moreover, nolA expression
              appears to be activated by a unique plant signal molecule. Site directed
              mutations have been constructed that, in each case, result in the expression of
              only one form of NoIA. Using these constructs, the independent regulation of
              the three NolA proteins is being investigated. Which of the three forms of NolA
              is important in determining symbiotic host range among genotypes of soybean
              will be determined. The nolA gene is expressed from at least two independent
              transcriptional start sites (P1 and P2). Expression from P1 appears to require
              a novel plant signal molecule, while expressi on from P2 requires a functional
              NoIA. Mutations in the 5' region of both P1 and P2 will be constructed to test
              between competing models of how their independent regulation may be mediated.
              Expression of NoIAM and NoIAS may be due to a third, unidentified
              transcriptional start site, or due to a posttranscriptional regulatory event.
              In addition, the possibility that secondary structure in the vicinity of ATG2
              (initiation of NolAM) may be important in determining the relative expression
              of NolAM and NolAS will be determined.  Finally, purification of the unique
              chemical from soybean plants that induces nolA expression will be done. These
              studies should clarify the role of NolA in nod gene expression. The results
              obtained, when added to other on-going research, should give a more complete
              picture of nod gene expression in B. japonicum and may serve as a paradigm for
              other complex regulatory systems where global regulatory networks impinge on
              the expression of a single operon. The B. japonicum-soybean symbiosis is an
              important system for exploring the cell signaling pathways between host and
              symbiont. The ultimate goal of this work is a clearer understanding of the
              integration of regulatory mechanisms involved in the global regulation of
              cellular metabolism.
