Title       : Cell Polarity and Localized Maternal Proteins in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a9728053

Award Number: 9728053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly L. Mowry Kimberly_Mowry@Brown.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
9728053
Mowry

Establishment of polarity in the egg can be described as the
              earliest step in embryonic patterning.  A single cell, the fertilized egg,
              contains the information that will ultimately specify the entire organism.  As
              the egg divides during the early stages of embryonic development, different
              cells acquire different fates.  One mechanism to account for this difference in
              developmental potential among the cleavage cells is the sequestering of
              molecules in the egg that could specify such potential.  It is a long-standing
              proposal that localization of such determinants prior to fertilization can
              provide the basis for pattern formation in the early embryo.  While there is
              evidence for the existence of localized cytoplasmic determinants in many
              systems, the identities of such determinants remain largely unknown in
              vertebrates, and the mechanisms for establishment of polarity in the oocyte are
              poorly understood.

In eggs of the frog, Xenopus laevis, cell polarity is
              readily apparent along the animal/vegetal (AV) axis, which represents an axis
              of developmental potential whereby specific cell fates are assigned with
              respect to the AV axis.  What is not known are the identities of all the
              presumptive maternal determinants, and how they come to be properly localized
              in the oocyte.  Such determinants can be localized as mRNA or protein;
              localized mRNAs are well documented in the Xenopus oocyte, and some are thought
              to play roles in axial patterning.  While it is apparent that not all of the
              localized maternal components are RNAs, little progress has been made on
              identifying localized maternal protein determinants.

The goal of the
              proposed research is to identify and characterize localized maternal protein
              determinants in the Xenopus egg.  The foundation for this work has been laid by
              Dr. Mowry's success in devising a subtractive immunization scheme to obtain
              monoclonal antibodies specific for proteins that are localized in the frog egg.
               Focusing their efforts on two of these vegetally localized proteins, three
              specific objectives are proposed:  I.  They will characterize the localized
              proteins at both the molecular and cytological levels.  II.  They will probe
              functions of the localized proteins in patterning and polarity.  III.  They
              will investigate the mechanism by which these proteins are restricted to the
              vegetal cortex.

These experiments are designed to investigate how
              developmental signals are spatially distributed to underlie patterning in the
              vertebrate embryo, and may also provide insight into how into how polarity is
              established in the oocyte.


