Title       : Crystal Structure of Colicin E3
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9728420

Award Number: 9728420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Menachem Shoham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728420  Shoham  The goal of this research is the crystal structure
              determination of colicin E3 in complex with its inhibitor, the immunity
              protein.  Three suitable heavy-atom derivatives have already been found, and
              more will be searched for.  The electron density corresponding to the four
              molecules in the asymmetric unit will be averaged in order to improve the
              interpretability of the map.  Upon completion of the structure determination,
              site-specific mutants of colicin E3 and of the immunity protein will be
              designed, in order to probe the contribution of certain residues to the
              affinity.  These mutants will be characterized both structurally and
              functionally in vitro as well as in vivo.  Colicin E3 is a toxic protein
              secreted by certain strains of E. Coli in order to eliminate related strains of
              bacteria living in the same ecological niche.  Colicin E3 carries out three
              functions: it binds to a specific receptor on the target cell  envelope, is
              internalized into sensitive cells across their inner membrane, and once inside
              the cell, it inactivates the protein biosynthetic machinery of the infected
              cell by nicking a specific bond on 16S ribosomal RNA.  The toxicity of colicin
              E3 thus stems from its enzymatic activity.  The three functions are apparently
              localized on three different domains of the colicin E3 molecule.  The producing
              organism is immune to the toxicity of colicin E3 by virtue of an   "immunity
              protein" which tightly binds to colicin E3 in a 1:1 complex, and thus renders
              it inactive.  Colicin - immunity protein complexes are amongst the most stable
              protein-protein complexes ever observed.  The goal of this work is to gain
              understanding at the molecular level of the nature of these extremely tight
              protein-protein interactions.  Furthermore, the crystal structure will provide
              information on the mechanism of inhibition by the immunity protein, as well as
              identification of colicin E3 residues likely involved in catalysis.  Detailed
              knowledge of the enzyme-inhibitor interactions will al so shed light on the
              local structure of the ribosome in the vicinity of the cutting site.  ***
