Title       : Dissertation Research: Modern Analog Study of Landscape Vegetation Contexts
               across the Lowermost Bed II Olduvai Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9728984

Award Number: 9728984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, MS Sandi Copeland will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. Her ultimate goal is the reconstruct the
              vegetation patterns at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania during a time interval ca. 1.7
              million years ago. A large scale archaeological project directed by Dr.
              Blumenschine has focused on broadly exposed sediments which date to this time
              horizon. The group has collected large samples of both faunal and artifact
              remains which have the potential to provide insight into how early hominids
              utilized the landscape. However to understand early human behavior it is
              necessary to project these data on a detailed landscape reconstruction because
              only when one understands the distributions of trees, open grassland and
              potentially edible food species is it possible to reconstruct subsistence
              strategy. Although some data such as soil carbonate samples are available,
              these are not sufficient to accomplish the desired goal.  With an innovative
              research design MS Copeland will examine modern analog landscapes. Based on
              geological similarity with Olduvai, she has located three regions in Tanzania
              which share essential characteristics with different parts of the
              paleo-landscape. She shall conduct careful vegetation analyses of these present
              day environments using sampling techniques. She will focus on resources such as
              potential plant foods and sleeping trees of presumed importance to early
              hominids to determine their density, distribution and association. She will
              also collect geological data which will allow her to `pin` the detailed modern
              patterns on the Olduvai landscape.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will help to develop a methodological tool which may be applied in
              many environments in many parts of the world. It will shed new light on early
              hominid behavior at a classic African site. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
