Title       : MCAA: Inbreeding Depression, Parental Behavior, and Mate Preference in Two
               Populations of the Prairie Vole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9728767

Award Number: 9728767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zuleyma Tang-Martinez zuleyma@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                PROPOSAL #:  IBN 9728767    PI:  Zyleyma Tang-Matrinez      The proposed
              research will examine the genetic and  behavioral effects  of inbreeding, using
              the vole, Microtus ochrogaster as the  model organism.  The research will
              address:  1. The effects  of inbreeding (defined as mating between close
              relatives) on  the number of young produced per litter, as well as the  weight,
              growth rates and survival of the pups.  2. The  effects of inbreeding on
              parental behaviors.  3. Preferences  of voles for related versus unrelated
              partners, or for  inbred versus outbred partners.  Systematic, quantitative 
              behavioral observations along with weighing and monitoring  of pups produced by
              inbred versus outbred matings will be  employed to address the first two
              objectives.  Mate choice  experiments will demonstrate whether voles show
              preferences  among four potential mates of different degrees of genetic 
              relatedness ofrinbreeding.      Inbreeding has detrimental effects in many
              species of  animals,  including humans. These effects may include decreased 
              growth, reduce vigor, and the expression of genetic diseases  of defects. 
              Deficits in parental behaviors may cause or  exacerbate some of these effects
              but almost nothing is  currently known about the interactions between
              inbreeding  and parental behavior. Similarly, little is known about the 
              importance of inbreeding in determining mate choices.  This  research is
              expected to provide insights into possible  behavioral effects of inbreeding in
              animals that could  potentially be extrapolated to humans.  Moreover, the
              information generated will be valuable to  husbandry and  conservation efforts
              that require the maintenance of genetic  diversity in populations.
