Title       : Parallel Visual and Circadian Pathways to Neuroendocrine Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9728581

Award Number: 9728581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamas L. Horvath   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9728581  Horvath    All animals studied to date possess endogenous biological
              clocks that mediate biological rhythms.  In rats and other mammals, pulsatile
              hormone release from the anterior pituitary is essential for normal growth,
              metabolism, and reproduction.  The interaction between visual, circadian and
              neuroendocrine systems underlies rhythmic anterior pituitary hormone
              secretions, including prolactin and luteinizing hormone (LH).  The
              suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is the critical brain structure underlying
              biological rhythms and a monosynaptic pathway between this hypothalamic nuclei
              and the principle neuronal populations regulating LH and prolactin release has
              been documented.  Recently, it has become clear that pure visual signals may
              directly or indirectly via the intergeniculate leaflet of the lateral
              geniculate nucleus influence endocrine mechanisms and these pathways may be
              functioning in parallel with the biological clock that itself is under the
              influence of light.  This indicates a more complex integration of visual
              signals into the neuroendocrine hypothalamus than previous suspected.  Dr.
              Horvath, through a series of elegant neuroanatomical studies, will determine
              the morphological relationship between subcortical visual efferents and
              hypothalamic neurons responsible for the regulation of endocrine mechanisms. 
              By using tract tracing methods in combination with degeneration and light and
              electron microscopic immunocytochemical approaches, and using biochemical
              assays, he will also assess the role of subcortical visual pathways in the
              regulation of pituitary gonadotrophs underlying ovulation.  The delineation of
              the pathways via which visual and circadian signals are integrated into the
              neuroendocrine hypothalamus will enhance our understanding of how rhythmic
              anterior pituitary hormones secretions are regulated and this is critical for
              understanding reproduction and behavior.
