Title       : Thermodynamic Origins of Sequence-Recognition in Ligand-DNA Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9728720

Award Number: 9728720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Graves graves@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9728720  Graves  The focus of this research is to gain insight into the
              mechanisms through which small molecules and proteins exert sequence-selective
              binding to nucleic acids.  Efforts will be directed towards correlating the
              thermodynamic properties associated with these interactions with both DNA
              sequence and ligand structure.  Recent studies have demonstrated the DNA
              binding enthalpies and entropies observed for actinomycin D-DNA interactions to
              be markedly influenced not only by the base-sequence at the intercalation site
              but also by the bases that flank the intercalation site.  These observations
              will be extended to explore the effects of subtle changes in the DNA base
              sequences that flank the ligand binding site and their relationship to changes
              in the thermodynamic binding mechanism(s).  Analyses of thermodynamic binding
              properties will be coupled to examination of the concomitant ligand-DNA
              structures resulting from interactions of ligands with specific DNA base
              sequences providing linkage between the thermodynamic mechanisms associated
              with complex formation and the structural geometry of the ligand-DNA complex. 
              Various biophysical methods including absorption spectroscopy and isothermal
              microtitration calorimetry will be used to examine the interactions of
              actinomycin D with oligonucleotides that have been designed specifically to
              harbor a single centrally located actinomycin D binding site and varied
              neighboring and next-neighboring flanking base sequences.  The binding site
              sequence and bases which flank the binding site will be systematically changed
              to determine their influence on the thermodynamic mechanism of complex
              formation.  From these studies, insight into the thermodynamic origins of DNA
              sequence-recognition will be discerned.  Structural details of the ligand-DNA
              complex will be examined by high-resolution nuclear magnetic resonance methods
              and correlated with the thermodynamic data to provide a novel paradigm for the
              "thermodynamic origins" of sequence-recognition.  Mol ecular recognition is one
              of the central problems in understanding the mechanistic processes that govern
              a wide variety of biochemical and molecular biological events that take place
              in the cell.  Hence, an understanding of the forces that govern the sequence
              specific interactions of small molecules and proteins with DNA is pivotal
              towards an overall comprehension of basic biochemical processes such as
              replication, transcription, recombination, and DNA repair.  The focus of this
              research is to determine and characterize the chemical and/or structural
              determinants on both the target DNA and ligand responsible for
              sequence-selective interactions.
