Title       : Cooperative Molecular Motions in Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9728854

Award Number: 9728854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              H. Eugene Stanley is funded by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to study cooperative molecular motions in   water.  The aim
              of the research is to conduct systematic studies of the   effects of the
              cooperative molecular motions on the properties of water   in an effort to
              understand: 1) power law singularities observed in the   thermodynamic response
              functions and relaxation times; 2) the shape of   phase boundaries in the phase
              diagram of water; and 3) anomalies found in   the propagation of sound through
              water.  A combination of molecular   dynamics simulations and formal
              theoretical modeling will be used to   develop a dynamical model of liquid
              water.  Molecular dynamics   calculations will use fast multipole methods on
              systems containing up to   a million water molecules using the Origin 2000 at
              Boston University. The   calculations will be performed with a parallelized
              code developed in   Stanley's research group.  Observable properties such as
              diffusivity,   spin lattice relaxation, dielectric function and dynamic
              structure   factors will be determined from the simulations for comparison with
                experiment.  Stanley will collaborate with three experienced  
              experimentalists who will provide data to characterize a hypothesized   second
              critical point for water.  Water is an important fluid.  Although this
              substance has been the topic   of considerable research since the beginning of
              the century, its peculiar   properties are still not completely understood. 
              Although agreement has   not been reached on the origin of the anomalous
              properties of water, it   is commonly believed that a central role is played by
              the possibility for   the water molecule to form hydrogen bonds and to create a
              tetrahedrally   coordinated open network in both the solid and the liquid
              phases.    Stanley's research is directed at a fundamental molecular level  
              explanation for the anomalous behavior of this ubiquitous fluid                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
