Title       : A Two-Component Signal Transduction Pathway in DictyosteliumDevelopment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9728463

Award Number: 9728463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Loomis wloomis@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728463  Loomis    Signals are received on the surface of cells and transduced
              to physiological responses within the cells.  This research is analyzing a
              two-component system in the soil amoeba Dictyostelium, which consists of a
              sensor kinase and a response regulator.  When the signal activates the sensor
              kinase, it autophosphorylates one of its histidines and then relays the
              phosphate to the response regulator.   In Dictyostelium the sensor kinase is
              encoded by the dhkA gene and the response regulator is encoded by the regA
              gene.  Mutations that inactivate dhkA block sporulation under all conditions
              while those that inactivate regA result in rapid sporulation even in the
              absence of prestalk derived signals.   In these experiments the histidine
              kinase activity of DhkA will be measured before and after it binds the small
              peptide, SDF-2, that is released by prestalk cells. The amino acids in DhkA
              that are phosphorylated by the kinase will also be determined.  The results of
              these experiments will provide a solid foundation for further understanding how
              this sensor kinase functions.  Conditions will then be established by these
              investigators to measure the relay of the phosphate from DhkA to the response
              regulator, Reg A.   These investigators have recently found that RegA is an
              enzyme that hydrolyzes cAMP and thereby prevents protein kinase A (PKA) from
              being active by removing cAMP from its regulatory subunit.  Genetic studies
              indicate that RegA is not active when it is phosphorylated by Dhka, possibly
              because it can no longer associate with the regulatory subunit of PKA.  
              Experiments outlined here will test for the interactions of the phosphorylated
              and unphosphorylated forms of RegA with the regulatory subunit of PKA.   The
              specific protein domains necessary for this interaction will be defined.   Two
              component systems have been shown to function in various responses of bacteria,
              fungi and plants, and this laboratory has isolated a cDNA from mouse tissue
              that is a histidine kinase and may func tion in signal transduction.  These
              studies will provide further details on how these two component systems
              operate.    One of the important signal transduction pathways is the two
              component system in which signals are received by a protein kinase, which then
              autophosphorylates a histidine residue, and then transfers this phosphate to
              another protein known as the response regulator, which in turn activates other
              proteins ultimately resulting in a response to the signal.  The research
              described here is looking at the detailed mechanisms by which this process
              occurs in the soil amoeba Dictyostelium  Since these two component systems
              operate in many bacteria and higher plants and possibly vertebrates, it is
              important to understand the biochemical and genetic mechanisms of these
              systems.  ***
