Title       : Regulation of the Reproductive and Stress Axes by the Metabolic Signal, Leptin.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9728023

Award Number: 9728023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Thompson mutant@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Cullinan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT      IBN 97-28032  PI = THOMPSON, ROBERT C.  
               Regulation of Reproductive and Stress Axes by the Metabolic  Signal, Leptin   
              Food availability affects reproductive function.  Key to  understanding as well
              as many other bodily functions, lies  in our ability to understand how the
              brain gathers  information on the availability of food. A major gap in our 
              understanding of how food availability controls reproduction  was filled
              recently with the discovery of a hormone called  leptin.  Blood leptin
              concentrations increase after meals in  most animals reporting to the brain a
              satiety signal.  Exactly how the brain senses these satiety signals like 
              leptin is only beginning to be understood.  Dr. Thompson  will determine how
              the brain senses leptin and more  specifically, communicates this leptin
              information to brain  centers that control reproductive function.  One
              hypothesis  tested in this research plan is that information about  altered
              food availability is relayed to the reproductive  brain centers via brain
              centers that are involved in sensing  "stress".  This idea arose when
              researches from different  backgrounds demonstrated two points.  First, stress
              or  stressful experiences have negative effects upon  reproductive systems. 
              Second, during conditions where food  availability is very low, brain systems
              known to control  stress are activated.  Thus, conditions where food is in 
              very short supply are stressful.  However, little is known  if the activation
              of these stress systems is the path by  which information concerning severely
              reduced food  availability is communicated to reproductive systems.  This  will
              be examined in this project.  Additionally, many  molecules in addition to
              leptin serve as "food signals". One  other signal is glucose.  Do different
              food signals  communicate to the reproductive system using the same  pathways
              or are there unique pathways for each food signal?  Using similar logic, are
              all stressful situations or  conditions influence d by food signals?  Dr.
              Thompson will  explore these questions and information developed in this  work
              will be used to further understand how the brain uses  food information to
              control reproductive function.
