Title       : Molecular Interactions Regulating Cell Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9728083

Award Number: 9728083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322753             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Cafiso cafiso@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728083  Cafiso  A number of proteins that are involved in cell signaling
              pathways are water-soluble but participate in signaling only when they are
              associated with the membrane interface.  One objective of this project is to
              determine the structures and forces that govern the association of proteins to
              charged membrane interfaces.  Protein domains known as PH and C2 domains are
              frequently found in molecules involved in cell-signaling and are believed to
              facilitate the attachment of these proteins to the membrane-solution interface.
               Although high-resolution solution and crystal structures for these domains are
              known, information on how these domains are positioned on the membrane and
              interact with the interface has not been obtained.  The goal of this research
              is to determine the orientation and position of PH domains and C2 domains on
              the membrane interface by the use of site-directed spin-labeling and EPR
              spectroscopy.  This methodology will also be used to investigate forces
              controlling the membrane association of simpler structures that include the
              charged domain of MARCKS (the myristoylated alanine rich C kinase substrate). 
              Finally, proteins such as MARCKS and other highly charged peptides induce the
              lateral phase separation of negatively charged lipids including the
              phospholipase C substrate PIP2 in fluid phase membranes.  This process controls
              the timing of second messenger production in cells and is believed to provide a
              positive feedback mechanism for some signaling systems.  A final objective of
              the work will be to investigate the forces and protein structural requirements
              necessary for the formation of these domains, which appear to be driven by
              electrostatic forces.  These measurements will make use of wide line 2H NMR
              spectroscopy.    Many proteins that function to control the metabolism and
              growth of cells are inactive in the cytoplasm of the cell, but become active
              when they are attached to the internal surface of the cell membrane.  These
              proteins often become attached to membr anes as a result of electrostatic
              interactions between positively charged regions of proteins and negatively
              charged membranes.  In some cases, the membrane association of these proteins,
              and hence their activity, is regulated by the enzymatic phosphorylation of
              sites within these positive domains.  Biological systems utilize this
              electrostatic "switch" to control the membrane attachment of these proteins and
              to regulate cell growth and metabolism.  The objective of this project is to
              investigate the forces and molecular interactions that attach these proteins to
              membrane interfaces.  Although the membrane attachment of basic protein domains
              is a general phenomenon, there is relatively little information on the
              structures of the protein domains and the magnitudes of the electrostatic
              forces that control membrane attachment.  ***
