Title       : RUI: Why Can
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9728332

Award Number: 9728332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Punt jpunt@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB9728332  Punt, Jennifer  RUI:  Why Can't CD4+ CD8+ Thymocytes be Stimulated
              to Proliferate?      Lay Summary    A basic question in immunology is why
              immature T lymphocytes respond so differently to stimulation compared to their
              mature descendants.  Mature T lymphocytes are important participants in the
              immune response because they protect the body from viruses and tumors by (a)
              recognizing and attacking abnormal or infected cells and (b) alerting other
              parts of the immune system to their presence.  T cells recognize threatening
              cells by binding foreign protein (antigen) to receptors, called T cell
              receptors, on their surfaces.  Every T lymphocyte expresses a different T cell
              receptor.  Therefore the large population of T cells in the body can
              collectively defend the body against a large range of threatening cells.  New T
              cells with new receptors are generated every day as T cells develop from
              immature precursors in an organ called the thymus.  The receptors expressed by
              the immature cells (called thymocytes) are randomly generated.  Because each
              new thymocyte expresses a brand new receptor, the cell must be tested for its
              suitability before being released into the body.  The screening for suitable
              cells occurs at a pivotal stage of development, the "double positive" (DP)
              stage, so-called because these cells express two key proteins, CD4 and CD8.  DP
              thymocytes are the immediate precursors of mature T cells.  However, the vast
              majority of DP thymocytes are never selected to become mature thymocytes
              because their receptors are deemed useless or directed against a normal antigen
              of the body.  The fate of the DP cells during this screening process is
              governed almost entirely by the signals they receive from their new receptors. 
              Interestingly, DP thymocytes interpret receptor signals very differently from
              mature T cells.  When mature T cells receive a strong signal through their
              receptor, they become activated and start to divide.  When immature DP
              thymocytes receive the same signal, they also b ecome activated but do not
              divide.  Nothing, in fact, seems to induce cells at this early stage of
              development to multiply.  The reason for this is not yet known.  To determine
              why DP thymocytes fail to divide in response to T cell receptor signals, these
              studies will compare the molecular machinery responsible for cell division in
              immature DP and mature T cells.  These studies will also test the possibility
              that the inability of a DP thymocyte to divide may be critical to the success
              of this screening process which fundamentally shapes the immune response.
