Title       : The IrrI Protein of Deinococcus radiodurans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9728404

Award Number: 9728404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353196             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Battista jbattis@unix1.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Battista  9728404  The bacterial species Deinococcus radiodurans displays an
              extraordinary ability to withstand the lethal effects of DNA damaging agents,
              especially ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation.  The capacity of these
              bacteria to survive massive damage to their genetic material suggests that the
              bacteria have evolved distinctive mechanisms of DNA damage tolerance.  The
              mechanism for the radiation repair properties of this organism is unknown,
              however, genetic inactivation of the so far uncharacterized IrrI gene of the
              bacterium renders this organism extremely sensitive to ionizing radiation. 
              This implies that the IrrI protein plays a pivotal role in the ionizing
              radiation resistance of the deinococci.  Evidence has been obtained that
              indicates that IrrI is an inhibitor of a exonucleolytic activity that causes an
              immediate breakdown of chromosomal DNA following the cell's exposure to UV and
              gamma radiation.  The putative exonuclease seems to act at strand breaks
              introduced either directly by the incident radiation or indirectly by DNA
              repair proteins, removing base damage caused by the incident radiation.  IrrI
              null mutants appear unable to stop this DNA degradation and, as a consequence,
              the chromosome is destroyed.  The putative exonuclease and the IrrI protein
              appear to be constituitively expressed, suggesting that the exonuclease is
              inhibited in the resting cell, and that radiation induced damage alleviates
              that inhibition, possibly by reversibly modifying IrrI.  In this study, which
              builds on these previous findings, the phenomenon of DNA damage-induced DNA
              degradation in D. radiodurans will be better defined by verifying Irr's
              regulatory role in the process, by identifying the protein(s) that mediate
              degradation, and by evaluating the significance of this process in DNA repair
              in this organism.  Since all organisms face damage do their DNA from the
              environment, a better understanding of how this organism manages to efficiently
              repair its DNA could eventually lead to making oth er organisms more resistant
              to radiation (for example plants to solar radiation).
