Title       : Coordination Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9728970

Award Number: 9728970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Turvey turvey@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many common behaviors require coordinating two limbs rhythmically.  These range
              from the relatively simple coordination of two legs in walking to the very
              complex coordination of two hands in juggling.  These acts of coordination
              require that the body's very many degrees of freedom--that is, its limbs,
              joints, muscles, even motor neurons--somehow get harnessed to function as units
              to accomplish a specific task.  This organization displays a rather special
              flexibility, however:  Although stable, it must also be temporary so that those
              same degrees of freedom can be reorganized, not only in order to accomplish
              some other specific task (the hands that juggle are also the hands that
              applaud) but also to allow the system to respond to perturbations (tripping on
              an uneven sidewalk).  The overarching goal of the proposed research is to
              identify the physical principles that govern the formation, stability, and
              variability of these kinds of rhythmic organizations or synergies.   Over the
              past decade, our research has contributed to the understanding that movement
              coordination is usefully and most appropriately addressed as a problem in a
              particular approach to physics, that of self-organizing systems.  The proposed
              research will use several classes of experiments to explore the idea that the
              physical basis of common psychological phenomena such as learning, retention,
              forgetting, attention, and adaptation can be examined using movement
              coordination as a testing ground.  Basic methodologies include requiring
              participants to swing hand-held pendulums rhythmically, to maintain an upright
              posture, or to perform cascade juggling. Manipulations (e.g., of participant
              expertise or handedness; of pendulum lengths and masses, oscillation frequency
              or phase; the imposition of extraneous tasks; the availability or continuity of
              visual structure) are motivated by certain expectations of the physical
              perspective.  Three-space motion analyzers and force platforms will be used to
              collect the data.   We pursue the idea that the principles governing movement's
              coordination are the principles of self-organizing physical systems and that
              the discovery and expression of these principles will benefit from the tools of
              nonlinear dynamics. Understanding the physical principles that govern
              movement's coordination should provide a source of new hypotheses about
              rhythmic and postural disorders as well as providing constraints on how
              coordination and its acquisition might be modeled.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
