Title       : Understanding the Basis for Metal Ion Specificity in Fe- andMn-Superoxide
               Dismutases: Learning to Make Bound Metal IonsCatalytically Active
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1999   
File        : a9728793

Award Number: 9728793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne-Frances Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728793  Miller  Comparison of Mn-substituted Fe-superoxide dismutase
              (Mn-sub-(Fe)(SOD) with Mn-SOD will provide a test that Fe-sub-Mn-SOD and
              Mn-sub-(Fe)SOD are inactive due to a mismatch between the E( tuning applied by
              the protein and that appropriate to the metal ion.  Experimental determination
              of the degree of protonation of the coordinated solvent in the two different
              proteins by resonance Raman spectroscopy and ESEEM will indicate the extent to
              which the proteins could modulate E( by manipulating the protonation state of
              coordinated solvent.  Spectroscopic and electrochemical studies of mutant
              (Fe)SOD containing the conserved Gln characteristic of Mn-SODs and mutant
              (Mn)SOD containing the Gln characteristic of Fe-SODs, with each of the metal
              ions bound, will provide reciprocal quantitations of the effects on the E( of
              this conserved amino acid difference between Mn- and Fe-SODs.  Observation of
              the conserved Gln's side chain directly by 15N NMR or indirectly by ESEEM will
              probe the polarity of this residue's hydrogen bonds with key ingredients of
              SOD's catalytic activity: Tyr 34 and the coordinated solvent.  Random
              mutagenesis of (Mn)SOD and screening for activity in the presence of Fe but not
              Mn will afford an unbiased selection of "convertant" SODs that have acquired
              activity with Fe.  Amino acid sequence determination and biophysical and
              electrochemical characterizations will then reveal what amino acids confer
              activity on Fe, by what chemical mechanisms and at what cost to activity with
              Mn.  Finally, solution of the X-ray crystal structures of Mn-SOD and
              Fe-sub-(Mn)SOD will show how the protein structure depends on the metal ion
              identity.  Thus, the work will identify general principles governing metal ion
              activity in proteins and examples of how they are implemented by particular
              amino acids in SOD.  Mn- and Fe-specific superoxide dismutases (SODs) will be
              used to study how proteins confer specific activity on bound metal ions. 
              Comparisons between inactive Fe-substituted-(Mn)SOD an d active Fe-SOD, and
              between the inactive Mn-sub-(Fe)SOD and active Mn-SOD should highlight
              differences that may be correlated with activity.  It is anticipated that metal
              ion substitution in existing enzymes may afford a rapid route to novel enzymes
              with useful properties. Therefore, knowledge of the different protein factors
              that determine the activity of bound metal ions is crucial to ability to design
              metallo-enzymes with desired catalytic activity.  ***
