Title       : Ciliary Neurotrophic Factor and Synaptic Components in Developing Chick Heart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9728881

Award Number: 9728881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63016              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley W. Halvorsen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728881  HALVORSEN   The secreted, biologically active molecules  called
              cytokines play key roles in the differentiation and  maturation of a variety of
              tissues during embryonic development.  It is important to determine the
              molecular mechanisms for these  cytokine actions for a general understanding of
              nervous system  development.  The recently described "neuropoietic" cytokines
              have  potential roles in the developing nervous and cardiovascular  systems
              which are, as yet, largely undefined. The overall goal of  this study is to
              understand the functional role of the cytokine  ciliary neurotrophic factor
              (CNTF) in development of the heart and  its innervation. The mechanisms
              important for expression of CNTF  receptors during development will be
              investigated, the molecular  mechanisms that regulate these receptors in heart
              tissue and in  cultured myocytes during parasympathetic synapse formation will
              be  defined, and the effects of CNTF on key synaptic components will  be
              identified in the heart.  Upon completion of the project three  fundamental
              questions will have been addressed. (1) Does the  change in CNTF receptor
              levels result in changes in tissue CNTF  sensitivity?  (2) What is (are) the
              mechanism(s) of regulation of  CNTF receptors in heart?  (3) Does CNTF play a
              role in  parasympathetic synapse formation in the developing atria?  Over  the
              long term, downstream gene and biochemical targets of CNTF and  related
              cytokine action in heart will be determined. These studies  represent some of
              the first to define the expression and function  of CNTF receptors in the
              cardiovascular system. With this new  information we will have a better
              understanding of the mechanisms  that regulate nerve-heart cell responses to
              cytokines during  embryonic development and of mechanisms that may be important
              for  maintenance of these functions in the adult.
