Title       : Centrosomin Function in the Cell Cycle, Gametogenesis, and in the Wingless
               Signaling Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9728694

Award Number: 9728694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Kaufman kaufman@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728694  Kaufman     The complex locus, arrow (arr), which resides in the genome
              of Drosophila melanogaster has been demonstrated to encode the protein,
              Centrosomin (Cnn). The gene has multiple tissue-specific transcription start
              sites and alternatively spliced mRNAs that produce different forms of the
              protein. The gene's structure will be characterized by mapping exons,
              transcription start sites and the sequencing of cDNAs from different tissues.
              Such information will lead to the construction of a more effective rescue
              construct than is now available. Concurrently, an expanded mutant analysis will
              be continued. Previous work has demonstrated that Cnn is involved in critical
              roles in development, gametogenesis and cell biology in Drosophila.  The focus
              of the inquiry into possible function(s) of this protein will center on its
              role in the Wingless/Wnt(Wg) signal transduction pathway in the centrosome and
              in the patterning of the oocyte. A set of Cnn protein deletion constructs will
              be expressed in cultured Drosophila cells in order to establish the functional
              domains within Cnn that are required for localization to the centrosome, to
              respond to Wg signaling and to be phosphorylated. Studies have demonstrated
              that Cnn is phosphorylated in a cell-cycle dependent manner. The parameters of
              that phosphorylation will be determined. The ultimate goals are to position Cnn
              within the Wg signaling pathway to determine its function in its various roles
              in development and to determine its role in the organization of the
              cytoskeleton.    How messages are delivered in a synchronized manner within
              cells and how they lead to the formation of a complex organism is still largely
              unknown. This work will expand our insights into that process.
