Title       : SGER: Anonymous Rare-Cutter Restriction Fragments: A NovelSource of Genetic
               Markers for Population Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9728376

Award Number: 9728376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31678              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. McDonald mcdonald@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9728376  McDonald   The object of this SGER research is to develop a new
              technique, anonymous rare-cutter restriction fragments (ARRFs) for assaying
              genetic variation. The ARRF technique would consist of digesting genomic DNA
              with two rare-cutter restriction enzymes, isolating the few small fragments
              from the many large fragments, and resolving the small fragments on a gel.
              Because there is no PCR amplification step, the intensity of a band will be
              proportional to the number of copies of the fragment. Therefore, single-copy
              nuclear fragments should be distinguishable from multiple-copy and organellar
              fragments, and heterozygotes should be distinguishable from homozygotes. DNA
              from parasites or contamination should also be easily be identified. Each pair
              of rare-cutter restriction enzymes has the potential to yield dozens of
              independent genetic markers, all of which could be assayed simultaneously. The
              only development steps required to apply the technique to a new species will be
              finding a suitable technique for preparing genomic DNA and determining which
              pair of enzymes yield suitable numbers of fragments. The AARF technique would
              be useful in a wide variety of studies in population biology where genetic
              markers are needed, including studies of gene flow and population structure,
              hybridization, mating behavior, selfing rates, and QTL mapping. These
              attributes of the AARF technique are major advantages over other techniques
              currently used for assaying variation in nuclear DNA.   The ARRF technique will
              be developed gradually, starting with bacterial DNA (genome size about 4M base
              pairs), then yeast (11Mbp), then Drosophila (100 Mbp), then larger Metazoans
              (1000+Mbp). As the genome size gets larger, each single-copy fragments becomes
              a smaller fraction of the total DNA, increasing the technical challenges.
              Calculations indicate that the amount of DNA required for detecting ARRF bands
              from an organism with a genome size in the billions of base pairs is fairly
              large, near the upper limit of p racticality, so there is no guarantee the ARRF
              technique will be feasible on all organisms. If the technique works, however,
              it will be a simple, rich, and robust source of genetic markers that will be
              useful to a broad range of population biologists, as well, potentially,  in
              studies of animal and plant disease and crop improvement.
