Title       : Physiological Mechanisms of Anoxic Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9728794

Award Number: 9728794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Jackson Donald Jackson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Lawler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9728794  Jackson  The object of this investigation is to understand how a
              specially-adapted vertebrate animal, the freshwater turtle, is able to survive
              long periods without oxygen, and why other animals are unable to do this.  The
              long-term goal is to discover fundamental principles of cellular and organismal
              function related to this adaptation.  Several experimental approaches will be
              utilized.    First, the role of the turtle's shell and skeleton in enabling the
              turtle to withstand the large buildup of lactic acid during long-term anoxia
              will be investigated.  Dr. Jackson has found that the shell both releases
              buffer compounds into the blood and serves as a storage site for lactate.  He
              will determine whether the skeleton does the same.  The role of the shell in
              lactate storage is a new finding and he will explore this further in the turtle
              and will also look for bone or hard tissue lactate uptake in other animals
              subject to sizable increases in circulating lactate.  He postulates that this
              may be an important acid-base regulatory mechanism in many animals.  In
              addition, the ionic exchanges between the turtle shell and extracellular fluid
              will be studied in preparations of powdered shell incubated with solutions of
              different pH and ionic composition.  Whole body ionic exchanges during anoxia
              will also be studied in intact animals to further characterize the contribution
              of the shell and body fluids to acid-base regulation.  He will continue his
              work on the adaptation of turtle heart to anoxia and acidosis using nuclear
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy and a computer-activated lever system to study
              perfused working hearts and ventricular muscle strips, respectively.  A
              particular goal of this grant period is to compare responses in the
              anoxia-tolerant turtle heart with hearts from anoxia-intolerant species, such
              as trout.
