Title       : Genetics of Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9728675

Award Number: 9728675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Perkins perklab@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                PERKINS    9728675   Neurospora is being used to investigate genetic problems
              that are not as readily approached with yeast or other organisms: (1) In a
              study of internuclear cis-trans position effects, progeny that are
              heterokaryotic for deficiencies of defined chromosome segments will be obtained
              from crosses heterozygous for translocations. These will be examined for
              impaired complementation between haploid nuclei, with the object of identifying
              segments and genes that specify nucleus-limited or nucleus-associated
              functions. The study is made possible by the existence of many well
              characterized chromosome rearrangements and the ability to obtain ascospores
              that are heterokaryotic for different products of the same meiosis. (2) The
              structure and content of a complex chromosome region that is responsible for
              meiotic drive will be examined using different Spore killer haplotypes in N.
              crassa and in the heterokaryotic species N. tetrasperma. New variants
              responsible for resistance to killing will be sought and characterized. The
              study is feasible because presence of a drive element is signaled visually by
              asci containing four black and four white ascospores. (3) Strains from natural
              populations will be examined for genetic polymorphisms at two molecularly
              sequenced vegetative incompatibility (het) loci, which govern the ability of
              nuclei to coexist in the same cytoplasm in a heterokaryon. This study of
              self-nonself recognition is made possible by the availability of insertional
              translocations that can be used to generate partial-diploid progeny
              heterozygous for each of the individual het genes.    The filamentous fungus
              Neurospora serves as a modal for economically important fungi and for fungal
              plant and animal pathogens. It also continues to provide basic information on
              processes common to many higher organisms. Neurospora strains with cells that
              contain nuclei of two different genetic types, one with a deficient chromosome
              segment and the other with the corresponding active segement, will be  used to
              identify genes whose functions are nucleus-limited or nucleus-localized. By
              using a series of defined segmental deficiencies, the experiments should reveal
              whether genes with completely or partially impaired internuclear
              complementation are widely distributed in the chromosomes. This noninvasive
              approach should provide new insights into cell organization. Make-up of the
              chromosomal Spore-killer complex is being examined. The direct effects of this
              selfish chromosomal DNA element are displayed visually in Neurospora in the
              pigmented ascospores of sexual hybrids. Genetic resolution of the complex
              should aid in understanding the evolutionary history and significance of
              similar meiotic drive elements in higher organisms.  Neurospora is ideal for
              detecting vegetative incompatibility genes that are able to distinguish "self"
              from "nonself", thus controlling the ability of genetically different fungal
              cells to fuse and form a stable multinucleate heterokaryon. The frequency and
              nature of differences at two such gene loci are being examined in an extensive
              survey of Neurospora cultures from nature. The study is expected to increase
              understanding of the molecular basis of vegetative incompatibility and the
              significance of incompatibility for the organism.
