Title       : Cell Wall Associated, Receptor Protein Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9728045

Award Number: 9728045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Kohorn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB9728045    Lay Abstract    The interactions between the extracellular and
              intracellular compartments of cells play important roles in controlling growth
              and development.  These interactions are essential for such basic cell
              functions as establishment of cell polarity and regulation of cell division,
              cell differentiation, cell migration and cell death.  The extracellular
              compartment contains molecular components arranged in a complex architecture
              termed the extracellular matrix (ECM).  It is well established that in animal
              cells a basic way in which the ECM can regulate cell processes is through its
              interaction with cell surface proteins (receptors) that bind to specific
              adhesive components of the ECM.  By contrast, in plant cells, despite their
              overwhelming importance on earth, little is known about the communication
              between the ECM (the plant cell wall) and the cell interior.  This proposal
              concerns a family of four cell surface receptors called Waks (short for
              wall-associated kinases), discovered in the cells of the flowering plant,
              Arabidopsis, which appear to be adhesion proteins that transmit signals between
              the extracellular and intracellular compartments.  Using genetics, molecular
              biology, biochemistry, and microscopy, we will determine the tissue location of
              these receptors and the molecular mechanism by which they mediate communication
              between the inside and outside of the plant cell.  We propose that the Waks
              generate a signal inside the cell by their ability to interact with and to
              modify (phosphorylate) specific target proteins which then initiate a cascade
              of molecular events within the cytoplasm.  This proposal describes experiments
              to dissect these interactions and events.  The analysis is likely to elucidate
              general principles of how eukaryotic cells interact with their immediate
              environment and perceive changes in the architecture of their ECM.
