Title       : Neurotransmitter Synthesis and Signalling: Proenkephalin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9728120

Award Number: 9728120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia T. McMurray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mayo Foundation
	      200 First Street South West
	      Rochester, MN  55901    507/284-2220

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-28120  McMURRAY      Dr. McMurray and colleagues will investigate a novel
              mechanism  by which DNA secondary structure within the control region of the 
              neurotransmitter gene controls both the timing and the level of 
              neurotransmitter synthesis.  The control region of the  neurotransmitter,
              proenkephalin, switches between two  conformations that control high or low
              synthesis states.  Dr.  McMurray and colleagues focus on the mechanism by which
              switching  occurs.  Preliminary results suggest that an important 
              transcription factor called CREB stabilizes the high activity  state of
              synthesis and that CREB degradation facilitates switching  to the low activity
              state.  Experiments are designed to test this  hypothesis.  The loss of CREB in
              proenkephalin A complexes will be  monitored after receptor stimulation before
              and after inhibition  of the degrading enzyme.  This will establish a role for
              CREB  degradation in control of neurotransmitter synthesis.  The  proteins
              bound to each form of the control region will be  determined, paying particular
              attention to the presence of CREB.  Finally, we will identify the composition
              of protein factors that  control high and low synthesis.  Protein binding and
              conformation  at the mutant enhancers will be correlated with their ability to 
              support either low or high expression.    CREB is a major transcription factor
              that controls memory and  adaptation in the brain.  Through a degradation
              mechanism, CREB  (with other proteins) appears to control switching and 
              neurotransmitter synthesis. Such a mechanism provides a direct  path through a
              gene control region by which CREB controls the  adaptive response of
              proenkephalin.  The switching mechanism  allows the economical use of gene
              control element such that a  single site may be utilized in two different ways
              by the neuron.  We believe that such a switch mechanism is a "rapid response" 
              system by which neurotransmitter synthesis can quickly adapt to  meet a demand
              of the cell.  A responsive switch that is s ensitive  to phosphorylation may
              represent a novel, but general pathway to  assemble efficient transcriptional
              complexes that optimize the  level and timing of neurotransmitter synthesis.
