Title       : Plant Peroxisome Biogenesis: Acquisition/Function of Membrane Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9728935

Award Number: 9728935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Trelease TRELEASE.DICK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728935  Trelease    Eukaryotic cells contain membrane-enclosed compartments
              (organelles) in which various   cellular functions are carried out.  This
              isolation of various functions within physical   boundaries is critical to the
              life of the cell:  it allows the cell to regulate the functions of   each
              compartment separately; and it prevents the contents of each compartment from  
              interfering with others.  However, it does require that the cells have
              mechanisms for   sorting and translocating individual proteins to their proper
              subcellular locations.  One   type of intracellular compartment is the
              peroxisome, which occurs in virtually all   eukaryotic cells.  Peroxisomes
              participate in a very wide range of metabolic pathways,   depending on the cell
              or tissue type in which they function.  The overall goal of this   project is
              to understand the complicated means by which peroxisomal membrane proteins  
              (PMPs) become selectively integrated into the boundary membrane of peroxisomes 
               (glyoxysomes) in oilseed seedlings, and to understand the functions of such
              PMPs within   the membrane as the seedlings develop.    Three specific
              objectives are proposed relative to the biogenesis of plant peroxisomes.    The
              first aim is to discover the putative membrane peroxisomal targeting signal
              (mPTS)   responsible for targeting peroxisomal ascorbate peroxidase (pAPX) to
              glyoxysomes, and   define the topographic orientation of the protein within the
              membrane. This information is   particularly relevant for oilseed glyoxysomes,
              to understand how the membrane is   protected from abundant reactive oxygen
              species and to understand the pathway for   regeneration of NAD+ required for
              conversion of storage oils into carbohydrates.  The   second aim is to test the
              hypothesis that a 73 kilodalton membrane-bound polypeptide,   PMP73, is a novel
              "peroxin" which functions at the boundary membrane as a molecular   chaperone
              in the uptake of proteins from the cytosol.  The third aim is to try to
              discover   additional plant PM Ps, using polyclonal rabbit antisera raised
              previously and already used   successfully to discover PMP73 and pAPX.      It
              is likely that, in addition to the overall goal of understanding peroxisomal
              biogenesis and   function in developing oilseed seedlings, the results of these
              studies will provide more   general insight into peroxisomal biogenesis that
              will be applicable to diverse species and   tissues.
