Title       : Small Molecules from Combinatorial Libraries that Modulate RAS Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9728062

Award Number: 9728062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Wigler   (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Peter Nestler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nestler  9728062    Encoded combinatorial chemistry has created a new paradigm
              in the quest for synthetic low molecular weight receptors.  Branched peptidic
              molecules that can bind peptides in a sequence-specific manner have been found
              in encoded combinatorial libraries. The potential of this system is used in
              this study to derive low molecular weight receptors that are capable of binding
              to and modulating RAS proteins, which play central roles in signal
              transduction, and single amino acid mutations render the wild-type protein a
              potent oncogene. Experiments are designed to elaborate a new strategy for
              blocking biochemical processing. Instead of inhibiting the enzyme responsible
              for a biochemical modification, the substrate is rendered inaccessible for the
              transforming enzyme by small synthetic receptor molecules that bind to the
              domains to be modified. More specifically, small molecules that bind to the
              carboxy-terminal domain of RAS are derived from encoded combinatorial libraries
              of branched peptidic receptors.  Stepwise screenings are used to select for
              tightly binding and highly selective "molecular forceps" with ability to
              interfere with RAS processing through preventing the attack of the farnesyl
              transferase to the carboxy-terminus of RAS. The results of this study and the
              methodologies developed to achieve them, should lay the groundwork for the
              discovery of small molecular agents that can modulate signal transduction
              pathways and other cellular processes of physiological importance.
