Title       : Molecular, Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of the C. elegans Muscle Gene UNC-60
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9728762

Award Number: 9728762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy M. Benian pathgb@bimcore.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728762  Benian    Actin is one of the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic
              cells   It can polymerize into microfilaments that provide structure to
              eukaryotic cells, either as individual dispersed filaments or bundled together
              by actin binding proteins into cables. Together with its associated motor
              proteins, the myosins,  actin microfilaments form the basis for a significant
              amount of intracellular movement, including muscle contraction.  Although actin
              is one of the most intensively studied eukaryotic proteins, there is much about
              its function and regulation that remains poorly understood.  This project
              promises significant insight into the understanding of how certain proteins
              regulate the assembly of the actin cytoskeleton.     The model system to be
              used is the nematode worm, C. elegans, a model organism in which many mutations
              affecting muscle proteins have been catalogued.  The unc-60 ("uncoordinated")
              gene encodes two proteins, both of which are members of a known family of
              actin-binding proteins (the ADF/cofilin family) which have been found in all
              eukaryotic cells examined to date.  Biochemical studies of these proteins in
              vertebrates have shown that they are involved primarily in depolymerizing actin
              filaments.  Unc-60 mutants provide a unique opportunity in that they are the
              only available mutants in this type of muscle protein in any multicellular
              organism.    Unc-60 mutant worms are paralyzed, and their muscles have
              abnormally large accumulations of actin filaments.  The working hypothesis for
              this study is that in normal worms, depolymerization by unc-60 serves to
              regulate the amount of actin in polymerized form, and lack of such regulation
              results in the abnormal accumulation of filaments. The Benian laboratory has
              successfully expressed both UNC-60 isoforms in bacteria and has purified and
              initially characterized the proteins.  Microinjection of synthetic RNA into the
              germline of C. elegans often results in a mutant phenotype of the corresponding
              gene.  Using this method, the Be nian lab has shown that injection of unc-60A
              RNA but not unc-60B RNA results in embryonic lethality.  This suggests that the
              normal function of UNC-60A is different from UNC-60B and that UNC-60A has an
              essential role in early development.  The goals of the project are:  1, to
              determine the sequence alterations of 12 unc-60 alleles and interpret these
              with respect to phenotypic severity and position of the mutation on the UNC-60
              protein structure; 2, to determine the spatial and temporal patterns of
              expression of the two proteins encoded by unc-60, to evaluate the hypothesis
              that one of them is muscle-specific and the other is embryonic or non-muscle;
              3, to study the effect of bacterially expressed unc-60A and B on actin
              polymerization in vitro and look for possible regulation by phosphoinositides
              and serine phosphorylation; 3a, to attempt to crystallize the proteins for
              structural analysis; 4, to analyze an unc-60-specific suppressor gene, sup-12,
              to see if SUP-12 interacts with, or modifies either UNC-60 or actin.  The
              nature of the SUP-12 proteins is likely to provide insight into the regulation
              of thin filament number, presently not easily obtainable through biochemical
              means.    These studies will provide important insights into how cells regulate
              the polymerization of actin microfilaments.
