Title       : The Behavior, Ecology and Genetics of Communal Halictine Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9728884

Award Number: 9728884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope F. Kukuk pkukuk@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Forbes  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Catherine A. Zabinski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9728884  Stephen H. Forbes    This research focuses on cooperation among
              nonrelatives using theory that can be applied to both kin and nonkin based
              social systems.  Based on detailed studies of a single species, Lasioglossum
              hemichalceum, several key characteristics that define cooperation in groups of
              nonrelatives have been identified.  These include a short life span for
              foragers, a long period of dependency for offspring, and the need for the
              continued presence of adults in nests to protect orphaned offspring.  These key
              features result in cooperation to attain "extended parental care".  Individuals
              cooperate in order to obtain future babysitters for their offspring should they
              die while foraging.  The investigators will examine these key characteristics
              in a carefully chosen set of additional species in order to determine how
              general the results with a single species may be.  This work will be carried
              out using careful field observations of the factors outlined above and
              molecular genetic techniques to assess parentage and genetic relationships
              among group members.    Social cooperation is an important feature of animal
              biology.  Most terrestrial ecosystems are dominated by social species.  Since
              the 1970s the study of social insects has provided the basis for a change in
              the way we view social interactions.  In the past, two bodies of theory have
              focused on how cooperation may have evolved.  The first deals with how
              interactions among relatives may have evolved and the second deals with
              cooperation among nonrelatives.  This research provides the opportunity to find
              a more general theory of sociality with some potential for broadening our
              perspective on how social cooperation evolved.   
              \\CLM-06\DEBPOP\POPBIO\ABSTRACT\FORBES.txt
