Title       : RUI: New Components of Notch-Mediated Cell-Cell Interactions in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9728776

Award Number: 9728776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline E. Goutte cegoutte@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                During the development of a multi-cellular organism, communication between
              cells influences the pattem of development. A great deal of research has
              focused on deciphering the molecular mechanisms responsible for such
              communication. Studies with model systems such as Drosophila and C. elegans
              show that a variety of cell-cell interactions involve evolutionarily conserved
              proteins of the Notch family. The Notch proteins function as cell-surface
              receptors that respond to specific cell-surface ligands. Although Notch
              proteins and their associated ligands are used by interacting cells in many
              different systems, including humans, very little is known about other molecules
              involved in these events. A genetic approach to identifying new components of
              Notch-mediated interactions has proven successful in C. elegans where two new
              genes, aph-1 and aph-2, have been identified. The aph-1 and aph-2 gene products
              appear to be necessary, along with the conserved Notch receptor and its ligand,
              to mediate cellular induction in at least two specific incidences in early
              embryogenesis. The general goal of this proposal is to determine what role
              these two gene products have in facilitating cellular communication. Three
              specific approaches will be used: First, biochemeical and molecular analysis
              will be used to further our understanding of the aph-2 gene product. Previous
              work showed that the aph-2 gene encodes a novel extracellular protein
              associated with the cell surface. The work presented here aims at analyzing the
              molecular interactions between the APH-2 protein, the cell surface, the Notch
              receptor protein, and its associated ligand. Second, molecular characterization
              of the aph-1 gene product will begin with its cloning and sequencing to
              determine the nature of the aph=l product. Third, a genetic approach will be
              used to search for additional gene products that interact with the aph=l and
              aph=2 gene products. Genetic screens are described that are specifically
              designed to isolate genes that participate with aph -1 or aph-2 in mediating
              cell-cell interactions. Together these experiments represent straightforward
              molecular and genetic approaches to learning about new components of the
              Notch-mediated mechanism of cell-cell interactions that occur throughout the
              animal kingdom.
