Title       : Structure of Fibronectin Fibrils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9728382

Award Number: 9728382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna P. Peters dmpeter1@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728382  Peters  The aim of this research is to determine how the macromolecular
              organization of fibronectin fibrils and its biological activities are
              regulated.  As one of the major proteins found in the extracellular matrix,
              fibronectin in organized into an insoluble fibril where it plays a major role
              in promoting cell adhesion, migration, and growth in vertebrates during
              embryogenesis.  At least twenty different isoforms of fibronectin are expressed
              during different developmental stages.  Although the functional significance of
              these isoforms are unknown, it is speculated that they regulate the
              conformation and assembly of fibronectin fibrils so as to favor, or discourage,
              certain biological activities.  The PI recently found that fibronectin fibrils
              have at least two different conformations, suggesting that the conformation of
              the fibrils may regulate its biological activity.  She plans to study 1) the
              conformation of fibronectin isoforms and how they affect the assembly of
              fibrils; 2) the macromolecular organization of the fibrils; and 3) whether the
              fibrils are flexible structures that undergo conformational changes that
              regulate the expression of biological domains on their surface.  High
              resolution immunoelectron microscopy, protein biochemistry, and molecular
              biology will be applied to this problem.    Fibronectin is one of the major
              proteins found in the extracellular matrix, where it forms fibrils that play a
              vital role in regulating cell adhesion, migration, and growth in vertebrates
              during embryogenesis.  This project addresses the hypothesis that regulation of
              these diverse biological activities by fibronectin varies with different forms
              of fibronectin as well as with different conformations of the fibrils. 
              Electron microscopy as well as biochemical and molecular biological techniques
              will be employed.
