Title       : Multidisciplinary Collaborative Research: Behavioral and Biological Effects of
               Chronic Social Stress.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9728543

Award Number: 9728543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. C. Blanchard blanchar@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Blanchard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    IBN-9728543  Behavioral and Biological Effects of Chronic Social
              Stress    Social stress is a common and enduring feature of life with 
              important behavioral and physiological effects.  A  multidisciplinary research
              collaboration between the  Laboratory of Behavioral Neurobiology at the
              University of  Hawaii and the Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology at the 
              Rockefeller University is aimed at description and analysis  of these effects. 
              Previous work with laboratory rodents  indicates that single, two-week stress
              periods can produce a  variety of potentially damaging changes, including: 
              increased defensive behavior and decreased social and sexual  behavior; higher
              levels of stress hormones and impairment of  brain mechanisms that normally
              limit stress hormone action;  impairment of brain and peripheral mechanisms of
              male sex  hormone production; and widespread changes in brain  neurochemical
              systems.  Work in an initial granting period  has begun to outline the time
              course of these changes and to  describe their permanence or reversibility;
              crucial factors  in understanding the dynamics of the stress cascade.    The
              proposed program will undertake a fine-grained analysis  of the development of
              stress effects by using behavioral,  brain system, and hormone measures taken
              at closely spaced  intervals.  This will enable comparison of the relative time
               course of these changes, enabling the creation of more  precise hypotheses
              concerning the relationships among these  phenomena.  A second focus will
              involve the role of male sex  hormones in the development of
              dominance-subordination  relationships and in modulating the stress responses
              of  subordinate males.  The final focus of the proposed work is  on analysis of
              the role of previous (early or recent)  stressful experience in modulating or
              exacerbating the  response to subordination.  These studies, using an 
              ecologically appropriate model, will provide detailed  information in several
              areas that are crucial in  understanding the mammalia n stress response and its
               widespread behavioral and physiological consequences.
