Title       : Aggression and Amines: The Roles of Serotonin and Octopamine Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9728551

Award Number: 9728551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Kravitz edward_kravitz@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728551  Kravitz                                           Serotonin  has been
              linked to aggression in a wide  and  diverse  range of species, including man.
              In vertebrates, lowered levels of  this   amine,   possibly   coupled   with  
              elevated   levels   of  norepinephrine, have been linked to a particular kind
              of impulsive  violence. While great interest is centered on this research, it
              is  difficult  in vertebrate systems, because of the large  number  of 
              neuronal elements involved, to link amines and aggression  at  the  level  of 
              single neurons and the precise changes taking place  in  the  nervous system
              accompanying violent behavior. In invertebrate  systems, with their limited
              numbers of large identifiable neurons,  the analysis of complex behavioral
              processes, like aggression, can  be  brought  to  the  level of the precise 
              cells  thought  to  be  essential for the behavior.        This  application
              continues our studies exploring  the  function  of  identified single nerve
              cells from the lobster central nervous  system  (cns)  that contain and utilize
              the amines  serotonin  and  octopamine  (the  invertebrate equivalent of 
              norepinephrine).  We  believe  that these two amines have opposing actions on 
              at  least  the  postural component important in agonistic (fighting) behavior 
              in lobsters. The serotonin cells that are the focus of our studies  are 
              neurosecretory cells. These cells release  serotonin  at  two  sites:  (i)
              within the central nervous system, where it influences  pathways  having to do
              with posture and escape; and (ii)  directly  into  the  haemolymph  (blood) of
              the  lobster,  where  the  amine  changes  the  ways that muscles and sensory
              neurons  function  for  prolonged  periods of time. Within the cns, much in the
               same  way  that  dimmer  switches work on electrical circuits, the  serotonin 
              cells  function  as  "gain-setters" that make particular  pathways  function
              better or worse for lengthy periods of time. The  present  studies  will 
              continue our investig ations  of  these  interesting  neurons,  asking  how
              they are activated, and will  begin  studies  aimed  at  asking whether these
              serotonin-containing neurons  show  any  changes in functioning as a long-term
              consequence of  changes  in social status. With the octopamine neurosecretory
              cells we plan  studies aimed at defining their physiological roles, learning 
              how  they  are  activated, asking how and where they interact with  the 
              corresponding  sets  of serotonin-containing neurons,  and  asking  whether  a 
              subset of these cells that selectively  innervate  the  claws, serve any direct
              role in the switch to subordinate behavior  seen when animals lose one of their
              large claws.        The  emphasis  in all of our studies is on understanding, 
              at  a  neuronal  level,  the short-and long-term consequences  of  social 
              interactions  between animals. With its well studied biochemistry,  physiology,
               anatomy  and  behavior,  the  lobster  model  we  are  examining, offers many
              advantages in addressing such issues.
