Title       : Translational Control of RuBPCase Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9728547

Award Number: 9728547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275800             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berry camjob@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Gollnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9728547  Berry/Gollnick  Amaranth is a dicotyledonous grain plant that uses
              the highly efficient c4 pathway of photosynthesis. In amaranth, the expression
              of genes encoding the large subunit (LSU, produced from the plastid-encoded
              rbcL gene) and small subunit (SSU, produced from nuclear-encoded rbcS genes) of
              ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBPCase) is strongly regulated by light and by
              developmental processes. Previously, it has been shown that very rapid changes
              in synthesis of the LSU and SSU polypeptides are induced in response to changes
              in illumination, and that these changes are due to regulation at the
              translations/level. In addition, alterations in translation from rbcL and RbcS
              mRNAs are associated with changes in leaf photosynthetic capacity, and appear
              to occur during various stages of leaf development. The research to be
              conducted will analyze light-dependent mRNA/protein interactions that occur at
              the 5' UTR of rbcL mRNA. The light-dependent binding of two 47 kDa proteins and
              the formation of a slow-migrating gel mobility shift complex to processed rbcL
              5'UTR sequences are tightly associated with our observations of light-induced
              activation of RuBPCase LSU translation. To better understand the role of
              mRNA/protein interactions in regulating the synthesis of this plastid-encoded
              photosynthetic polypeptide, the predominant 47 kDa rbcL 5' UTR mRNA binding
              proteins will be characterized and their associated factors identified. The
              formation and composition of the slow-migrating rbcL 5' UTR RNA binding complex
              produced by plastid extracts from light-grown plants will be investigated, as
              will the fast-migrating complex produced by the dark-plastid extracts. In
              addition, it will be determined how processing differences in the length of the
              rbcL 5' UTR prevent or enhance light-dependent protein binding and complex
              formation. In the long term, the information acquired from these in depth
              biochemical studies will be used to characterize the kinetic properties of the
              light-dependent protein/R NA interactions, and to determine the role of the RNA
              binding proteins using a transgenic C4 dicot system. These investigations will
              provide novel insights into mechanisms that regulate photosynthetic gene
              expression at the translational level in the C4 dicot amaranth and other higher
              plants.  In higher plants light serves both as a primary energy source and as
              an environmental signal that regulates development. Investigations into
              light-regulated responses in plants are of fundamental importance in
              determining how factors controlling plant development respond to environmental
              stimuli. The process of protein translation is an integral part of the overall
              pathway of gene expression in all organisms. Rapid changes in the translation
              of specific mRNAs may be a mechanism for adapting to sudden environmental
              changes that could affect the survival of the organism. In addition to
              providing unique perspectives about the genetic control of photosynthesis, this
              basic research with amaranth will aid in its development as an agriculturally
              important crop for food production and for industry.
