Title       : The Ecology and Development of Male Song Production and Female Song Preferences
               in Brown-Headed Cowbirds From Different Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9728091

Award Number: 9728091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen I. Rothstein rothstei@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrian L. O'Loghlen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        Non Technical Abstract   9728091       Rothstein, S. I.        This
              project employs integrated field and laboratory  approaches to investigate the
              development of vocal behavior  in a common songbird, the Brown-headed Cowbird. 
              Major  emphases are elucidation of the ecological conditions that  limit or
              enhance learning processes and the concordance  between (1)  the development of
              female recognition of male  song and (2) the development of male song
              production.  Goals  will be pursued by studying wild birds under different 
              ecological conditions and by bringing birds into captivity  for short periods
              to study song structure and function.      The cowbird is important to the
              study of animal behavior and  ecology for several reasons.  The extensive
              amount of prior  work on it has made it a model for studies of vocal 
              development in songbirds, which is remarkably similar to  speech development in
              humans.  However, much of the prior  work has been limited to captive birds and
              may not reflect  learning processes that occur in nature.  In addition, this 
              species is a brood parasite whose young are raised by a host  species but
              nevertheless overcomes this early behavioral  deprivation and learns only
              cow-bird vocalizations.  Besides  serving as a model for behavioral development
              in the face of  early deprivation, the cowbird is also significant to 
              endangered species and to the preservation of biodiversity.  Other species may
              divert so much of their parental effort  towards raising cowbirds that they
              sometimes raise too few  of their own young to ensure the persistence of host 
              populations.  The basic knowledge gained in this study may  lead to
              improvements to the extensive and very costly  management efforts currently
              employed to ameliorate the  impacts of cowbird parasitism.
