Title       : Studies on RNA Recombination In Vivo and In Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9728277

Award Number: 9728277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford D. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9728277  Simon  The TCV RdRp, after synthesizing full-length or near
              full-length plus-strands of the associated RNA sat-RNA D, switches to using
              minus-strands of either a second associated RNA, sat-RNA C, or the TCV genomic
              RNA with transcription reinitiating just 3' of stable hairpins. This system has
              been reconstructed for in vitro studies by creating a chimeric RNA consisting
              of the recombination hot-spot from sat-RNA D plus-strands at the 3' end
              connected by a short loop to sat-RNA C minus-strands including the sat-RNA C
              recombination hot-spot hairpin (motif1-hairpin). Using partially purified TCV
              RdRp, recombination in vitro is detected as an intramolecular extension product
              from the 3' end of the sat-RNA D sequence using the sat-RNA C-derived region as
              template. The motif1-hairpin and a short intrastrand base-paired region just
              upstream of the motif1-hairpin are important for primer extension both in vitro
              and in vivo. Recombination between sat-RNA D and TCV genomic RNA in vivo does
              not apparently involve a base-paired region 3' of the TCV motif3-hairpin
              recombination hot-spot. In addition, transcription start sites for subgenomic
              (sg) RNA promoters are hot-spots for recombination in vivo. This research will:
              ( 1 ) establish an in vitro primer extension system for the TCV motif3-hairpin
              region and (2) sgRNA promoter region analogous to the system established for
              the sat-RNA C motif1-hairpin. Using a mutagenesis strategy, the roles of the
              hairpins and single-stranded regions surrounding the motif'3-hairpin or sgRNA
              promoter hairpin will be determined. In addition, the in vivo effects of adding
              sequences capable of forming heteroduplexes with sat-RNA D plus-strands
              upstream and downstream of the TCV motif3-hairpin and sgRNA promoter will be
              established. (3) The mechanism of RdRp processing of the 3' end of the nascent
              strand will be determined using the in vitro primer extension constructs
              labeled at the 3' end. By examining small labeled products of the
              primer-extension reaction, a determ ination of whether processing involves
              endonucleolytic or exonucleolytic activity and also the length of the 3' end
              sequence that is removed will be made.  RNA recombination is one of the major
              processes involved in the evolution of RNA virus genomes. In addition, analyses
              of sequences and structures that are important for recombination have provided
              major insights into a poorly characterized enzyme, the enzyme encoded by all
              RNA viruses that replicate through RNA intermediates, called RNA-dependent RNA
              polymerase (RdRp). The turnip crinkle virus (TCV) system is an unusually
              powerful system for studying RNA recombination since recombination can be
              studied using the whole organism (plant), cell culture (protoplast) and in
              vitro systems. In addition, recombination in the TCV system is between subviral
              (satellite) RNAs (such as sat-RNAs C and D) that are non-coding and are
              substantially smaller than the viral genomic RNA, or between sat-RNAs and the
              genomic RNA. This research will establish the sequences and structures on the
              RNA molecules that are important in the recombination event. In addition, the
              ability of the RdRp to repair truncations at the ends of virus RNAs using a
              process similar to recombination will be analyzed.
