Title       : Organization and Reorganization of Pattern Generators: A Comparative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9728769

Award Number: 9728769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin D. Murphy a.don.murphy@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                   Organization and Reorganization of Pattern
              Generators: A Comparative  approach.         Only  in  recent years have we
              begun to understand in  reasonable  detail  how  specific neural circuitry
              mediates any given behavior.  A  fundamental question that is difficult to
              directly address is: "How do  behaviors  co-evolve  with  the neural  circuitry
               that  mediates  the  behaviors?" This comparative study will begin to examine
              this  general  question   by   exploiting   invertebrate   feeding   systems.  
               Many  invertebrates have neurons with unique identities. These  identifiable 
              neurons  have  morphological  and physiological  characteristics,  and 
              interconnections with other identifiable neurons, that are  replicated  in 
              each individual of a species. As specification occurs some of  the  properties
              and interconnections of some of these identifiable  neurons  will  diverge, 
              whereas others will remain unchanged.  Many  distantly  related gastropods
              (i.e. different subclasses) have relatively similar  feeding  behaviors. In
              contrast many closely related  gastropods  have  radiated   into   diverse  
              ecological   niches   with   corresponding  diversification  of  feeding
              apparatuses  and  behaviors.  This  study  exploits  data  on  the  circuitry 
              underlying  similar  feeding   and  ingestive  behaviors in the distantly
              related opisthobranch sea  hare,  Aplysia  californica,  and pulmonate pond
              snail,  Helisoma  trivolvis.  Similarities and differences in the neural
              control of feeding in these  animals  will  be experimentally analyzed. These
              data will  provide  a  baseline  for  examining  the changes that  have 
              occurred  in  neural  circuitry   devoted   to  oral  behaviors  in  closely  
              related   but  ecologically   diverse   gastropods  as   the   oral   behaviors
                and  morphological feeding apparatuses have evolved.
