Title       : Function of the Cofactors of Complex II from Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9728778

Award Number: 9728778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Cecchini   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Calif Inst for Res & Edu
	      4150 Clement St (151NC)
	      San Francisco, CA  941211598    415/750-6954

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gary Cecchini  MCB-9728778    1. Technical Abstract    This study is aimed to
              investigate the function of the cofactors of fumarate reductase
              (menaquinol-fumarate oxidoreductase) (QFR) and succinate dehydrogenase
              (succinate-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) (SQR) from Escherichia coli.  These two
              membrane-bound enzyme complexes, found in most prokaryotes and eukaryotes, are
              structurally and genetically related and are important components of anaerobic
              and aerobic respiratory chains, respectively.  The cofactors of the enzyme
              include a covalently bound FAD cofactor, bound to the largest membrane
              extrinsic subunit of the complex which contains the substrate binding site. The
              iron-sulfur containing subunit of the complex contains three distinct Fe-S
              clusters.  The Fe-S clusters are: Center 1, a  2Fe-2S 2+,1+ cluster; Center 2,
              a  4Fe-4S 2+,1+ cluster; and Center 3, a  3Fe-4S 1+,0 cluster. The membrane
              intrinsic domain of the complexes contain two hydrophobic subunits which
              provide site(s) for the interaction of the enzyme with quinone cofactors.  In
              addition, the SQR complex, (but not QFR) contains a heme prosthetic group.  The
              enzyme complexes can catalyze the same reactions   with both SQR and QFR
              proficient at succinate oxidation, however, only QFR   is highly active as a
              fumarate reductase.  The nature of electron transfer   through the highly
              similar enzyme complexes and their cofactors must   therefore be responsible
              for the inability of SQR to efficiently reduce   fumarate in catalytic assays. 
              The reasons for this difference will be a   major focus of this proposal.
              Experiments are designed to use biochemical, biophysical, and molecular
              biological techniques to investigate the protein environment responsible for
              the functioning of the FAD, Fe-S, and heme cofactors in the enzymes.  The
              enzyme complexes are easily manipulated by site-directed mutagenesis and both
              wild type and mutant forms of the enzyme can be isolated in very high yield. 
              The large amounts of highly purified enzyme complex which is  produced aids in
              EPR, magnetic circular dichroism (MCD), and resonance Raman spectroscopic
              methods used to analyze the   environment of the Fe-S clusters and the redox
              potential of these important   cofactors.  Site-directed mutants of both enzyme
              complexes will be   constructed and analyzed for their effect on the Fe-S
              clusters.  This will   be done to determine if the redox potential of the Fe-S
              clusters can be   manipulated in a predictable manner and if the differences in
              redox   potential for the Fe-S clusters of SQR and QFR are the major reason for
              the   differences in the catalytic activity between the two enzyme complexes.  
              Investigations will also be begun to determine if time resolved kinetic  
              measurements of electron transfer through the various cofactors of QFR and  
              SQR can be measured.  This will be accomplished by following the  
              photooxidation of pyranine dyes placed specifically at the active site of   SQR
              and QFR and monitoring electron transfer through the FAD, heme, and   quinone
              cofactors of the enzymes.  These studies will aid in the understanding of
              electron transfer reactions through proteins.  Important information will also
              be provided on the differences in electron transfer through the highly similar
              QFR and SQR enzyme complexes.            Gary Cecchini, Ph.D.  MCB-9728778     
              2. Non-technical abstract    This study investigates the function of the
              cofactors of two enzyme complexes important for the function of respiratory
              function in cells in both an aerobic and anaerobic environment. The enzyme
              complexes studied are fumarate reductase (menaquinol-fumarate oxidoreductase,
              QFR) and succinate dehydrogenase (succinate-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, SQR)
              usually from the bacterium Escherichia coli.  These two membrane-bound enzyme
              complexes, found in most prokaryotes and eukaryotes, are structurally and
              genetically related.  Both enzyme complexes contain a covalently bound FAD
              cofactor, bound to the largest membrane extrinsic subunit of the complex, which
              also contains t he dicarboxylate binding site. Each enzyme also contains three
              distinct iron-sulfur clusters which participate in the electron transfer
              function of the enzymes.  The iron-sulfur clusters have distinct redox
              potentials spanning a range of several hundred mV.  In addition, to the
              iron-sulfur cluster the SQR   complex, but not the QFR complex, contains a heme
              cofactor as an additional   prosthetic group.  The major questions being
              investigated are what factors   in the protein environment control the redox
              potential of the various   prosthetic groups in these two enzymes and thus the
              path of electron flow   through the complexes. Under defined conditions
              succinate dehydrogenase acts as a "tunnel diode" in directing the path of
              electrons through the various prosthetic groups which act as the electron wires
              in the protein complex.  Using the techniques of site-directed mutagenesis and
              electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) the protein environment will
              be modified to understand how one can alter the rate and directionality of
              electron flow in these enzymes by modification of the redox potential of the
              cofactors.  These   studies will allow a more complete understanding of ways
              nature designs the   micro protein machinery involved in electron transfer
              reactions.  In   addition, the studies will show how two very similar enzyme
              complexes can be   poised to catalyze different chemical reactions.
