Title       : Molecular Genetic Mechanisms of Gonad Development in Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9728587

Award Number: 9728587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Postlethwait jpostle@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The long-term objective of this project is to understand the genetic
              mechanisms that control gonad development in animals with backbones. The
              general morphology and endocrinology of gonad development are well conserved
              among vertebrates, but the genetic pathway that determines whether a gonad
              becomes an ovary or a testis is not well understood in any vertebrate.
              Understanding the mechanisms that regulate gonad growth and differentiation
              takes on increasing significance as environmental pollutants, such as some
              polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), may disturb gonad development and endocrine
              function in fish, birds, and mammals, including humans. The resulting effects
              on the physiology of reproduction are significant for the preservation of
              wildlife populations and for human reproductive health.    Although the
              underlying pathway of gonad development may be shared among vertebrates,
              different vertebrate lineages have different ways of diverting the pathway
              towards an ovary or a testis. Some species have strong genotypic sex
              determination, such as mammals in which a specific gene called SRY on the
              Y-chromosome specifies gonad development. Other species have strong
              environmental sex determination, such as some turtles in which the temperature
              of embryo incubation regulates gonad sex. Investigations on zebrafish suggest
              the hypothesis that multiple genotypic factors, with a minor influence from the
              environment, cause an individual's gonads to express either genes for androgen
              synthesizing enzymes and androgen receptor, or express genes for estrogen
              synthesizing enzymes and estrogen receptor; these endocrine factors may then
              control the sex of the gonad, primary germ cells, and secondary sex
              characteristics.    This hypothesis will be tested in three ways: Specific Aim
              1. The proposed experiments will investigate the expression patterns of genes
              predicted by the model to play a role in early gonadal development of the
              zebrafish. Specific Aim 2: The proposed experiments will perturb gonad
              development  using sex steroids and their inhibitors, and various mutations,
              and investigate whether gene expression patterns change in ways predicted by
              the model. Specific Aim 3: The proposed experiments will identify quantitative
              trait loci (QTLs) associated with sex differentiation in zebrafish. Map
              locations will be compared to those of genes isolated in Specific Aim 1 and
              with mammalian genomes to suggest candidate genes for gonad differentiation in
              zebrafish.    Achieving the specific aims will result in a more robust
              understanding of the control mechanisms of gonad development in zebrafish, and
              will point to genetic loci that influence sex determination in this species.
              The resulting firmer understanding of the basic nature of sex determination in
              zebrafish will permit the future design of mutagenesis protocols to isolate
              novel genes important for vertebrate sex determination.
