Title       : Atomic Scale Studies of Heterophase Metallic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9728986

Award Number: 9728986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603181             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Seidman d-seidman@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9728986  Seidman    The principal thrust of this study is examination of 
              segregation at well-characterized coherent and semicoherent  heterophase
              interfaces developed in the same alloy system.  Specimen preparation is
              achieved primarily via solid-state  decomposition reactions or internal
              nitridation to produce  precipitates with atomically clean interfaces.  This is
               followed by low-temperature treatments to induce segregation  of ternary or
              quaternary elements.  Below a critical  diameter the precipitates are coherent,
              while above this  diameter they are semicoherent, allowing a study of 
              segregation at either coherent or semicoherent interfaces.  The highest
              resolution techniques available, including atom-  probe field-ion and
              three-dimensional atom-probe  microscopies, high-resolution and scanning
              transmission  electron microscopies, and spatially resolved electron- 
              energy-loss spectroscopy, are employed.  Among the systems  investigated, which
              include both interfaces of technological  interest and `model' interfaces, are
              Al/Al3Sc (Mg) (an  aerospace structural alloy); Al(Cu) and Cu(Sn or In) 
              (interconnects for integrated circuits); Fe/Mo, Fe/Mo(V);  alpha-Fe/molybdenum
              nitride (Sn); Au/Ni, with and without  segregants.  Theoretical modeling of
              heterophase interfaces  addresses the interface structure and the properties of
              the  segregants at the interfaces.  The modeling employs ab  initio density
              functional theory calculations, molecular  dynamics and Monte Carlo
              simulations, and continuum  elasticity theory.  %%%  Segregating atoms play a
              crucial role in the physical and  mechanical properties of technologically
              significant  heterophase metallic interfaces.  Segregants are important  for
              tailoring interfacial properties, e.g., by the  introduction of selected
              microalloying solutes in controlled  quantities.  Control of the critical
              transition diameter  from coherent to semicoherent precipitates is 
              technologically important, as it determines the stability of  the
              microstructure of the m aterial.  ***
