Title       : Regulation of Shoot Development by the Maize Meristem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9728518

Award Number: 9728518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erin E. Irish erin-irish@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Irish  9728518    The shoot apical meristem of higher plants is ultimately
              responsible for the post-embryonic addition of new cells, tissues, and organs
              to the shoot through-out the life of the plant. During vegetative development,
              the meristem initiates leaves and stem tissue in a repetitive manner. As
              vegetative development progresses, the manner in which newly formed organs
              differentiate may vary, in a process termed phase change. Once in the
              reproductive phase, shoot meristems form or become floral meristems, which
              initiate a predictable and determinate sequence of floral organs. Much remains
              to be learned about the functioning of the vegetative shoot apical meristem,
              such as how it initiates lateral organs, to what extent it determines how those
              organs differentiate, and how the vegetative meristem is convened to an
              inflorescence or floral meristem.    The focus of the research proposed here is
              to ask to what controls various developmental processes that occur at the shoot
              apex. The experiments will be conducted using the maize plant, and will take
              advantage of a technique, shoot meristem culture, that we have developed for
              maize. Our previous experiments using meristem culture indicated that both the
              change from vegetative to reproductive development and the process of phase
              change are under the control of global signaling that occurs throughout the
              plant. We propose a set of experiments that are aimed at understanding how
              global signaling in maize is coordinated with meristem-autonomous activities.
              The following questions will be addressed: 1. How is the expression of
              indeterminate, a gene required for the transition to flowering in maize,
              affected by the culture-induced resetting of a shoot apex? 2. How is the
              meristem reorganized when it is forced to undergo a prolonged period of
              vegetative development? 3. Are all phase-specific phenotypes reset when an
              adult meristem is isolated and forms a complete new shoot? If resetting occurs
              in a specific gene (PI-Blotched), how is the methylation  state of that locus
              affected? 4. In mutant backgrounds in which the juvenile phase is prolonged and
              reproduction delayed, is this slower ontogeny the result of altered (weaker)
              signaling from leaf primordia? Is the expression of heterochronic mutations
              dependent on the phase of the plant, or on a free-running measurement o1' time
              after germination? The answers to these questions will increase our
              understanding of the global changes that occur during shoot ontogeny and the
              role of the shoot meristem, the site of organogenesis, in directing these
              changes.
