Title       : Support for the Field Museum Fossil Invertebrate Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9728991

Award Number: 9728991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott H. Lidgard lidgard@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Field Museum's Fossil Invertebrate Collection is  recognized internationally
              for its vast size and ongoing  significance to research in systematics,
              evolution, and  paleoecology.  The collection includes about 320,000  specimen
              lots with as many as 2 million individual  specimens.  However, specimen
              overcrowding has hampered  efforts to realize the full potential of the
              collection.  Implementation of the project outlined in this proposal will 
              result in a better organized, less crowded, and more easily  accessible
              collection.  The project will successfully  address conservation issues, first
              by curating much of our  backlog holdings, and second by alleviating crowding
              of  specimens.  The taxonomic division of this material and the  integration of
              specimens into a temporal/systematic  framework is viewed as the most practical
              and scientifically  beneficial  manner in which to treat it.  This project
              outlines the  reorganization and move of the entire collection,  and additional
              primary curation by staff and visiting  curators for type specimens,
              echinoderms and Paleozoic  gastropods.  The recent move of paleobotanical
              collections  to new facilities has provided additional cabinet space more  than
              sufficient for this need. The curation and  incorporation of the backlog
              material in collections will  result in effectively "new" specimens becoming
              available to  the scientific community.
