Title       : Molecular Genetics of Cell Differentiation in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9728047

Award Number: 9728047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Larkin jlarkin@unixl.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research is to understand the steps that lead from the
              selection of a cell's developmental fate to the elaboration of its ultimate
              differentiated phenotype.  This problem is being studied using hairs
              (trichomes) on the leaves of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model for
              understanding the control of cell differentiation.  These trichomes are highly
              specialized single cells that extend out from the epidermis.  Although in the
              field, Arabidopsis trichomes have been shown to provide significant protection
              from insect herbivores, trichomes are non-essential under laboratory
              conditions.  In addition, trichomes are located on the surface of the plant,
              and mutant phenotypes are readily observed.  These two features of trichomes
              have facilitated the isolation of mutants and genetic analysis.  Mutations in
              more than twenty different genes have been identified that affect trichome
              development and/or morphology, and three genes affecting trichome development
              have been cloned.  Two of the earliest-acting genes in the trichome development
              pathway have turned out to be transcription factors.  These genes commit an
              epidermal cell to a highly specialized differentiation process involving
              dramatic changes in cell shape.  At present, there is little understanding of
              how transcription factors can control processes such as polarized growth of a
              cell in any organism.  The ultimate goal of this project is to connect events
              occuring during the cell fate decision and the cellular mechanisms responsible
              for the mature trichome cell phenotype.  This connection is poorly understood
              in all organisms, and the study of trichome development is likely to produce
              results with broad implications for understanding development in plants and
              animals.
