Title       : Muscle Mechanics in Squid: An Integrated Analysis of Muscle Fiber Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9728707

Award Number: 9728707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Kier billkier@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728707  Kier  Comparison of striated muscle cells from a diversity of animals
              reveals a remarkable range of performance.  This specialization depends both on
              variation in the chemical composition of the cells and on variation in the
              arrangement and dimensions of the components of the cells.  Much of the
              previous research on this topic has been focused on vertebrate muscle, in which
              muscle fiber specialization occurs primarily through variation in chemical
              composition.  Little research has been done, however, on muscle specialization
              in invertebrates, in spite of the fact that a much greater range of striated
              muscle structure and performance is observed in these animals.  The muscle
              cells to be studied in this investigation are the obliquely striated cells of
              the arms and the cross striated cells of the tentacles of the squid Loligo
              pealei.  Previous research has shown remarkable differences in the
              ultrastructure of the two cell types and the physiological implications of
              these differences have been hypothesized, yet the actual physiological
              performance of these cells has not been studied.  Recent studies also suggest
              that the cross striated muscle cells of the tentacle are derived, both through
              ontogeny and phylogeny, from an obliquely striated muscle fiber type.  This
              study will offer the opportunity to explore and to document the physiological
              implications of the structural specializations of the cross striated fibers. 
              This will be the first measurement of the basic physiological parameters of the
              two muscle types.  These data will be used to test and refine a
              forward-dynamics model of the tentacle strike.
