Title       : Lipid Metabolism in the Oyster Protozoan Parasite, PERKINSUS MARINUS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9728284

Award Number: 9728284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Lin E. Chu chu@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9728284  Chu  The protozoan parasite Perkinsus marinus (Dermo) is one of the two
              important parasites that have been causing severe mortality in the American
              (eastern) oyster, Crassostrea virginica, on the eastern and Gulf coasts of the
              United States since the 1950's.  Presently, no information exists on lipid
              metabolism and biosynthesis in this parasite, although its host is an
              ecologically and economically important aquatic species. Using radiolabeled or
              "fluorescent-labeled" precursors, the investigator will characterize lipid
              metabolism and biosynthesis in this parasite in relation to its growth phases
              and life stages. She will also determine if temperature and salinity affect the
              parasite's lipid metabolism and biosynthesis and, in addition, will investigate
              the effect of P. marinus parasitism on the lipid metabolism of the host.  She
              will use gas liquid chromatography (GLC), thin layer chromatography/flame
              ionization detector (TLC/FID) lipid analyzer (Iatroscan MK-3), high performance
              TLC, argentation TLC, and high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipped
              with a flow scintillation analyzer to analyze the uptake/incorporation,
              distribution, metabolism and synthesis of lipids, particularly phospholipids,
              and fatty acids in the parasite.  The identification of fatty acids will be
              confirmed with an ELQ400-2 GC/MS system.  The morphological distribution of 
              "fluorescent labels" will be examined by epifluorescent and electron
              microscopy.    Parasites are the major cause of disease in oysters on the
              eastern and Gulf coasts of the United States.  These parasites derive their
              food, mainly in the form of lipids and protein, from the oyster.  This is the
              first study of lipid metabolism of an internal parasite of an aquatic
              invertebrate species.  The results from this research will contribute to the
              fundamental understanding of lipid metabolism in host-parasite relationships,
              especially in saltwater systems.  The study will provide important information
              for the establishment of a host-parasite in vertebrate model to elucidate
              mechanisms involved in lipid acquisition in parasites.  This information may
              also serve as the basis for the future development of a procedure to control
              oyster parasites.
