Title       : Molecular Structure and Function of Fruit Cuticle Polyesters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9728503

Award Number: 9728503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Stark stark@postbox.csi.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728503  Stark  The cuticle of higher plants functions primarily as a protective
              barrier for the leaves and fruit, controlling microbial attack as well as the
              diffusion of water and chemicals.  Its major chemical constituents are waxes
              that provide waterproofing and either of two insoluble structural polymers,
              cutin and suberin.  This project aims to understand how the monomer units are
              linked together and to cell-wall matrices, how stresses alter the membrane's
              supramolecular architecture and surface microstructure, and how the suberin
              polymer is synthesized during wound healing.  Several biophysical approaches
              will be taken to these problems.  (1) Oligomeric fragments of lime cutin and
              potato suberin will be produced chemically and identified using
              high-performance liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, and nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR).  (2) The flexibility and phase segregation of intact tomato
              cuticles will be assessed in response to wind, temperature, and hydration
              stress using solid-state  13C and 2H NMR. (3) The response of tomato cuticle
              surface topography and micromechanical properties to dewaxing, swelling, and
              application of aqueous detergents will be examined using atomic force
              microscopy (AFM).  (4) The biosynthesis of suberin in wound-healing potato
              tissues, including feeding with 13C-enriched precursors, will be monitored
              through spectroscopic analysis of soluble phenolic metabolities and insoluble
              cell-wall bound materials.  The overall objectives of this project include
              understanding how the monomer units of the protective cutin and suberin
              biopolymers are linked together and to supporting cell-wall matrices, how
              environmental stresses such as wind abrasion, high humidity, and temperature
              shock alter the architecture of the cuticular membrane, and how the suberin
              polymer is synthesized by the plant tissue during wound healing.  Ultimately,
              this research should have both agricultural and economic impact, aiding in the
              design of essential crop protection strategies.  More b roadly, the
              microstructural and molecular insights developed from this work may assist the
              development of synthetic waterproofing materials for industrial or cosmetic
              use.  Finally, this project will serve to introduce methods such as solid-state
              NMR and AFM to the community of plant scientists.  ***
