Title       : Mechanisms of Homologous Pairing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9728070

Award Number: 9728070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent G. Golic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for, "Mechanisms of Homologous Pairing in Drosophila"   Kent Golic,
              P.I.  - 9728070    The work described here is designed to characterize the
              mechanism of homologous chromosome pairing in mitotic cells of Drosophila
              rnelanogaster. Pairing will be examined in different tissues at different
              stages of development, in order to assemble a detailed picture of how cells
              manage to efficiently pair homologous sequences. The proposed experiments will
              determine whether pairing is a dynamic process that continues throughout
              interphase, and whether there are specific portions of the chromosomes that act
              to promote pairing. The influence of chromosome structure and the arrangement
              of chromosomes in the nucleus will be examined to determine whether these
              factors constrain the ability of chromosomal sequences to find and pair with
              homologous sequences elsewhere in the genome. In these experiments, the FLP
              site-specific recombinase and its target sites (FRTs) will be used to
              quantitate mitotic pairing, and the disruption of that pairing by chromosome
              rearrangements. The principal that underhes these experiments is that, in order
              to recombine, FRTs must pair, and that pairing must be brought about by normal
              cellular functions. By supplying the FLP recombinase to the cell in a
              controlled fashion, the levels of recombination that are detected must reflect
              the relative pairing of FRTs in different circumstances. Because FLP-mediated
              recombination is highly efficient, large amounts of data can be obtained with
              relative ease. In addition, FRT insertions can be used to assay pairing at many
              different sites throughout the genome.    Chromosome pairing is a fundamental
              feature of chromosome behavior in many types of cells. Homologous chromosome
              pairing is needed for meiotic recombination and the faithful segregation of
              homologs in Meiosis I. Double-strand breaks can be repaired by using homologous
              sequences as a template, and this clearly requires that the sequences be in
              close proximity. Ectopic pairing and re combination has been implicated in
              small scale and large scale genome rearrangemerit in evolution. Pairing of
              sequences at ectopic sites may also be involved in generating the recurrent
              chromosome rearrangements that are associated with some types of cancer.
              Ectopic pairing may also underlie phenomena of multi-copy suppression that have
              been observed in many organisms. The work to be undertaken will increase our
              understanding of the mechanisms that cells use to pair homologs. It will likely
              be possible to generalize the results to provide a better understanding of the
              mechanism that cells employ to bring together homologous DNA sequences. In
              addition, the proposed work will have practical benefits for the Drosophila
              community. A resource of approximately 100 insertions of specially designed
              FRT-bearing P elements, with locations and orientations determined, will be
              produced. These P elements can be used for making chromosome rearrangements, as
              targets for the FLP-mediated insertion of genes, and for mitotic recombination.
              Furthermore, methods to increase the efficiency of FLP-mediated DNA integration
              should result.
