Title       : Studies on Stationary Phase Cultures of Eschericia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9728936

Award Number: 9728936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Kolter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Kolter  9728936  When nutrients are plentiful and conditions are propitious
              for growth most bacteria grow exponentially. However, due to the usual limited
              availability of nutrients, exponential growth periods tend be short-lived and
              bacteria must cope with prolonged periods of starvation. Many gram-negative
              bacteria, among them Escherichia coli, respond to starvation by developing
              increased resistance to environmental stresses. For E. coli, this starvation
              response is controlled in great part by a starvation-inducible sigma factor
              sigma-s, the product of the rpoS gene. Soon after the entry into the stationary
              phase of growth induction of the sigma-s regulon results in a homogeneous
              population of highly resistant cells.  However, if starvation continues for
              very long what ensues is anything but stationary.  Despite the induction of the
              rpoS regulon, prolonged starvation inevitably leads to a heterogeneous
              population with some cells dying while others survive. Most importantly, the
              survivors in starving populations are not just cells identical to the initial
              strain but rather the progeny of mutant subpopulations that have a Growth
              Advantage in Stationary Phase (referred to as mutants that can express a  GASP
              phenotype).                                                    From these
              observations emerges the hypothesis that underlies this research:  In some
              instances starving bacterial populations can both survive and evolve by
              repeated takeovers of GASP mutants under conditions when essential nutrients
              are provided predominantly by the dead cells.  This hypothesis makes many
              predictions and raises many questions.  The fact that mutant alleles of rpoS
              which result in reduced expression of the sigma-s regulon can confer the GASP
              phenotype indicates that under some starvation conditions maximal expression of
              the regulon is not advantageous. Two questions arise. First, what is the range
              of mutant alleles obtainable and how is the sigma-s product affected?  Second,
              if there are conditions where less  sigma-s is better, is there allelic
              variation in rpoS among wild-type isolates of E. coli?  Additionally,
              populations that are taken over by GASP mutants can themselves be taken over by
              subsequent second and even third generation GASP mutants. Here again several
              questions arise.  How many cycles of GASPing can occur before a strain will no
              longer evolve under a particular selective condition?  Where do additional
              GASP-conferring mutations lie?  Finally, the physiology of the GASP phenomenon
              needs to be addressed in much more detail.  What are the GASP mutants utilizing
              as nutrients and where are these nutrients coming from?  To address these
              questions the following experiments are being conducted:  1) Isolate a
              collection of GASP-conferring rpoS alleles and determine the changes in the
              gene and analyze changes in the expression of sigma-s activity.  2) Obtain
              fresh wild-type isolates of E. coli from diverse environments and sequence
              their rpoS genes and characterize their sigma-s proteins.  3)  Determine how
              many rounds of GASP can occur under one set of defined starvation conditions
              and identify genetic loci able to confer subsequent rounds of GASP.  4)
              Identify nutrients that GASP mutants can obtain from the dead cells in the
              population.  5) Identify genes that are required for the expression of GASP
              when a cell harbors a GASP-conferring allele or alleles.
