Title       : The Identification and Characterization of Synthetic Peptide Substrates and
               Inhibitors for Protein Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9728399

Award Number: 9728399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kit S. Lam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lam  9728399    1. Technical    This study focuses on protein tyrosine kinases
              (PTKs), which play an important role in signal transduction for a broad
              spectrum of cellular activities, including T-cell and B-cell activation,
              responses to extracellular stimuli, mitogenesis, differentiation, and
              oncogenesis. The objective is to further our understanding of the range and
              substrate specificity of these enzymes, particularly peptide substrates and
              inhibitors for p60c-src PTK.  The structure-activity relationship, kinetic
              parameters, physico-chemical interaction, and biological and biochemical
              effects on v-src transfected cells or cells that have constitutively elevated
              c-src activity are basic issues that are studied.  Experiments include:
              evaluation "one-bead one-compound" combinatorial peptide libraries with
              p60c-src PTK for identification of additional substrate motifs; design of
              potent pseudosubstrate-based peptide inhibitors for p60c-src PTK; detailed
              kinetic studies on the identified substrates and inhibitors; probing the
              biochemical effects of the peptide inhibitors on the phosphorylation of
              cellular proteins; examining the biological and biochemical effects of the
              peptide inhibitors on v-src transfected 3T3 and other cell lines; computer
              modelling ( DOCK  program) the interaction between the peptide substrates or
              inhibitors with the known crystal structure of p60c-src PTK; and determining
              the X-ray crystal structure of the co-crystal (in collaboration with Professor
              Stephen Harrison and Michael Eck of Harvard University).    2. Non-technical   
              Protein tyrosine kinases represent a class of enzymes that play extremely
              important roles in various cellular activities such as cell division, cell
              death, and cancer formation.  Despite their great importance, very little is
              known about the mechanism of action of these enzymes.  The objective of this
              study is to build on what has already been discovered in this laboratory in the
              last two years (NSF Grant MCB 9506217) on the p60c-src protein tyrosine ki nase
              project.  The peptide substrates and inhibitors that have already been
              identified will be used to further study the mechanism of action of this
              enzyme.  Kinetic studies will also be performed with these peptides. 
              Additionally, Dr. Lam has established a collaboration with Drs. Eck and
              Harrison of Harvard University to determine the X-ray structure of the
              peptide-enzyme complex.  Also planned is the use of computer modelling
              techniques to understand how these peptides interact with the enzyme.  Finally,
              different approaches will be followed to deliver the peptide inhibitors into
              cells and study their fundamental biological effect on cell lines which have an
              elevated level of protein for p60c-src tyrosine kinase.
