Title       : Functional Analysis of NPR1 in SAR Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9728111

Award Number: 9728111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinnian Dong xdong@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728111  The long-term goal of this project is to understand the induction
              pathway and molecular mechanisms that confer systemic acquired resistance (SAR)
              to plants.  SAR confers immunity to a broad spectrum of  pathogens and is
              normally established after a primary exposure to avirulent pathogens.  Using a
              genetic approach, the npr1 mutant in Arabidopsis was isolated and demonstrated
              to control the onset of SAR.  Mutants with defects in NPR1 fail to respond to
              various SAR-inducing signals, such as salicyclic acid (SA) and avirulent
              pathogens, display little expression of pathogenesis-related (PR) genes and
              exhibit increased susceptibility to infections. Recently NPR1 was cloned using
              a map-based approach and the gene was found to encode a novel protein
              containing ankyrin repeats.  Ankyrin repeats have been identified in a variety
              of proteins and are thought to mediate protein-protein interactions.  Lesions
              in the npr1 mutant alleles disrupt the ankyrin consensus sequence, suggesting
              that these repeats are important for NPR1 function.  Transformation of the
              cloned wild-type NPR1 gene into npr1 not only complemented the mutant
              phenotypes but also rendered the transgenic plants more resistant to infections
              by Pseudomonas syringae and Peronospora parasitica.  Furthermore, studies of
              transgenic lines carrying the NPR1-GFP fusion showed that NPR1 is localized to
              the nucleus upon induction.  These findings, along with the fact that
              NPR1-overexpressing plants are perfectly healthy, suggests that the NPR1 gene
              is a positive regulator of SAR and may serve as a target gene for genetically
              engineering disease-resistant plants.  The biological role of NPR1 in
              transducing the SA signal and in regulating PR gene expression has been
              demonstrated in previous studies.  This project will focus on two specific aims
              to elucidate the molecular function of NPR1: (1) Determining the functional
              importance and the regulation of NPR1 nuclear localization:  Mutagenesis
              studies will be carried out to determine whether nucle ar localization of the
              NPR1 protein is necessary and sufficient for activating PR gene expression and
              SAR, and how the localization process is regulated.  (2) Determining the role
              of NPR1 in regulating PR gene expression:  Promoters of the NPR1-regulated PR
              genes will be analyzed and gel mobility shift assays will be performed to
              determine whether NPR1 directly regulates the PR gene promoters or indirectly
              affects the activity of a transcription factor(s) which controls the expression
              of these genes.      The outcome of this research will have a beneficial impact
              on basic research and on society.  Genetically engineered disease-resistant
              plants generated with the knowledge of disease resistance mechanisms can lead
              to reduction in the usage of harmful pesticides.  Studies have also begun to
              compare the plant defense mechanisms against microbial infection with those in
              animal systems to determine whether there is any conservation in the evolution
              of this fundamental biological function.
