Title       : TECO: Carbon Monoxide Consumption by Forest and Agroecosystem Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9728363

Award Number: 9728363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Carol Johnston                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. King GKing@Maine.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1095,1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9728363  King  Carbon monoxide is a more dynamic component of the atmosphere
              than methane, occurring at a lower concentration but substantially higher flux.
              CO and hydroxyl radical interact rapidly, affecting a number of atmospheric
              parameters: the oxidative state of the troposphere; the fate and residence
              times of methane, non-methane organics and inorganics; tropospheric ozone; and
              the extent of thermal forcing. Soils consume atmospheric CO, accounting for
              10-25% of the global carbon budget, depending on the source estimate. Some of
              the controls of soil CO uptake and production have been described generally,
              but much remains unknown. Details of CO uptake in agroecosystems are
              particularly sketchy, in spite of the fact that they occupy about 10% of
              terrestrial surface area, and have a disproportionate impact on a number of
              important trace gases. Limited field results have suggested that CO uptake in
              agroecosystems may be equivalent to or greater than uptake in undisturbed
              systems. Stimulation of CO consumption in agroecosystems could partially
              ameliorate the inhibition of methane uptake that accompanies agriculture by
              enhancing the availability of tropospheric OH. Since CO uptake is as much as
              10-fold greater than methane uptake on a global basis, small changes in soil CO
              dynamics (positive or negative) can have a significant impact on the fate of
              methane.   This study will determine specifically the extent to which
              agricultural practices affect atmospheric CO consumption by soils. Agricultural
              soils will be compared with similar non-agricultural soils across a gradient of
              texture using sites in Maine and Georgia. This study will focus on gas
              exchange, water regimes, temperature, and various agricultural disturbances
              (fertilization, pesticide use, tilling, no-till), as controls of CO fluxes. The
              extent to which several microbial groups of CO oxidizers vary as a function of
              land use will also be determined. The results of this study will establish both
              rates and the major controls of soil CO dyn amics, as well as the sensitivity
              of CO uptake to climate change and other anthropogenic perturbations.
