Title       : Visual Control of Prey Pursuit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9728032

Award Number: 9728032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cole Gilbert cg23@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 97-28032  GILBERT      Detection of targets while moving is difficult for
              systems that  track targets visually, because the observer's own movements 
              degrade the target image by blurring it.  The blur causes a  decrease in visual
              contrast between the target image and the  background that makes it difficult
              to localize the target.  Such  motion-induced problems in target detection
              exist for moving  animals, such as visually-hunting predators, and also for
              man-made  systems, such as optically-guided robots.    Predatory animals have
              evolved various strategies for coping with  degradation of target images during
              pursuit.  Tiger beetles are  diurnal, visually-hunting predators that pursue
              their moving prey  by running discontinuously, i.e., after initially localizing
              its  prey, a beetle runs very fast (over 0.5 meter per second), then  stops
              briefly (a few hundred milliseconds), then runs fast again  toward the prey. 
              This pattern of stop-and-go is repeated three or  four times until the
              continuously moving prey is caught.  In  preliminary experiments, Dr. Cole
              Gilbert filmed beetles pursuing  live prey or experimenter-controlled prey
              dummies. Frame-by-frame  analysis indicated that a beetle stops only long
              enough to  relocalize the prey.  While a beetle is stopped, the image of the 
              prey is not degraded and thus may be easier to see and localize.  Subsequently,
              while the beetle is quickly running toward the prey,  its image is degraded,
              perhaps so much so that the beetle loses  track of it and must stop again. This
              hypothesis is supported by  results from experiments in which beetles pursued
              prey dummies of  very high contrast.  In such pursuits, beetles were able to
              run  continuously after the prey without stopping, suggesting that the  visual
              contrast of the target image determines the type of pursuit  the beetle can
              afford.    Dr. Gilbert will investigate visually-guided pursuit by tiger 
              beetles using a newly acquired digital camera capable of much  higher speeds
              than his previous equipment .  In particular, he will  more rigorously test the
              hypothesis that viewing conditions  determine whether the beetle performs
              continuous or stop-and-go  pursuit.  In short, is the beetle's switch in
              behavior an adaptive  response to the amount of degradation of the target
              image?  Various levels of target contrast and velocity will be used to  produce
              different amounts of degradation and the dynamic  properties of the resulting
              pursuits will be analyzed.  The  results from the project will elucidate the
              strategy used by the  tiger beetle to cope with degradation of target images
              caused by  the beetle's own high velocity.  Moreover, the results may suggest 
              useful strategies for man-made exploratory machines that often  need to
              efficiently survey large areas quickly.  The project may  reveal that in some
              situations, the beetle's strategy of moving  quickly then stopping to gather
              visual information may be more  efficient than moving slowly enough to avoid
              image blur so that  visual information can be gathered continuously.
