Title       : Genetic Analysis of Plant Cell Wall Matrix Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9728779

Award Number: 9728779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolf-Dieter D. Reiter wdreiter@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9728779  Reiter    Lay Abstract    The cell walls of plants play numerous
              protective and growth-regulating roles during the life cycle of a plant. 
              Furthermore, plant cell wall material represents the most abundant renewable
              source of biomass on earth, and represents the raw material for many products
              such as wood, textiles and paper.  Accordingly, the investigation of the
              synthesis of plant cell walls is of considerable interest both from a basic and
              applied point of view.  Plant cell walls consist of many different components
              such as cellulose, pectins, and many minor polysaccharide and protein
              components.  Although most of the photosynthetically fixed carbon is ultimately
              incorporated into the polysaccharides of the cells wall, the biosynthetic
              pathways leading to the synthesis of these complex carbohydrates are poorly
              understood.  This project utilizes a genetic approach to unravel the
              complexities of these in the model plant organism, Arabidopsis thaliana.  The
              project will focus on two cell wall mutants, mur2 and mur3, which affect the
              bisynthesis of a class of important cell wall cross-linkers called xyloglucans.
               The mutants will be used to obtain the affected genes by so-called "positional
              cloning", a procedure that permits the isolation of genes based solely on their
              location within the genetic material.  Once these genes involved in the
              synthesis of the plant cell wall polysaccharides have been obtained, they will
              be used to determine their function and to identify other components of the
              cell wall biosynthetic machinery in higher plants.  In the long term, this
              knowledge is likely to permit the genetic manipulation of cell wall synthesis
              with the goal o f improving the properties of agriculturally important plants. 
              ***
