Title       : Collaborative Research on Dynamic General Equilibrium Theorywith Distortions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1991      
File        : a9109708

Award Number: 9109708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolfo E. Manuelli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project studies dynamic general equilibrium models with                   
              distortions.  There are two main areas of concern.  The first of               
              these deals with the theoretical properties of price taking models             
              with distortions in general (that is, existence, uniqueness, etc.).            
              This is basic research studying the internal consistency of the                
              Walrasian view of economics in environments in which government                
              policy plays an important role.                                                
                                                                                             
              The second area is the more specialized area of the determinants               
              of growth.  The emphasis here is on the types of and quantitative              
              nature of the effects of government policies on development.  Three            
              distinct projects will be investigated.  The first concerns the                
              form of optimal (Ramsey) taxation in models of endogenous growth               
              and involves the estimation of the productive role played by                   
              government expenditures (for example, schooling).  This will be                
              accomplished through the analysis of the steady state equations                
              from a completely specified general equilibrium model.  The second             
              project concerns the effect of monetary policy and inflation on the            
              rate of growth or development of an economy.  This has been                    
              identified as a quantitatively important policy variable in the                
              empirical literature on the determinants of growth.  The last                  
              project studies the alterations which arise in the theory of                   
              endogenous growth under conditions of uncertainty.  Very little                
              work has been done in this area to this point.  An example                     
              identified as important in the empirical literature is the                     
              depressing effect on growth of an increase in the variance of the              
              monetary expansion rule.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The last few years have seen a virtual explosion of work on models             
              of endogenous growth.  This is because of the importance of these              
              models in helping our understanding of the process of growth and               
              development.  A full development of both empirical and theoretical             
              research in this area will bring us to a deeper understanding of               
              both the successes (for example, Japan and Korea) of the last 40               
              years as well as the failures (for example, Chad).  Taken as a                 
              whole, the research will make a serious contribution to this                   
              effort.  In particular, the work on inflation and growth and growth            
              and uncertainty will be of particular use since these factors have             
              already been identified as important explanatory variables in the              
              empirical literature.
