Title       : Novel External Laser Cavities for Diode Laser Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1994     
File        : a9109029

Award Number: 9109029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295288             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Leger leger@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to analyze, fabricate, and test a new                               
              class of external resonators containing volume-                                
              holographic output mirrors for establishing                                    
              coherence across two-dimensional diode laser                                   
              arrays.  The resonators are expected to have many                              
              new properties that will enhance the performance                               
              of coherent diode laser arrays.  We will perform an                            
              analysis of the lateral modes and modal                                        
              discrimination of this new resonator geometry.                                 
              Good discrimination properties are imperative for                              
              high-power operation of diode laser arrays without                             
              coherence degradation.  We will also study edge                                
              effects and resonator optimization by computer                                 
              models.  Volume-holographic elements will be                                   
              fabricated to match the desired lateral mode from a                            
              given diode laser array.  The multi-step process                               
              consists of using lens design software to calculate                            
              the required recording wavefront, fabricating a                                
              computer-designed diffractive element by e-beam                                
              lithography and dry etching, and using the                                     
              diffractive element to expose a volume holographic                             
              material.  The performance of the volume-                                      
              holographic resonator will be studied with a linear                            
              diode laser array.  We expect this new type to                                 
              resonator geometry to have significant advantages                              
              in lateral mode control, efficiency, size, and high-                           
              power operation.  Small cavity lengths may permit                              
              future integration into a two-dimensional                                      
              monolithic structure.  In addition, the basic                                  
              technology developed in this proposal can be                                   
              applied to many other electrooptical systems such                              
              as frequency doublers, solid-state lasers, and                                 
              complex illuminators.
