Title       : Phonological and Grammatical Bases of Luganda Prosody
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1991      
File        : a9109234

Award Number: 9109234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry M. Hyman hyman@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACTS                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The present grant provides funds to allow the PI (Prof. Larry                  
              Hyman) and Dr. Francis Katamba to complete their joint research                
              on the phonological and grammatical bases of Luganda prosody.                  
              Supported by National Science Foundation                                       
              researchers have carefully documented and jointly published on a               
              number of issues concerning the interfacing of phonology and                   
              grammar in Luganda.  The project has centered around three areas:              
              1)the analysis of prosodic features (quantity, tone, accent, and               
              intonation, which impact, respectively, on theories of                         
              syllabicity, tonal representation, metrical representation and                 
              phonetic implementation); 2)the analysis of prosodic domains                   
              required by these features (the phonological word, clitic group,               
              tone group, tone phrase, and intonational phrase); and 3)the                   
              nature of the syntax-phonology interface (i.e. determining                     
              whether-or under what conditions-the phonology may directly                    
              access the syntax, rather than indirectly accessing the syntax by              
              mediation of the prosodic domains).  As is documented in the                   
              proposal, the current project has resulted in breakthroughs in                 
              each of these areas.  First, by closely scrutinizing the complex               
              data of Luganda, the researchers have discovered that the "facts"              
              (which have been cited by a number of theoretical phonologists)                
              are not always exactly as the standard references indicate.                    
              Second, the discovery of these facts has led the researchers to                
              theoretical innovations which they have explored and propose to                
              investigate further in this final phase of the project.  These                 
              innovations include a refinement of moraic theory (particularly                
              as it relates to complensatory lengthening and the question of                 
              what is a tone-bearing unit); a new contour representation of                  
              underlying tone in Luganda (and perhaps a subclass of so-called                
              pitch-accent systems); a cyclic approach to morphology and                     
              phonology that allows affixes to be "infixed" rather than added                
              to the periphery of their base; extension of overlapping prosodic              
              domains to the lexicon; and testing of these results against the               
              lexical prosodic domains required by the segmental phonology                   
              (e.g. for vowel height harmony, consonant mutation, consonant                  
              nasalization (the "Ganda (for ?Meinhof's! Law"), etc.  Renewed                 
              funding from the N.S.F. will thus allow the PI and Dr. Katamba to              
              complete their productive collaboration and attend to the                      
              discoveries that have arisen thus far in the project.
