Title       : Some Nonlinear Regularities and their Causes in Financial Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9109671

Award Number: 9109671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40831              (Estimated)
Investigator: Blake LeBaron blebaron@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project continues research on nonlinear regularities that                 
              emerge from apparently chaotic daily and weekly movements in                   
              financial asset prices.  The research focuses on intriguing                    
              regularities in the behavior of stock market indices and foreign               
              exchange markets discovered earlier by the investigator.  The                  
              results of the research should improve our understanding of the                
              way institutions for processing information affect the stability               
              of financial markets.  It should also provide better statistical               
              techniques based on chaos theory for studying nonlinear                        
              relationships in economic time series.                                         
                                                                                             
              The project addresses the connections between correlations and                 
              volatility in stock returns series at the daily and weekly                     
              frequencies.  These correlation patterns are shown to change with              
              changing market volatility levels.  Correlations are larger at                 
              smaller volatility levels.  The robustness of the results is                   
              determined by analyzing data for individual firms.  Some possible              
              causes for the results are explored.  Transactions costs and                   
              costs of acquiring new information may cause prices to be less                 
              informative during quieter periods.  If these costs are unrelated              
              to the level of volatility then periods of low volatility may                  
              appear less "efficient" in the sense of positive correlations.                 
              New information may take several days to get impounded into                    
              prices.  These correlations may also be the result of market                   
              maker interventions.  In their attempts at maintaining price                   
              continuity market makers actions could show up as positive                     
              correlations.  During volatile periods information and prices are              
              changing so fast that the actions of the market maker are not                  
              observed over the daily horizon.  A closely related issue is how               
              quickly limit orders are being eliminated and if these also carry              
              across the daily boundaries.
