Title       : RIA: Experimental Simulation of Crack Initiation at Bimaterial Interfaces due to
               Mechanical and Thermal Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9109731

Award Number: 9109731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jerome Sackman                          
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69359              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hareesh V. Tippur htippur@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Experimental research, dealing with quasi-static and dynamic crack             
              initiation and growth at material interfaces subjected to                      
              mechanical and thermal loading, will be carried out.  The research             
              will contribute to a better understanding of interfacial failure               
              mechanisms which predominantly control the fracture behavior of                
              multi-phase materials such as polymer and metal matrix composites,             
              metal filled composites, and of adhesive bonds and thin films on               
              substrates.  The proposed work is concerned with crack initiation              
              and growth simulations under controlled loading conditions in                  
              bimaterial specimens.  Interfacial crack tip deformations will be              
              optically measured prior to and at fracture initiation.  A newly               
              developed, real time, full field optical technique, 'Coherent                  
              Gradient Sensing' (CGS), will be utilized as an experimental tool              
              for measuring deformations near interfacial cracks.  From these                
              high resolution optical measurements, local crack tip parameters               
              such as complex stress intensity factor and crack tip mode mixity              
              will be inferred.  The optical measurements will allow us to seek              
              relationships between the local crack tip parameters and                       
              external/material parameters such as remote loading and material               
              property mismatch.  This will provide valuable data for identifying            
              parameters which significantly influence crack initiation at                   
              interfaces and for establishing interfacial failure criteria.
