Title       : RUI: The Role of Learning in Aggression and Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9109137

Award Number: 9109137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Hollis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Signaled occurrences of food, rivals, predators, or mates produce              
              Pavlovian-conditioned anticipatory responses in all vertebrates,               
              including humans.  The ability of so many different animals to                 
              exhibit this type of learning in so many different contexts would              
              suggest that the anticipatory response is probably highly                      
              adaptive.  However, despite intense interest shown in the                      
              biological function of Pavlovian conditioning over the last                    
              twenty-five years, direct experimental investigations have been                
              sparse.  Recently, however, several studies have demonstrated the              
              adaptive value of Pavlovian conditioning in the aggressive and                 
              reproductive behavior of a territorial freshwater fish.  The aim               
              of this project is to explore in greater detail the way in which               
              Pavlovian conditioning enhances animals' aggressive and                        
              reproductive strategies.                                                       
                                                                                             
              One study will determine whether signals accompanying aggressive               
              encounters predispose winners and losers to assume different                   
              strategies in subsequent contests.  Other experiments will                     
              explore how conditioning affects the frequency and duration of                 
              aggressive behavior.  Finally, the role of signaling in females'               
              choice of mates will be examined.  Almost nothing is known about               
              the role that Pavlovian conditioning plays in naturally-occurring              
              aggressive and reproductive behavior, despite the fact that                    
              conditioned aggressive and reproductive responses are easily                   
              evoked in many animals, including humans.  These studies will                  
              redress that problem as well as shed light on the long-standing                
              question of what is learned in Pavlovian conditioning.
