Title       : The Effects of Metropolitan Labor-Demand Shocks on Urban Poverty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1991  
File        : a9109538

Award Number: 9109538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Bartik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WE Upjohn Inst for Emp Re
	      300 South Westnedge Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490074630    616/343-5541

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The relationship between metropolitan labor demand and urban poverty        
              has received considerable attention in light of recent concern about the       
              urban underclass.  Current theory focuses on mismatches between the            
              location and skills of the urban poor on the one hand and the location         
              and skills of metropolitan area jobs on the other.  An overall approach        
              to labor market conditions suggests that changes in both labor demand          
              and labor supply have a direct effect on labor market conditions for the       
              urban poor.  This project will further an understanding of urban poverty       
              by estimating how metropolitan labor demand affects an individual's            
              probability of suffering persistent poverty.  These effects will be            
              examined for different groups of the poor and non-poor:  welfare               
              mothers, long-term jobless adult men, children from welfare dependent          
              families, and the working poor.  Data for the project will come from the       
              1968-87 individual file of the Panel Survey on Income Dynamics and will        
              be used to estimate  how metropolitan labor demand shifts affect the           
              earnings, employment activity, and wages of poor and non-poor residents        
              and how demand shocks affect an individual's probability of being poor.        
              The research will follow the same individuals over time, examining how         
              their incomes and poverty status change in response to changes in local        
              labor demand.  A variety of labor demand and supply shocks will be             
              considered, such as overall metropolitan area employment change, change        
              in employment by industry, and the geographical distribution of                
              employment within metropolitan areas.                                          
                 This project should provide important information about how regional        
              labor demand conditions affect poor individuals.  The research should          
              indicate whether anti-poverty policies should include efforts to               
              increase demand for the labor of the poor or whether other anti-poverty        
              policies should receive greater emphasis.  This project will be the            
              first to follow the same set of individuals over time, and it is the           
              first to focus on how metropolitan employment demand shocks affect the         
              poor.  The results should provide sophisticated analyses of labor demand       
              effects on distinct groups of the poor.  As such the project results           
              should form the basis for policy prescriptions targeted to meet the            
              needs of specific segments of the urban poor.
