Title       : ROW/RPG: Developmental Plasticity in Polygonum viviparum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9109777

Award Number: 9109777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela K. Diggle diggle@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   The underlying assumption of many evolutionary studies is                 
              that evolutionary change in developmental processes occurs                     
              indirectly, by selection on the characters formed by those                     
              processes.  While variation among characters must be the result                
              of variation in underlying developmental processes, it is the                  
              functioning of those characters that is subject to natural                     
              selection.  Evolutionary change in development results, but only               
              because these processes give rise to the selected character.  In               
              contrast, a little explored aspect of evolution is the                         
              possibility that selection acts directly on developmental                      
              processes themselves.                                                          
                   Because plants grow and develop continuously throughout                   
              their lifetime, developmental processes are likely to be critical              
              components of the functioning of these organisms and subject to                
              selection.  The alpine tundra presents a particularly intriguing               
              environment in which to explore the results of natural selection               
              on plant development.  The alpine is a harsh environment with a                
              very short growing season.  Plants have a limited amount of time               
              in which to develop, grow, and reproduce.  A common pattern of                 
              development in many such environments is preformation.  Plants                 
              form all structures used during any one growing season during the              
              preceding growing season.  These structures remain dormant and                 
              unexpanded during the winter and can expand and begin functioning              
              rapidly in the spring.  The alpine, however, is also an                        
              unpredictable environment.  Patterns of snow drift and melt are                
              variable from year to year, drought is common and varies with                  
              patterns of snow melt, and snow and freezing temperatures can                  
              occur at any time during the growing season.  The most common                  
              pattern of plant development in such spatially and temporally                  
              varying environments is phenotypic plasticity (the ability of an               
              individual to alter its phenotype and development).                            
                   Thus, in the alpine, plants encounter two conflicting                     
              selective regimes both of which are expected to act directly on                
              developmental processes.  The short harsh season is expected to                
              select for the predetermined pattern of preformation, while the                
              unpredictability of the environment is likely to select for                    
              flexibility of development.  These two patterns of development                 
              are in direct conflict:  preformation is likely to limit any                   
              flexibility or developmental response to current environmental                 
              conditions.  What, then, is the actual pattern of development                  
              that has evolved in response to these conflicting demands?                     
                   The proposed research will examine the developmental properties          
              of preformation and plasticity of plants in the alpine                         
              environment.  The results will address the issue of the evolution              
              of developmental processes and life histories, and can also be                 
              used to predict vegetation response to changing climatic                       
              conditions.  The Colorado alpine is currently being studied as a               
              model system for examining the effects of global change.  Because              
              the alpine is such a harsh and marginal environment, small                     
              climatic changes are expected to have dramatic effects on species              
              distribution.  A more thorough understanding of the range and                  
              limits of developmental responses of alpine plants to                          
              environmental variation will provide new and important                         
              information for models of vegetation change or persistence.
