Title       : Monogamy and Aggression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9109852

Award Number: 9109852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213931             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Barlow barlowgw@garnet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project explores the relationship between a male and a                    
              female in a monogamous pair of fish, the Midas cichlid of                      
              Nicaragua.  As is typical of monogamous species, males and                     
              females look alike and have the same behavior patterns.  Pair                  
              formation is accompanied by high levels of threat display as each              
              sex probes to determine that the other has the wherewithal to                  
              obtain and protect a breeding territory, and to defend the eggs                
              and young against predators.  When arbitrarily selected, only                  
              about 50% of pairs put together successfully mate; aggression                  
              gets out of control in the others.  Some fish lose their dark                  
              pigments and become strikingly gold in color.  The gold-colored                
              fish inhibit aggression in their opponents; thus nature has                    
              provided a unique experimental tool for exploring pair                         
              relationships.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The experiments are of two types.  In the first, Dr. Barlow will               
              test three alternative hypotheses in aquaria.  Each makes                      
              different predictions about the success of pairing depending on                
              the aggressiveness of the individuals.  In the second experiment,              
              Dr. Barlow will explore the relationship between color,                        
              aggressiveness, and sex, using a large pool situation.  In the                 
              field, the fish mate predominantly with those of the same color,               
              but experiments have proved that they have no preferences by                   
              color that would predict such an outcome.  The effect of gold                  
              color on aggression probably produces assortative mating in the                
              field; if so, this can tell us something important about mate                  
              compatibility.  Dr. Barlow will also make a field trip to                      
              Nicaragua to test conclusions and predictions.                                 
                                                                                             
              This project departs from the prevailing vogue.  Current theory                
              on mating has led to an emphasis on polygynous species, in which               
              the sexes look strikingly different from one another, mate                     
              quickly, then separate.  Mates in monogamous species remain                    
              together and have a greater need to adjust aggressiveness.  The                
              Midas cichlid offers the possibility of being a model species for              
              understanding intersexual aggression in monogamous species in                  
              general.  Note that spousal abuse is exceedingly common in                     
              humans; in the USA, a spouse is abused on average every 15                     
              seconds.  Finally, the Midas cichlid is the most important food                
              fish in Nicaragua; information about its reproductive behavior is              
              useful in managing and culturing this species.
