Title       : GABA- Acetylcholine Interactions and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9109163

Award Number: 9109163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen Sigvardt                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34592              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Walsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Acetylcholine and the cholinergic system contribute to                    
              learning and memory.  In particular, the septohippocampal                      
              cholinergic system appears to be a critical neural substrate of                
              working memory processes.  Alterations of this system induced by               
              anticholinergic drugs, electrolytic or neurotoxic lesions of this              
              system produce impairments in working memory without disrupting                
              reference memory.  Clinical evidence also supports a role for                  
              degenerates in Senile Dementia of the Alzheimer Type.  Working                 
              memory is involved in temporarily maintaining representations of               
              previously experienced events or episodes, whereas reference                   
              memory contributes to the performance of well-learned responses                
              in the presence of an appropriate discriminative stimulus.  This               
              component theory of memory serves to provide a conceptual                      
              framework for interpreting the dissociation in memory processes                
              observed in both humans and animals following damage to the                    
              hippocampal formation or to its cholinergic innervation.  Dr.                  
              Thomas Walsh is combining both pharmacological and behavioral                  
              experiments on rats in order to define the interactions between                
              two transmitters GABA and acetylcholine in the modulation of                   
              synaptic activity in the hippocampus.
