Title       : Semantic Representations in Reading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9109215

Award Number: 9109215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36186              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. McClelland mcclelland+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Connectionist networks, which compute via the massively parallel               
              cooperative and competitive interactions many simple neuron-like               
              processing units, provide a unified framework for studying cognitive           
              processes and their neurological implementation.  The proposed                 
              research involve modeling acquired reading disorders in patients with          
              brain damage by developing and "lesioning" a connectionist model of            
              normal reading.  Based on data from psychology and neuropsychology,            
              the model has two routes for deriving the pronunciation of a printed           
              word: a phonological route that maps directly from orthography to              
              phonology by "sounding-out" the word, and a semantic route that maps           
              indirectly via semantics by "recognizing" the meaning of the word.             
              Preliminary connectionist implementations of each of these routes in           
              isolation have succeeded in reproducing a limited range of normal and          
              abnormal reading behavior.  It is proposed to develop a complete               
              dual-route model capable of addressing a much wider range of                   
              phenomena, relating to the coordination and relative contribution of           
              each route during reading acquisition, mature skilled reading,                 
              behavior after partial damage, and recovery from damage.  The model            
              will be developed within a more neurophysiologically plausible                 
              connectionist formalism than the one used in the previous work.  In            
              addition, a major research effort will focus on developing an                  
              adequately sophisticated semantic system that overcomes the severe             
              limitations of existing systems.  High-performance computing                   
              facilities will be used to meet the extensive computational demands            
              of training and testing the model.
