Title       : Runtime Support for Machine-Independent Parallel Programming: the Chare Kernel
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9109114

Award Number: 9109114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Wennie Shu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              A major challenge for parallel computation is to use real hardware             
              with real software to solve real application problems. This research           
              will extend a runtime support system, chare kernel, to run real                
              computation problems on real parallel machines.  Experience has shown          
              the feasibility and advantages of a runtime support system.  Such a            
              system can provide a machine-independent programming environment for           
              parallel computations.  More important, it has the function of dynamic         
              scheduling and communication management, as well as abstraction of             
              interaction between parallel actions, realizing a powerful virtual             
              machine.                                                                       
              The project will investigate how much benefit can be obtained by using         
              the chare kernel system, especially for applications with irregular            
              and unpredictable features.  It will implement a number of substantial         
              applications on the chare kernel for comparison with implementation            
              without runtime support.  It will study the compilation technique to           
              translate high-level languages into the chare kernel language, and             
              compare this approach to implementation of compiler directly on                
              parallel machines.  It will also investigate an automatic program              
              partitioning scheme to further relax the burden of users or compilers.         
              The goal of this research is to make parallel programming powerful             
              (able to handle most application problems), and able to utilize the            
              parallel system resources effectively.
