Title       : The Origins of Public Authority in American Cities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1994   
File        : a9109539

Award Number: 9109539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Steinberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              0310000   Municipal Service                       
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Public authority in the United States is at a particularly low ebb.            
              This has not always been so.  Well into the nineteenth century, the            
              United States had a much more popular and participatory public life            
              than it does now, and public attitudes toward public authority were            
              more positive.  This project seeks to understand how and why this              
              change has taken place through an examination of the origins of                
              public authority.  The project will examine the shaping of public              
              authority in one city (Philadelphia) during the nineteenth century             
              since the local level is where the discussion, debate, and                     
              development of public authority took place.  The data for the study            
              includes records from the court and prison dockets, grand jury                 
              presentments, annual reports of municipal agencies, and record                 
              books from various public and social service agencies as well as               
              newspapers, popular literature, and the papers of jurists and                  
              lawyers.  The project will concentrate on how an understanding of              
              public authority was manifested in the activities of local                     
              institutions, including local courts, and the circumstances of its             
              transformation as manifested in struggles over criminal law,                   
              education, public services, and social services.                               
                                                                                             
              Although there have been a number of studies of the formation of               
              the American state, few have illuminated aspects of public                     
              authority below the level of the state and federal governments.                
              Most historians have explained the peculiarity of public authority             
              in the United States by emphasizing its weakness relative to the               
              market and demonstrating how private economic interests have                   
              determined public authority and policy.  This research offers a new            
              perspective in concentrating on localism and non-market authority              
              in the legal, social, institutional, and intellectual aspects of               
              public life.  Results of the research will add substantially to                
              our understanding of the institutional structure and behavior of               
              American law in the post World War II era.  From a practical                   
              standpoint, such an understanding is becoming increasingly                     
              important because of both the pressing problems faced by public                
              authority in the United States and the democratic revolutions                  
              sweeping through much of the world.
