Title       : Establishing the Hormonal Origins Chemical Identity, and Chemosensory Function
               of F Prostaglandin Pheromones.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9109027

Award Number: 9109027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Sorensen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Pheromones are chemical substances that individuals release into               
              the external environment that affect the behavior and/or                       
              physiological states of other individuals of the same species.                 
              It is one of the major forms of communication.  Although a number              
              of pheromones have been identified in insects and are now being                
              use as a non-invasive form of pest control, little is known about              
              precise neural, endocrine and evolutionary bases of pheromone                  
              function in vertebrates.  Dr. Sorensen reports that fish have                  
              evolved a highly-developed chemosensory and pheromonal signalling              
              system which play fundamental roles in mediating reproduction and              
              other behavior interactions.  He has described two hormonal                    
              pheromones, one of which is comprised of unknown metabolites of F              
              prostaglandin.  These results are particularly intriguing since                
              prostaglandins are thought to mediate reproduction in many fish.               
                                                                                             
              Dr. Sorensen has teamed with Dr. Goetz, an endocrinologist, and                
              Dr. Brash, a prostaglandin biochemist, to determine the chemical               
              identities, biological functions and hormonal origins of the F                 
              prostaglandin metabolites.  This research is of both scientific                
              and practical importance.  First, the results will demonstrate                 
              for the first time in a vertebrate the intimate link between                   
              hormones, pheromones, olfactory function and behavior.  Thus, the              
              findings have broad implications about fundamental mechanisms                  
              underlying the neuroendocrine basis of sex pheromone function in               
              vertebrates.  Second, the intimate relationships between hormones              
              and pheromones revealed by this work should have direct carryover              
              into improved aquacultural practices that require controlled                   
                                                                                             
              maturation and synchronous spawning.  The application of                       
              pheromones have enormous potential among both wild and cultured                
              fish that are experiencing reproductive failure and for which                  
              direct hormone manipulations is too difficult, stressful or                    
              costly.  Conversely, as is presently the case with bio-control of              
              insects, pheromones may be used to control undesirable exotic                  
              fish such as the lamprey by attracting them to traps, repelling                
              them, or confounding their reproductive behaviors.
