Title       : Research Initiation Award: Novel Supported Molybdenum and Tungsten Sulfide
               Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9109845

Award Number: 9109845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Palligarnai T. Vasudevan ptv@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project deals with supported molybdenum sulfide, cobalt-                  
              promoted molybdenum sulfide, and tungsten sulfide catalysts                    
              prepared by the decomposition of the respective thiosalts in                   
              hydrogen or helium.  The activities of such catalysts, as                      
              determined by suitable test reactions, are compared with those                 
              of catalysts having the same metal content but prepared by                     
              conventional methods.  The effects of various pretreatments on                 
              total area, oxygen chemisorption, and activity are                             
              investigated.  Pretreatments include the removal of excess                     
              sulfur by temperature-programmed reduction or by reductive                     
              sulfiding.  Correlations between oxygen chemisorption and                      
              catalyst activity are obtained for various sulfur contents as                  
              well as for catalysts prepared in each of the atmospheres                      
              (hydrogen or helium) for decomposition of the thiosalts.                       
                                                                                             
              Supported sulfide catalysts play a vital role in coal                          
              liquefaction and in the petrochemical industry.  Active                        
              sulfide catalysts are conventionally prepared by converting                    
              the respective oxides to sulfides, but this is often difficult                 
              and does not proceed in a regular manner.  This work explores                  
              the utility of catalysts prepared by a different technique                     
              that may yield more uniform and more active catalysts.
