Title       : Continuing Studies on the Evolution of Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9109155

Award Number: 9109155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research project will investigate ion channels in the                     
              neurons of the jellyfish and the flatworm.  Although neurons in                
              the jellyfish function in much the same way as neurons in higher               
              animals, they have at least one property that may reflect their                
              evolutionary position of being the most primitive animal                       
              possessing a nervous system.  The physiology of their sodium-                  
              dependent action potentials is essentially the same as that of                 
              sodium currents of other animals but the pharmacology of those                 
              currents is that of calcium currents.  Biochemical and                         
              electrophysiological techniques will be employed to elucidate the              
              structure of the fast sodium channel in neurons of the jellyfish.              
              Dr. Anderson will also examine the diversity and properties of                 
              ion channels in the flatworm.  Flatworms are the "first" animals               
              to possess a centralized brain, therefore occupying an                         
              significant position in nervous system evolution.  These animals               
              are the lowest organism reported of being sensitive to                         
              tetrodotoxin, a sodium channel blocker.  Furthermore these                     
              animals are a major class of parasites and information about the               
              physiology of their excitable cells may lead to the development                
              of new classes of anthelminthic drugs.  This study will provide                
              important facts about how nervous systems evolved.  The                        
              physiology and pharmacology of ion channels in the most primitive              
              animals possessing a nervous system will allow comparisons with                
              channels in primitive and more advanced animals.  Results                      
              obtained from this study will provide useful information to                    
              neurobiology in general by identifying subtypes of ion channels                
              with equivalents in higher animals.
