Title       : REU: Spatial Position and Fitness: A Dynamic Optimization Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9109970

Award Number: 9109970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105004             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Uetz GEORGE.UETZ@UC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Jakob  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In nature, there are advantages of sociality (increased food              
              gathering potential, protection from predators), yet there are                 
              also costs of the social environment (increased competition for                
              food and/or space, potential for spread of parasites and                       
              diseases, increased visibility to predators).  Not all animals                 
              within a colony or social group experience these benefits and/or               
              costs equally.  For example, animals on the edge of colonies may               
              be at greater risk of predation from their natural enemies, while              
              others in the center may face greater competition for food.  Dr.               
              Uetz's research is directed at understanding how animals make                  
              decisions (live alone or in a group; change location within a                  
              colony, etc.), and how the cumulative effects of those decisions               
              affect survival and  reproductive success.  The studies concern                
              spacing behavior, and how location of spiders within three-                    
              dimensional web colonies affects the balance between feeding                   
              success and predation risk.  Using this information, Dr. Uetz                  
              will develop a mathematical model to  predict the optimal                      
              decision-making strategies yielding the best chance of survival                
              and reproductive success.                                                      
                   The evolution of social behavior has received much                        
              attention, and scientists continue to examine the costs and                    
              benefits of group-living in light of natural selection theory.                 
              This topic arouses both interest and controversy, because of the               
              diversity of social behaviors observed in animals, and because                 
              humans as well are social.  This research will contribute to                   
              growing knowledge of how costs and benefits of behavioral                      
              strategies shape the evolution of animal societies, and also                   
              provide insight into how social behavior can evolve in typically               
              asocial animals such as spiders.
