Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Domain Decomposition for Time-Dependent Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9109088

Award Number: 9109088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton N. Dawson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   This project will investigate domain decomposition                        
              algorithms for solving time-dependent partial differential                     
              equations on parallel processing computers.  The domain                        
              decomposition methods to be examined are explicit/implicit                     
              Galerkin and mixed finite element, and finite difference                       
              procedures.  In these approaches, the computational domain is                  
              divided into nonoverlapping subdomains, and boundary data at                   
              subdomain interfaces are calculated explicitly from the solution               
              at the previous time step.  A priori error estimates for                       
              these schemes have been derived for model problems.                            
              Furthermore, preliminary numerical results indicate that the                   
              approaches are viable, and that a speed-up factor equal to the                 
              number of subdomains can be achieved.  The principal investigator              
              will investigate the extension of these algorithms to more                     
              general linear and nonlinear problems in multiple space                        
              dimensions, and their implementation on parallel processing                    
              machines.                                                                      
                   Of particular interest will be the application of                         
              these procedures to flow in porous media problems, such as                     
              enhanced oil recovery and subsurface contaminant transport.  In                
              these problems, the physical and chemical processes to be                      
              modeled generally occur over long time periods, and accurate                   
              simulation requires fine-scale temporal and spatial resolution.                
              Current supercomputers have been extremely useful in                           
              increasing the amount of resolution obtainable.  However, it is                
              possible that with the emerging parallel computers, we may be                  
              able to increase resolution by at least another order of                       
              magnitude. To achieve this goal will require modifications to                  
              current algorithms and the development of new algorithms.  In the              
              methods proposed here, domain decomposition is used to                         
              effectively divide large problems into smaller subproblems that                
              can be solved in parallel.  By employing this type of approach,                
              fine-scale, multidimensional simulations that are currently too                
              memory -intensive or time-consuming for conventional machines may              
              become tractable.
