Title       : RIA: Brittleness Effects on the Structural Response of Strain-Softening
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9109416

Award Number: 9109416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69813              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Labuz jlabuz@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Strain softening is a characteristic displayed in several materials            
              encountered in civil engineering.  For example, rock, concrete, and            
              dense soil exhibit the behavior where the tangent modulus decreases            
              from an initial positive value and becomes negative as strain                  
              increases.  When softening is involved with a structural component,            
              however, an internal snap-back instability may occur, with the                 
              softening branch taking on a positive slope.  Failures of this type            
              would be catastrophic even in a displacement-controlled setting and            
              must be prevented.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to develop and apply a theory of             
              brittleness in order to predict the global behavior of a structure             
              composed of a strain-softening material.  An elastic-plastic                   
              constitutive law will be adoptive for the local strain components,             
              while the softening behavior will be described in terms of                     
              displacement components through a cohesive-zone model of fracture.             
              Experiments will be conducted in a closed-loop, servo-hydraulic                
              testing system to capture the post-failure regime and to evaluate              
              the necessary material parameters.  The softening response of                  
              concrete beams in three-point bending will be studied by varying               
              the geometry, size, and constraint, while recording the acoustic               
              emissions from the failure process.  Acoustic emission testing in              
              proposed as a viable nondestructive technique to detect the onset              
              of an instability.  This research will provide an analytical                   
              explanation and present experimental evidence of the snap-through              
              versus snap-back behavior of strain-softening beams.
