Title       : Efficiency of Human Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9109514

Award Number: 9109514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Kersten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Image understanding, how the visual system determines what and                 
              where objects are just by looking, is one of science's greatest                
              mysteries.  Despite its seeming effortlessness, it is a problem                
              because the image input to the eye is locally ambiguous, i.e., in              
              any patch of a natural image, there is rarely an unequivocal cue               
              to shape, surface material, or lighting.  Somehow, the visual                  
              system makes its best bet as to what is out there from the noisy               
              pattern of intensities that make up the image, and this visual                 
              perception in a complex natural environment is rarely wrong.  The              
              mystery is exactly how the human visual system solves the problem              
              of ambiguity by exploiting the regularity or statistical                       
              structure in the eye's image and its visual world.                             
                                                                                             
              This research will model regularities in images and object                     
              properties and measure how well human observers make use of their              
              implicit statistical knowledge of these regularities.  Whenever                
              the statistical information available for a visual task can be                 
              made explicit and quantified, it is possible to model an "ideal"               
              observer, one that makes optimal use of this information.  A                   
              direct comparison of human and ideal performance provides a                    
              measure of statistical efficiency for a visual task.   This                    
              research will study efficiency in four problems of image                       
              understanding:  1) Nearby points in natural images often have                  
              similar intensities, that is, brightnesses are correlated.  This               
              research will measure the efficiency with which human vision is                
              tuned to the intensity correlations in natural images and relate               
              this to known image encoding processes in visual cortex.  2) Many              
              objects have some form of symmetry in 3D, but this symmetry gets               
              distorted when the image is formed in 2D.  In principle, symmetry              
              can be used to see how objects are slanted in space and to infer               
              object parts that are occluded.  This research will show what                  
              forms of symmetry are detected most efficiently and how they may               
              be used.  3) Nearby objects often cast shadows on each other.                  
              Experiments will show whether depth from cast shadow information               
              is used by human vision to infer shape and how it interacts with               
              other cues to depth, such as motion.  4) Object recognition is                 
              formally difficult because of uncertain illumination and                       
              viewpoint.  The research will measure efficiency for the                       
              classification of 3D objects from 2D images.                                   
                                                                                             
              Understanding vision has become a key problem in brain and                     
              cognitive science.  The problem of image understanding is not                  
              only important to our understanding of how we acquire knowledge                
              of the world, but it is formally hard, resisting the best efforts              
              of computer scientists to produce a machine that can recognize                 
              objects in natural images.  Progress in this quest can inform                  
              research into brain mechanisms as well as computer vision.
