Title       : An Economic Analysis of Bankruptcy Laws and Financial Institutions in Reforming
               Socialist Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9109696

Award Number: 9109696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Economic reform in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union has                     
              attracted great attention in the past year.  Reforming governments             
              have sought advice about how to lay the foundations for the                    
              operation of capitalist market economies.  A necessary precondition            
              for the proper functioning of capital markets is implementation of             
              clear and enforceable definitions of property rights, of which                 
              bankruptcy laws are an important component.  It is precisely these             
              rights and laws that are currently lacking in Eastern Europe.                  
              Although previous researchers have produced legal or historical                
              comparative studies of bankruptcy laws or financial institutions,              
              no modern analysis or theory exists for the transition from                    
              socialism to capitalism.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research examines the problems of design and implementation               
              of bankruptcy laws and the link between bankruptcy statutes and                
              capital markets during the transition from centrally planning and              
              largely state-owned economies to market-oriented economies with                
              private ownership.  The study is comparative, not only among the               
              several East European states themselves, but also regarding                    
              capitalist economies with longstanding bankruptcy systems.  The                
              research methodology employs a combination of formal, mathematical             
              modeling, economic analysis of legal and financial developments,               
              and gathering of data regarding design and enforcement of                      
              bankruptcy laws in these two sets of economies.                                
                                                                                             
              This research should enhance our understanding of the role and                 
              functions of law and of economic behavior under conditions of rapid            
              social transformation.  It will contribute to the development of               
              aspects of the theory of financial reform necessary for the move               
              from nonmarket to market economic systems.  Also, it is likely to              
              advance knowledge about the economics of law and the optimal                   
              strategies and policy options for legislative reform regarding key             
              economic laws such as bankruptcy.
