Title       : RUI: Effects of Human Use on the Ecology of Upper-ElevationForests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9109453

Award Number: 9109453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60014              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Metz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Kentucky Univ
	      University Drive
	      Highland Heights, KY  41099    859/572-5100

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                 Growing concerns about the consequences of forest clearance have            
              increased the need to understand more completely the processes by which        
              human activity affects the species composition, structure, and dynamics        
              of forests.  Some earlier studies of forest degradation and conversion         
              now have been criticized as having been short-sighted, superficial, and        
              excessively alarmist, but other studies have highlighted the significant       
              changes that can result from a variety of human activities.  This              
              project will contribute new insights about the complex dynamics of             
              change in forests through a lengthy, detailed case study of                    
              deforestation in the upland forests on the southeastern flank of the           
              Dhaulagiri Himal range of western Nepal.  Extensive field work by the          
              investigator and native assistants will gather data about vegetation           
              characteristics, physical characteristics, and human use and management        
              practices for roughly 50 forest stands controlled by native villages in        
              the region.  These data will be analyzed through direct and indirect           
              gradient analyses to assess the impacts of human, physical, and natural        
              factors on vegetational dynamics.                                              
                 This project will provide valuable new insights about the complex           
              processes through which people and natural forces interact within and          
              near upland forests.  Because methods used in this analysis have been          
              used elsewhere, this study will complement other research and add to           
              general knowledge about these types of processes.  This Research in            
              Undergraduate Institutions award also will support general research and        
              educational activities at a predominantly undergraduate institution.
