Title       : Conflict Paradigms and the Instance Theory of Automatization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9109856

Award Number: 9109856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. Logan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate the role of attention in                        
              controlling and overcoming conflict engendered by automatic                    
              processing of irrelevant information.  Conflict from automatic                 
              processing is apparent in real-world situations in which our                   
              current goals run counter to established habits, such as                       
              departing from the usual route home to stop at the store.  The                 
              Stroop task provides a laboratory example:  People are asked to                
              name the color in which words are presented and must overcome the              
              automatic reading response when the word itself names a                        
              conflicting color (e.g., RED written in green).  Performance on                
              the Stroop task and its many variations (e.g., deciding whether 3              
              + 4 = 12 is true) provides a major data base which theories of                 
              attention and automaticity must explain.  This research will                   
              apply Logan's instance theory of automaticity, developed to                    
              account for skill acquisition, to conflict paradigms.                          
                                                                                             
              The instance theory assumes that novice performance is based on a              
              general algorithm for performing the task and that, with                       
              practice, the algorithm is gradually replaced by memory for                    
              specific solutions.  This learning process is modeled in the                   
              theory in a precise mathematical fashion.  The instance theory                 
              accounts for learning better than other theories of skill                      
              acquisition because it accounts for changes in the entire                      
              distribution of reaction times, not just average performance.                  
                                                                                             
              As it stands, the instance theory makes incorrect predictions in               
              conflict paradigms, predicting no slowing of reaction time and an              
              error rate close to 100%, in contrast to vast numbers of                       
              experiments which show a substantial slowing in reaction time and              
              a slight increase in error rate.  This research will develop the               
              theory to overcome this problem and then test the new                          
              developments.  Theory development will involve assuming two                    
              different representations, a perceptual representation and a                   
              conceptual representation, that are bound together by the process              
              of attention.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The research will involve three series of experiments.  The first              
              will examine the process that binds perceptual representations to              
              conceptual representations; the second will separate perceptual                
              and conceptual representations; and the third will examine long-               
              term consequences of the binding process by examining learning                 
              effects.  The research will investigate the binding process                    
              theoretically using computer simulations of the learning process               
              that compare the instance theory with other current theories of                
              skill acquisition.
