Title       : Processes of Social Referencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9109634

Award Number: 9109634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tedra A. Walden tedra.walden@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Infants and young children are active information processors and               
              they seek information that they can use in deciding how to behave              
              in a variety of situations, particularly those that are novel or               
              stressful.  One source of information to which even young                      
              children learn to pay attention is the behavior of other people,               
              particularly emotional reactions to events as they occur.  That                
              is, other people's reactions are an important source of                        
              information about hazards and opportunities in the world.  By the              
              end of the first year of life infants notice and base their                    
              behavior partly on reactions communicated to them by other                     
              people.  This series of studies will investigate processes of                  
              social referencing and their development in infants and young                  
              children.  Social referencing refers to the use of another's                   
              interpretation of an event as basis for forming one's own                      
              interpretation of the meaning of that event and as a basis for                 
              subsequent responses to that event.  Specifically, this program                
              of research will follow-up findings obtained in my previous work               
              which indicated that some children did not show behavior                       
              regulation in response to parental affective communications; and               
              that this effect was associated with parental contingency, an                  
              issue in the timing of information.  The effect of contingency is              
              proposed to operate via infant attention, with noncontingent                   
              messages occurring in nonoptimal state of attention with regard                
              to linking the message with the intended referent.  Projects will              
              1) investigate the development of infant attention and link                    
              social referencing outcomes with messages received in optimal and              
              nonoptimal state of attention, 2) experimentally manipulate the                
              occurrence of parental messages to occur in optimal and                        
              nonoptimal state of attention, and 3) investigate the                          
              contribution of infant affect prior to and during receipt of                   
              parental messages to social referencing outcomes.  These projects              
              will contribute to our understanding of processes that underlie                
              social referencing and facilitate or inhibit the transmission of               
              social influence the transmission of social influence from one                 
              person to another.  Thus, they will add to our knowledge of how                
              this significant form of social information is communicated to                 
              and used by very young children in dealing with events.
