Title       : Topics in Equilibrium Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9109645

Award Number: 9109645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreu Mas-Colell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project extends the investigators' research on the solution               
              theory of cooperative games in which binding agreements can be                 
              implemented with a large number of players and nontransferable                 
              utility games.  It consists of four parts.                                     
                                                                                             
              Part I deals with the Harsanyi non-transferable utility value for              
              which payoffs to players are both egalitarian and utilitarian.  It             
              studies the relation between these values and Walrasian equilibria             
              in perfectly competitive economies.  Part II investigates the non-             
              cooperative foundations for cooperative solutions.  In a non-                  
              cooperative setup, binding agreements are not possible.  But this              
              does not rule out cooperation among the participants if it is in               
              the interest of everyone to follow the agreement rather than                   
              defect.  Since non-cooperative behavior is the more basic and                  
              primitive concept and cooperation could arise only if it is                    
              supported by non-cooperative behavior, it is important to                      
              understand and look for non-cooperative foundations to cooperative             
              solutions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Part III deals with models of incomplete information and cheap talk            
              - communication that is "free."  The research seeks to characterize            
              what is achievable by the simplest form of communication that                  
              requires no external devices such as binding agreements and                    
              mediators.  Part IV proposes to study several topics in incomplete             
              markets theory: the existence problem of equilibria when there is              
              a continuum of states, the determinacy problem when there are too              
              many equilibria and the efficiency problem of an incomplete market             
              equilibrium.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project covers a wide spectrum of important issues in                     
              equilibrium analysis.  These analyses will lead to a much better               
              understanding of various solution concepts, and of the interplay               
              of communication and strategic interaction among agents.  It will              
              provide a strong foundation from which many important questions                
              concerning cooperative and non-cooperative behavior can be                     
              addressed.
