Title       : Support for the IGU Commission on Industrial Change Conference; Orlando,
               Florida; August 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9109733

Award Number: 9109733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Malecki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Geographers and other scientists have focused considerable attention        
              on dramatic recent changes in the structure and location of economic           
              activities.  Because a major dimension of those changes has been the           
              development of more complex international interconnections, researchers        
              examining the dynamic economic geographies of specific regions                 
              increasingly have found themselves working more closely with colleagues        
              in foreign nations.  The International Geographical Union's Committee on       
              Industrial Change has been an important organization helping geographers       
              in different nations to relate research activities and to develop              
              collaborative research projects.  In August 1992, this committee will          
              meet in Orlando, Florida, for a five-day meeting at which research             
              papers will be presented, plans for future activities will be made, and        
              high-technology industrial operations in central Florida will be               
              studied.  A conference proceedings will enable scientists not in               
              attendance at the conference to benefit directly from its presentations        
              and deliberations.  This award provide partial support to assist in the        
              planning and operations of that meeting.                                       
                 This conference will convene geographers and related scientists to          
              share their current perspectives and insights about an important topic.        
              In addition to bringing together scholars from across the globe who have       
              had relatively little opportunity for focused, face-to-face discussions,       
              the project also will provide opportunities for identification of new          
              lines of basic research and for development of international                   
              collaborative research projects.
