Title       : Bimetallic Carbene Complexes as Reagents and Catalysts for Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1992       
File        : a9109000

Award Number: 9109000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. G. Finn mgfinn@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research involves the development of new methods for                      
              directing the powerful carbon-carbon bond-forming chemistry of                 
              Fischer carbene complexes for the purposes of organic                          
              synthesis. It will focus on the cyclopropanation of alkenes                    
              and several addition/insertion reactions of alkynes. The key                   
              intermediates are heterobimetallic Fischer carbene complexes,                  
              in which an electron-deficient metal center is attached to the                 
              heteroatom of a metallocarbenoxy moiety. By virtue of their                    
              electron-deficient nature and rapid ligand substitution                        
              chemistry, Lewis acidic metal substituents will play a fourfold                
              role in the chemistry of these bimetallic systems: (1) as a                    
              template on which to attach substrate molecules bearing a                      
              ligand "handle" to achieve new and useful diastereoselectivity;                
              (2) as a site for attachment of chiral auxiliaries to achieve                  
              asymmetric induction; (3) as a source of intramolecular                        
              nucleophilic reactivity, allowing stabilized Fischer carbenes                  
              to be activated by heteroatom displacement: and (4) as a means                 
              to regenerate the carbene moiety under mild conditions,                        
              allowing the target reactions to be performed under catalytic                  
              conditions.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. M. G. Finn of the                    
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Virginia. The                     
              research is in the area of syntheic methodology and will                       
              develop new methods for directing carbon-carbon bond formation,                
              one of the most important classes of reactions in organic                      
              chemistry. The key intermediates in the process are                            
              heterobimetallic Fischer carbene complexes, which are molecules                
              containing two different metal atoms.  These intermediates will                
              enable shape-selective control of the reactions.
