Title       : Restructuring Innovation: Geographical Perspectives on Technology Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1992    
File        : a9109650

Award Number: 9109650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78842              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Angel dangel@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 As with other facets of economic activity, spatial patterns of              
              innovation and technological development have changed substantially in         
              recent decades.  New forms of developmental activity within individual         
              firms and among groups of firms include joint ventures, licensing              
              agreements, and research and development consortiums.  Research on these       
              trends has been long on theory and anecdotal evidence but short on             
              systematic empirical analysis.  This project will focus on two central         
              questions:  How have geographic patterns of industrial innovation and          
              technological development changed as more activities have been conducted       
              through arrangements outside the framework of individual firms?  How           
              have communications and other interactions among firms changed in              
              response to increased externalization of innovation and technological          
              development?  Answers to these questions will result from information          
              gathered through detailed surveys of executives in the industrial              
              chemical, computer, and computer-assisted design and manufacturing             
              equipment industries.  These data will be analyzed quantitatively and          
              statistically to determine the degree to which geographic dimensions of        
              innovation and technological development have changed in recent years.         
                 This project will provide new data about the form and magnitude of          
              developmental linkages among industrial firms for three different              
              industries.  Analyses of these data will provide new insights into             
              changing spatial forms of innovation and technological development, and        
              they will provide a basis for comparative evaluation of changing               
              patterns in other industries.
