Title       : RIA: Spatial Coherence for Determining Mode Structure in Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9109425

Award Number: 9109425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty L. Anderson anderson@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Although it is not generally possible to observe                               
              directly the optical field distribution in optical                             
              waveguiding devices, one approach to obtaining the                             
              information is to examine the spatial coherence                                
              function (SCF) of the emitted beam.  Very little                               
              information has been published on the spatial                                  
              coherence of optoelectronic devices due to the                                 
              cumbersome nature of the usual measurement                                     
              technique (i.e. Young's double slit), and the relatively                       
              low optical powers in these devices.  A new fiber-                             
              based interferometric technique has been developed                             
              by the principal investigator, which, for the first time,                      
              allows the direct and repeatable measurement of                                
              spatial coherence of low-power light beams.                                    
                                                                                             
              It is planned in this Research Initiation Award to use                         
              the measured SCF to determine the mode                                         
              distribution in the cavities of laser diodes.  Three                           
              possible approaches are proposed:  1) a non-rigorous                           
              first order analysis based on invoking the Van Cittert-                        
              Zernike Theorem (not strictly applicable to coherent                           
              sources such as lasers, but coherence effects can be                           
              removed by time-averaging); 2) an approach following                           
              that of Spano, i.e. writing down expressions for the                           
              first few modes in an optical cavity and predicting the                        
              SCF, then using the measured SCF to extract the                                
              weight for each mode; and 3) adapting the algorithm                            
              of Tervonen et al, who presents a method for                                   
              computing the mode distribution from the SCF for                               
              Hermite-Gaussian modes (fiber), to planar                                      
              waveguides such as those used in laser diodes and                              
              optoelectronic integrated circuits.
