Title       : RIA: Bandwidth and Energy Efficient Communication Via Ring Encoded Continuous
               Phase Modulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9109944

Award Number: 9109944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bixio Rimoldi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project considers the problem of decreasing the                      
              probability of error of M-ary continuous-phase modulation (CPM)                
              schemes by means of channel coding.  It is argued that the usual               
              technique involving an external binary convolutional encoder is                
              unnatural, and it exploits only part of the coding gain.  This                 
              project is based on a new solution, which aims to obtain a larger              
              coding gain for the same decoding complexity.  The method is by                
              means of M-ary convolutional channel encoders (CE) that explicitly             
              use the state information of the CPM scheme that they feed.  The               
              ability to use this method lies in the model for CPM, which                    
              consists of a linear sequential circuit denoted continuous-phase               
              encoder (CPE) followed by a memoryless modulator (MM).  Since the              
              CPE is M-ary, one can feed-back the content of its memory units                
              and use it explicitly in the CE which is also M-ary and linear                 
              over the ring of integers modulo M.  Thus the CE has its own                   
              memory units and those shared with the CPE.  This symbiosis                    
              increases the constraint length of the CE without increasing the               
              overall number of states.  Codes that are more powerful than the               
              usual ones are obtained without increasing the decoding                        
              complexity.  Moreover, this solution is not constrained to CPM                 
              schemes whose input alphabet's size M is a power of 2.  The                    
              research on ring codes is of interest in its own.  Various recent              
              results are a clear indication that ring and group codes are of                
              great importance for nonbinary modulation schemes.
