Title       : Estimation and Stabilization of Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9109962

Award Number: 9109962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaakov Bar Shalom   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chun Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research deals with an important class of                                 
              stochastic systems, whose dynamic character is                                 
              undergoing random abrupt changes.  These systems are                           
              called hybrid systems since they are suitably                                  
              described in a hybrid space consisting of the usual                            
              continuous-valued system state or base state and a                             
              finite valued discrete jump state or system mode.  The                         
              switching of the mode indicates a change of the base                           
              state dynamics.  For systems with a finite number of                           
              modes the optimal estimation problem has                                       
              computational requirements that are exponentially                              
              increasing with the time horizon,i.e., infeasible in                           
              practice.  While a number of estimation and control                            
              algorithms have been developed for this class of                               
              problems based on noisy state observations, they relied                        
              on heuristic approximations.  In view of this, no hard                         
              results, like stability of the controlled system, could be                     
              proved.  Performance evaluation for these algorithms                           
              has been done only via Monte Carlo simulations.                                
              The investigation we are proposing will consider the                           
              following three major problems related to hybrid                               
              systems: estimation, control and stability.  In the area                       
              of estimation there ar several practical algorithms and                        
              we shall focus on developing tools for prediction of                           
              their performance without recourse to expensive                                
              simulations and, in particular, the evaluation                                 
              of the stability of such algorithms in tracking                                
              problems -- a major practical issue in e.g., Air Traffic                       
              Control Systems.  For controlling such systems there                           
              are some algorithms, but, since they were developed                            
              using heuristic approximations to the Stochastic                               
              Dynamic Programming, one cannot evaluate the                                   
              stability of the resulting controlled systems.                                 
              A real-time implementable control algorithm will be                            
              obtained using an upper bounding technique in the                              
              Stochastic Dynamic Programming.  This technique will                           
              then be used to show, with a stochastic Lyapunov                               
              function, that the resulting closed-loop system is stable.
