Title       : How Children Constrain Possible Word Meanings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1993    
File        : a9109236

Award Number: 9109236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Markman markman@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research addresses a fundamental problem of language                      
              acquisition, how young children figure out the meanings of words.              
              Children must determine what a novel word refers to from a                     
              limited amount of information about how a new term is used.                    
              Thus, word learning poses a difficult inductive problem for                    
              children.  This research proceeds from the premise that part of                
              the solution is that children focus quickly and effectively on                 
              the correct meaning of terms because they consider only some                   
              kinds of hypotheses.  One way children may limit hypotheses is in              
              accordance with the mutual exclusivity assumption, which states                
              that children expect each object to have only one label.                       
              Although previous findings strongly suggest that preschool                     
              children use mutual exclusivity to guide their interpretation of               
              a novel label, there is as yet little evidence about children                  
              beginning to acquire language.  Moreover, alternative                          
              explanations for some of the findings have been raised.                        
              Controlled experimental tests of these alternative explanations                
              will establish how mutual exclusivity is used by beginning                     
              language learners.  The research will determine how mutual                     
              exclusivity supplements other information and how it provides                  
              children with a safeguard against certain errors.  This work will              
              enrich our understanding of how word-learning assumptions                      
              interact with cognitive, linguistic, and environmental factors to              
              help very young children figure out what words mean.  This                     
              improved understanding of the basic processes underlying language              
              acquisition might better enable early childhood educators to                   
              provide learning environments that will facilitate word learning,              
              and may promote more accurate diagnoses and more effective                     
              remediation of language disorders.
