Title       : The Nation State and Responses to Global Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9109928

Award Number: 9109928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Dietz tdietzvt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  As issues of climate change, loss of biodiversity, ozone                  
              depletion and other global environmental problems come to center               
              stage in national and international policy debates, the role of the            
              state becomes increasingly decisive.  This project studies the                 
              nation state as a critical actor in shaping both the forces that               
              cause global change and human response to it.  Macro-social                    
              indicator data on nation states are used to develop and test                   
              a macro-comparative theory of state environmental policy.  The                 
              model includes such factors as citizen affluence, economic                     
              growth rates and capital stock, position of dependency in a world              
              economic order, structure of the economy, population pressure,                 
              class structure and education, the strength of the national                    
              environmental movement, scientific resources, level of democracy,              
              and cultural and institutional history.  Because measures of the               
              strength of the environmental movement and the strength of the                 
              environmental science community were heretofore unavailable, this              
              research project fills that gap by combining objective indicators              
              from secondary sources with assessments of a panel of experts in               
              order toy develop those measures.                                              
                                                                                             
                   This project adds to the comparative policy and                           
              international relations field by examining rigorously the                      
              importance of considering a nation's position in the world                     
              political economy as a determinant of the degree of state control              
              of the protection of the environment.  It contributes new                      
              understanding of what leads nations toward accepting various                   
              restrictions on their autonomy for the sake of protecting the                  
              environment.
