Title       : Spatial Dynamics at Individual and Landscape Levels: Vegetation Cluster
               Processes in Semi-Arid Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9109240

Award Number: 9109240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Auerbach                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $748113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Rykiel   (Principal Investigator current)
              L. J. Folse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsin-i Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Archer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Rykiel, Wu, Folse, and Archer propose to build and test                   
              dynamic, spatially explicit models of vegetation interactions that             
              permit a mechanistic basis for (1) understanding local spatial                 
              interactions among individual plants, (2) generating spatial                   
              processes in succession, and (3) studying how small scale processes            
              can produce and regulate large scale patterns.  They will use                  
              vegetation clusters as model ecosystems for developing theory and              
              simulation models explicitly linking plant and landscape levels of             
              organization.  The theoretical component of the proposed research              
              is based on the hypothesis that local (individual and neighborhood)            
              behavior determines the ecological patterns observed at larger                 
              scales (community and landscape).  The modeling component involves             
              development of (a) object-oriented simulation models representing              
              spatial interactions between individual plants in clusters, and                
              between clusters in the landscape, and (b) simplified grid-based               
              (cellular automata) models of spatial interactions in cluster                  
              development.  Field data will be collected on leaf area,                       
              transpiration, growth rate, and root extent for savanna and thorn              
              scrub vegetation for model parameterization and evaluation.  They              
              will use the theory, models, and field data to predict the effects             
              of spatial heterogeneity in nutrient availability on the formation             
              and growth of vegetation clusters, the dynamics of individual                  
              clusters, and the interactions among clusters that produce observed            
              and expected landscape patterns of vegetation and resource                     
              distributions.  Drs. Rykiel, Wu, Folse and Archer are leaders in               
              the field of vegetation in cluster development.  The facilities                
              available for conducting this research are outstanding.
