Title       : RUI: Communication and Predator Defense by Ground- Transmitted Vibration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9109850

Award Number: 9109850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet A. Randall jrandall@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Kangaroo rats are nocturnal rodents found only in the deserts of               
              North America.  Although they are part of the rich web of life in              
              the deserts of the Southwestern United States, little was                      
              understood about their communication and social organization                   
              until Dr. Randall began her research on them.  She is continuing               
              to examine how members of one species, the banner-tailed kangaroo              
              rat, communicate their identity to other species of kangaroo rats              
              and protect themselves from predators by drumming their hind feet              
              on the ground to create air-borne and ground-transmitted                       
              vibrations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Footdrumming is a unique communication system that has never been              
              studied in detail in any other animal besides the banner-tailed                
              kangaroo rat.  In this project, Dr. Randall is opening research                
              into footdrumming as seismic communication by investigating                    
              whether or not banner-tails can communicate underground from                   
              territory to territory.  She will also explore the possibility of              
              cultural transmission of footdrumming signals:  Individual                     
              footdrumming signatures of mothers are possibly learned by their               
              offspring and then modified as the young animals establish                     
              themselves in new territories with new neighbors.  Finally, Dr.                
              Randall will examine in much greater detail than before                        
              communication between kangaroo rats and snakes, focusing on                    
              whether or not banner-tails footdrum in the presence of snakes to              
              induce them to leave by informing them that their chances of                   
              predation are low.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Because most research on mammalian communication by sound has                  
              been done on highly social species, this study provides important              
              comparative evidence for the evolution of sound communication in               
              nonsocial mammals.  In addition, the research will contribute to               
              an understanding of fragile desert ecosystems.  Because the                    
              banner-tailed kangaroo rat was recently listed as an endangered                
              species in Arizona, Dr. Randall's research could become very                   
              important in conservation efforts and recovery programs to assure              
              the survival of the banner-tail and other endangered kangaroo-rat              
              species.
