Title       : Explosive Volcanism: Understanding Pauses and Abrupt Shifts in Intensity During
               the1912 Novarupta Eruption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0106700

Award Number: 0106700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Houghton b.hought@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Houghton
EAR-0106700

Pauses and/or abrupt shifts in eruptive intensity are a
              fundamental yet little studied part of many large explosive eruptions. Stable
              Plinian plumes may pause or fluctuate in intensity by several orders of
              magnitude on times scales of hours. The causes of such shifts remain poorly
              understood, at a time when our models for steady state eruptive processes
              become increasingly elegant and sophisticated. The quality of hazard advice and
              eruption 'forecasts' would be significantly improved if such changes could be
              explained and even anticipated. This study focuses on the origin of such
              'unsteadiness' in a powerful sustained explosive eruption, for both breaks in
              eruptive activity of several hours duration and abrupt but short-lived changes
              in style/intensity.

The eruption of Novarupta in 1912 event was the world's
              largest 20th century eruption and is widely cited as an excellent example of a
              historical large sustained eruption. Sustained Plinian/ignimbrite eruption at
              Novarupta stopped briefly and abruptly 16 and 45 hours after commencement of
              the eruption before finally giving way after 60 hours to effusion of lava domes
              (Hildreth and Fierstein 2000). Caldera collapse during the 1912 eruption
              occurred not at vent, but 10 km distant, thus preserving the very near-vent
              products of the eruption to within 100m of vent, and medial eruption products
              have a 'chemical stratigraphy' that enables correlation of coeval products of
              highly varying character between widely spaced localities. This permits us to
              address this fundamental problem of abrupt changes in eruption dynamics from a
              very well constrained perspective and for one of the five largest eruptions
              recorded in the last 1000 years. 

Goals of the proposed study are to assess
              the relative influences played by: a) the rates and timing of growth and
              collapse of gas bubbles, degassing and syneruptive microlite crystallization;
              b) vent roughness and stability; and c) changes in the pre-eruptive state of
              the magma, including pre-eruptive volatile concentrations, in altering the
              dynamics of the 1912 eruption. 

Our starting hypothesis is that the close of
              each episode of explosive volcanism at Novarupta was caused by 'ascent-driven'
              changes in the physical state of the volumetrically dominant dacitic magma
              whereas short-lived fluctuations in eruption intensity were the products of
              plume instability generated by irregularity and roughness of the vent walls and
              limited vent wall collapse. The effects of changing flow behavior in the
              conduit, as the magma rheology responds to decreases in the concentrations of
              dissolved volatiles, and increases in the abundances of bubbles and crystals,
              will be inferred from image analysis of the vesicle and crystal populations in
              carefully selected pumice samples from either side of the breaks in Plinian
              deposit and abrupt fluctuations in eruptive intensity. External environmental
              factors, (vent wall roughness and instability, vent migration and widening)
              will be studied by mapping changes in the nature and abundance of wall rock
              lithic clasts. 

