Title       : Finite-Volume Methods for Hyperbolic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0106511

Award Number: 0106511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $516326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. LeVeque rjl@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns the development of multidimensional high-resolution
              finite-volume methods for solving hyperbolic partial differential equations,
              the development of software implementing these methods, and the application of
              these methods to particular problems. These methods are implemented in the
              CLAWPACK software package, which is freely available on the web and allows
              students and researchers studying a wide range of phenomena to use the
              technology of high-resolution methods and adaptive mesh refinement. These
              algorithms and the software will be further developed and brought to bear on a
              wider variety of problems. Particular problems of interest include: further
              development of adaptive refinement base on a new tree-structured code;
              inclusion of Cartesian-grid techniques for complex geometries; development of a
              general methodology for solving hyperbolic equations on curved manifolds; and
              wave-propagation problems (e.g., elastodynamics) in heterogeneous material,
              including nonlinear problems with spatially-varying flux functions.

A wide
              range of practical problems in science and engineering involve the propagation
              of waves or the transport of substances in fluid flow. Examples arise in
              problems as diverse as the study of ultrasound waves in human tissue, the
              transport of contaminants in groundwater or the atmosphere, and the study of
              gravitational waves arising from the collision of black holes. Mathematically
              all of these problems lead to similar sets of partial differential equations.
              Solving these equations numerically requires special techniques that can deal
              with discontinuous functions, since often either the coefficients describing
              the problem or the solution (or both) are discontinuous. Examples include
              discontinuities in material properties at the interface between tissue and bone
              in an ultrasound problem, or the shock waves that arise in most nonlinear
              wave-propagation problems. Over the past few decades, a powerful class of
              numerical methods has been developed for solving such problems that have been
              much more heavily used in some applications areas than others. A primary goal
              of this project is to facilitate the transfer of this technology to new areas.
              The software package CLAWPACK, developed by the P.I. and coworkers, is designed
              to make it relatively easy to for students to learn about these methods and for
              researchers to apply them.  There are still numerous mathematical challenges
              that arise in applying these methods to new situations. Research will be
              conducted to further improve these methods as a variety of new applications are
              explored. The subjects covered in this proposal are fertile ground for graduate
              education in computational mathematics. The P.I. is actively involved in
              training students and postdocs at the University of Washington as well as at
              other institutions by hosting visiting graduate students. The P.I. has also
              taught several short courses elsewhere and developed lecture notes, textbooks,
              software, and other educational material based on this research.  

