Title       : Towards Scalable Quality of Service Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0106706

Award Number: 0106706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Yuan xyuan@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              To support Quality of Service (QoS) in the Next Generation Internet, new
              algorithms are needed for many network components, including routing,
              scheduling and admission control.  QoS routing, which identifies paths that
              have sufficient resources to satisfy the QoS requirement of a connection and
              selects a path for that connection, is one of the most important components for
              QoS provision.  Although many QoS routing algorithms have been proposed, a
              number of theoretical and practical issues remain to be addressed to achieve
              efficient QoS routing in large scale networks, that is, scalable QoS routing. 
              This research will attempt to address some of these issues.  Specifically, we
              will focus on the following four areas.

Networking state aggregation.  For a
              large network, a common approach to achieve scalable routing is to reduce the
              size of global network state by aggregating information according to the
              hierarchical structure of the network.  This approach has been adopted by the
              ATM private network-network interface (PNNI) standard.  However, when multiple
              QoS metrics are involved, precisely aggregating information of a domain may not
              be feasible since it requires memory space that grows exponentially with
              respect to the size of the domain.  In this research, we will design various
              topology aggregation schemes, study the trade-offs of the schemes between the
              amount of space needed and the effectiveness in summarizing the domain
              information, investigate the QoS routing performance with different topology
              aggregation schemes, and determine the topology aggregation schemes that are
              effective in practice for QoS routing with multiple QoS metrics. 

Handling
              random imprecision of the global network state information. In large scale
              networks, maintaining precise global state information requires link states to
              be distributed frequently, which results in large protocol overheads along
              multiple dimensions including bandwidth, storage, update processing, and the
              associated context switching.  To control the protocol overhead, the link state
              update frequency may be reduced, which results in the imprecise global state
              information.  The imprecision caused by the infrequent link state updates is
              random in the sense that a router cannot estimate the accurate global network
              state.  Thus, a practical QoS routing algorithm must be able to perform
              effective routing using the imprecise global network state information.  In
              this research, we propose a novel routing scheme that performs effective
              routing in the presence of imprecise global state information.  Our scheme is
              different from the existing methods in that it combines static and dynamic
              routing and adapts the routing schemes based on network status.  We will
              compare our scheme with the existing methods in terms of routing performance
              and protocol overheads and identify the strengths and weaknesses of each method
              through extensive simulations.  

Interaction between resource reservation
              and QoS routing.  Most current QoS routing algorithms assume a separate
              protocol to perform resource reservation.  However, in the future large scale
              high speed networks, it is desirable to combine resource reservation with QoS
              routing.  Combing resource reservation with QoS routing may have negative
              impacts on the routing performance, especially for large networks.  This
              research will try to understand the impact of resource reservation on various
              QoS routing schemes and develop techniques to achieve effective routing in the
              presence of resource reservation traffic.

Multi-constrained QoS routing and
              generic QoS routing algorithms.  Multi-constrained QoS routing finds a path
              that satisfies multiple independent QoS constraints.  This problem is NP-hard.
              However, distributed applications such as the Internet phone and distributed
              games have very diverse QoS requirements on delay, cost, delay jitter, loss
              ratio, bandwidth, etc.  To support such applications, practical
              multi-constrained QoS routing algorithms must be developed.  Furthermore, due
              to the complexity of multi-constrained QoS routing, existing QoS routing
              algorithms are very restrictive on the type and the number of QoS constraints,
              which implies that different QoS routing algorithms will be needed for
              different applications. In the future networks, it is desirable to use a
              generic QoS routing algorithm that can efficiently handle different QoS
              requirements.  In this research, we will study the heuristic algorithms that
              solve the multi-constrained routing problem effectively in practice and develop
              a generic algorithm that performs well regardless of the number and the types
              of QoS requirements.

We plan to evaluate our techniques by implementing the
              proposed techniques in Qbone and to validate the techniques through
              implementation and experimentation in the real network.  We believe that by
              developing effective mechanisms to address these four issues, we will be able
              to integrate the mechanisms and develop efficient scalable QoS routing schemes
              for the future large scale high speed networks.

