Title       : Effects of Tissue Architecture on Vascular Mechanics: Role of the Hierarchical
               Structure and Constituent Evolution of Elastin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0106010

Award Number: 0106010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Pruitt lpruitt@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Effects of Tissue Architecture on Vascular Mechanics:
ROLE OF THE HIERARCHICAL
              STRUCTURE AND CONSTITUENT EVOLUTION OF ELASTIN

This proposal combines the
              techniques and approaches of several disciplines, including mechanics, polymer
              physics, and molecular biology, to study the role of elastin in the arterial
              wall. Arteries are complex heterogenous structures with profound ability to
              remodel in response to biochemical and mechanical stimuli. Since arterial
              diseases like atherosclerosis and aneurysms directly correlate with changes in
              the amounts of elastin in the vessel wall, it is important to characterize the
              mechanical properties of arteries with varying amounts of elastin. The project
              aims to hierarchically link tissue microstructure and biochemical composition
              of arterial walls to their emergent mechanical behavior. A primary goal of this
              work is to study the effect of constituents on the structural properties of
              vessels. The mechanical tests will be used to assess the effects of a changed
              tissue microstructure on its overall constitutive behavior.  In order to link
              changes in mechanical behavior with alterations in tissue microstructure,
              structural relationships will be characterized using biochemical methods. The
              results of this study have broad applicability to vascular mechanics and
              clinical treatments for arterial diseases.


