Title       : Bayesian Methodology for Disclosure Limitation and Statistical Analysis of Large
               Government Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0106914

Award Number: 0106914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roderick J. Little rlittle@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Trivellore Raghunathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Surveys with complex probability sampling designs involving clustering and
              stratification are a major source of empirical data for governmental and
              scientific use.  The standard approach to survey inference is design-based,
              with statistical inferences being based on the sampling distribution with
              population values treated as fixed.  This approach has been a powerful force
              for the development of objective statistical analysis of large surveys, with
              reliable operating characteristics under weak assumptions about the population.
               However, the design-based paradigm is too limited to handle: (i) the increased
              availability of data from a variety of sources, such as surveys, censuses and
              administrative records; (ii) increasing demands for analyses that go beyond
              simple descriptive information such as means and totals for large domains;
              (iii) the development and analysis of data masked to preserve confidentiality;
              and (iv) the analysis of data subject to unit and item nonresponse.  These
              questions can be addressed by a model-based Bayesian approach, with models that
              capture the relevant features of the population under study and take into
              account important features of the sample design, and non-informative priors
              that limit subjectivity in the analysis.

Bayesian methods are enjoying a
              resurgence in statistics, with the development of computational tools that make
              them practically feasible.  However, the application of Bayesian methods to
              sample surveys remains very limited.  The goal of this research is to develop
              useful, practical Bayesian methods for sample survey inference that have good
              design-based properties.  The dissemination of public use data files is crucial
              to the research community in order to conduct research that forms the basis for
              rational policy decisions.  This research will develop methods for
              disseminating detailed micro-data files that greatly reduce the risk of
              disclosure of the identity of respondents to a data intruder.  Methods will be
              based on multiple imputation of key variables, an approach that allows for
              valid statistical inferences using existing software and limits the degree of
              information loss.  The methods will be tested on large government surveys
              collected by the National Center for Health Statistics and other federal
              agencies.  This research also will develop Bayesian methods for three topics in
              the statistical analysis of complex surveys: (i) the analysis of surveys where
              the sampled units have differential probabilities of inclusion; (ii) the
              handling of unit and item nonresponse in surveys; and (iii) the analysis of
              samples collected using rotating panel designs.  This research is supported by
              the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of
              federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey and Statistical
              Methodology Funding Opportunity.


