Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Evolution of Competitive Settlement
               Strategies in Fijian Prehistory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0106221

Award Number: 0106221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Hunt thunt@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Terry Hunt, Ms. Julie Field will collect data
              for
her doctoral dissertation. She will initiate new archaeological research
              in
the Sigatoka Valley, located in the southwestern corner of the island
              of
Viti Levu, Fiji. This research will investigate the evolution of
              competitive
settlement strategies between related and non-related social
              groups in
Fijian prehistory.  Ms. Field's previous analyses of aerial
              photographs from
the Sigatoka Valley have documented the location and
              character of over 700
archaeological features, including fortifications,
              agricultural features,
and unfortified settlements. Despite the quantity and
              richness of the
archaeological record, no chronology exists for the
              establishment of the
fortifications, or the arrival of the various patrilineal
              descent groups
documented at the contact period.  Ms. Field's doctoral
              dissertation
research will examine the development of fortifications in the
              valley, and
also trace the relationship between the environment and the
              frequency of
conflict, as evinced by the occurrence of fortifications on
              lands
traditionally held by patrilineal descent groups, known as mataqali
              and
yavusa.  Her research will incorporate an archaeological excavation
              and
collection strategy, focusing on a sample of 15 sites from a variety
              of
environmental zones.  The acquisition of datable materials from
              such
features as walls, ditches, and remote mountain outposts will allow for
              the
first chronology of fortifications in this part of Fiji.  Ms. Field
              will
also couple the information gleaned from archaeological research to
              an
environmental model generated within the framework of a
              geographic
information system (GIS).  Comparison of these data, as well as
              the
distribution of land-holdings and hierarchical social relations that
              are
known to exist between the patrilineal descent groups of the valley,
              will
have the potential to indicate group fission, movement, and the
              various
competitive stances that existed in prehistory.  Archaeologists
              are
interested in the development of conflict and warfare, and the
              examination
of fortifications is a very direct method for the study of this
              phenomenon
during the prehistoric period.  NSF support will allow Ms. Field to
              conduct
excavations in Fiji, and also provide for the dating of
              archaeological
materials.  This research is important because it will yield
              data of
interest to both regional and international scholars, and it explores
              a
topic that is of great interest to the discipline of anthropology.  It
              will
also support and assist in training a promising young scientist.

