Title       : Deuterium-Hydrogen (D/H) Fractionation at High Pressure and High Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0106718

Award Number: 0106718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57456              (Estimated)
Investigator: Youxue Zhang youxue@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zhang
EAR-0106718

This proposal is aimed at understanding the influence of
              pressure, temperature and composition on deuterium-hydrogen (D/H) isotopic
              fractionation through high-pressure, high temperature experiments.  Isotope
              fractionation at high pressure is theoretically interesting and affects both
              the composition of fluids released from subducted slabs, and of the residual
              water that is entrained in high-pressure phases. Under favorable conditions,
              these water-containing phases may be sequestered at great depth in the lower
              mantle. The isotopic signature of such "recycled" water will depend in part
              upon fractionation processes occurring at mantle conditions.
Although the D/H
              ratio in the present upper mantle is known to be on the whole relatively
              constant, the primordial D/H ratio for the earth is unknown. Knowledge of
              high-pressure D/H fractionation factors relevant to degassing of the earth will
              help constrain the primitive D/H ratio and the proportion of ocean water that
              originated from the mantle .
The D/H ratios of subduction related basalts are
              relatively high (e.g. Poreda, 1985; Dobson and O'Neil, 1987), indicating that
              their source has a different D/H ratio to the depleted upper mantle.  Although
              this is attributed in part to the D/H ratio of subducted water, the D/H ratio
              of the evolved water may be affected by fractionation processes as water is
              released from hydrous minerals at depth.  In the bulk of the mantle, nominally
              anhydrous minerals are thought to constitute the major reservoir for water
              (e.g. Bell and Rossmann, 1992; Kohlstedt et al., 1996). It has been suggested
              that the D/H ratio of water in nominally anhydrous minerals of the upper mantle
              is fixed by equilibration with hydrous fluids in the mantle wedge (Bell and
              Ihinger, 2000). Thus, fractionation of D/H between hydrous phases (in the
              slab), fluid (leaving the slab), hydrous magmas (in the mantle wedge) and
              nominally anhydrous minerals (the mantle residue) could explain the D/H
              systematics of the entire upper mantle. D/H fractionation factors at pressures
              greater than a few kilobars have not yet been measured, however, and cannot be
              reliably predicted; thus we propose to measure fractionation experimentally
              under mantle conditions.  In the period of this one-year pilot project, we will
              carry out a preliminary investigation of the effects of pressure and
              temperature on D/H fractionation between brucite and water at elevated pressure
              (3-6 GPa) and temperature (500-700 degrees C).  This work will determine the
              magnitude of the pressure effect on D/H fractionation.  Working in this simple
              MgO-H2O system with such a water rich mineral will also allow us to develop and
              improve our experimental and analytical technique. The results of this
              systematic study will be fundamental to our understanding of isotopic
              fractionation at high pressure.	In addition, we will begin to investigate the
              isotopic fractionation factor between a synthetic basalt melt and H2O vapor
              phase to understand the D/H fractionation during mantle degassing.  The effect
              of dissolved H2O content (hydroxyl to molecular H2O ratio) on the fractionation
              factor will also be examined. 



