Title       : Short Term Variation in Mass Flux During Basaltic Eruptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106349

Award Number: 0106349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. L. Harris harris@higp.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luke P. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harris and Flynn
EAR-0106349

Mass flux rates have been shown to vary over
              day-to-month long periods during effusive basaltic eruptions.  These variations
              provide insights into eruption mechanisms, revealing whether or not the chamber
              was pressurized.  Little data exist, however, to determine how mass fluxes vary
              over time scales of seconds to hours.  Such data would provide insight into the
              variability of supply during an eruption.  Over recent years unpublished data
              have been gathered indicating that erupted mass fluxes may vary between high
              and low levels over minute-long periods.  If such short term cyclicity exists,
              then this finding will provide unique insights into the stability of supply to
              persistent basaltic eruptions over minute to hour long periods.  The objective
              of this research is thus to search for and examine short term mass flux
              variations during ongoing basaltic eruptions defining, for the first time, any
              cyclicity in the short term mass flux that may exist.  This will provide us
              insights into the supply mechanism during persistent effusive eruptions,
              answering the prime question: is supply steady or surging?  This in turn will
              allow us to apply conduit convection models that explain the relevant supply
              mode.
To achieve these objectives, two volcanoes characterized by contrasting
              styles of persistent activity have been selected for analysis: Kilauea
              (Hawai'i) and Villarrica (Chile). While activity at Kilauea is dominated by the
              emplacement of tube-fed lava flows, Villarrica hosts a persistently active lava
              lake.  At both of these volcanoes, preliminary data indicate that magma supply
              to the eruption site may cycle between high and low levels, with each cycle
              lasting minutes to hours.  At each volcano data sets capable of revealing short
              term mass flux variation will be collected.  At Kilauea, thermal measurements
              will be made every 1-2 seconds at skylights along the active master tube and at
              incandescent vents over the eruption site. At Villarrica, during two field
              campaigns, thermal data will be collected simultaneously with gas flux and
              seismic data.  Results will be correlated and analyzed for evidence of cyclic
              supply to Villarrica's lava lake.  At both targets, satellite thermal data
              collected on a daily basis will be used to construct longer mass flux time
              series allowing the persistence of any cyclic behavior to be examined.  These
              data sets of multiple geophysical measurements will allow conduit convection
              and degassing models to be fitted to each system. 
This research will advance
              our scientific understanding of persistently erupting systems by extending
              knowledge of how volcanic eruptions evolve over short time periods.  We will
              also assess the validity of popular gas-based conduit convection models that
              predict and explain such short term variation in terms of variable volatile
              content and/or convective overturn.  We will use these data to support
              educational/outreach projects in 3 ways.  (1) We will make the data available
              on the Internet for public access.  (2) We will use these data to support
              University of Hawai'i courses for teachers, allowing them to develop exciting
              high school lesson plans using real-time data.  (3) Through the support of
              Hawai'i Space Grant Consortium undergraduate students will benefit by using the
              data to support their work.

