Title       : Platinum Group Element Analysis of Komatiites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0106974

Award Number: 0106974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Munir Humayun hum8@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Igor Puchtel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Humayun
EAR-0106974

To better understand the mantle geochemistry of platinum
              group elements (PGE) and the information returned by 186Os-187Os isotopic
              studies, we propose to determine the PGE abundances of a global suite of
              komatiites by a precise isotope dilution ICP-MS technique. Based on results in
              this lab, this analytical technique has been successfully applied for the
              determination of PGEs in komatiites. Proposed localities include komatiites
              from the following greenstone belts: Barberton (S. Africa); Kamennoozero,
              Vetreny, Onega (Baltic Shield); Belingwe (S. Africa); Abitibi (Canada);
              Kambalda (Australia); and Gorgona (Caribbean). All samples are available in
              collections held by us, or will be generously provided from other geochemical
              studies, particularly previous Os isotopic studies. These include both
              alumina-depleted and alumina-undepleted komatiites, and both chondritic and
              suprachondritic initial gamma-187Os-bearing komatiites.
Our intellectual goals
              for the proposed study are to: 1. Focus on establishing the rules of PGE
              behaviour during the extremely high degrees of partial melting experienced by
              komatiites, and establish a framework for future work that would include
              picritic lavas and primary basaltic melts; 2. Determine the PGE composition of
              Archean crustal materials, which are possible sources of subducted crust for
              Phanerozoic flood basalts and OIB lavas; 3. Study the PGE composition of each
              komatiite source region, presumably the Archean lower mantle, for clues to its
              heterogeneity, with implications for mantle dynamics in the Archean; and 4.
              Search for evidence of core-mantle interaction in Archean plumes, including
              evidence for secular changes in such outer core derived signatures.
Successful
              completion of this project will enable us to determine whether this approach
              can be applied to better understand mantle processes in source regions sampled
              by picrites and primary basalts, and thereby extend our framework to include a
              larger spatiotemporal sampling of the mantle. This project also supports the
              continued US visit of Russian geochemist, Igor Puchtel, the holder and
              dedicated student of an extensively studied suite of four komatiite localities
              in the Baltic Shield previously inaccessible to non-Russian scientists.

