Title       : Timescales of Geochemical and Isotopic Transport in Natural Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0106925

Award Number: 0106925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Criss criss@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Everett L. Shock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106925
Criss

          A new model of solute and isotopic transport in
              natural waters is being refined and tested.  This model can quantiy the
              timescales of transport without ad hoc assumptions, about ixing groundwater and
              surface water components.  Based on diffusion theory, storm events are treated
              as "delta functions" that induce a complex series of geochemical and physical
              responses.  The transport equations are readily transformed into linear
              versions whose intercepts accurately retrodict the timing of the storm events,
              and whose slopes reveal the time constants for transport of each creochemical
              constituent.  The basic concept is to study the natural system with
              perturbations provided by natural processes.
          Information gained
              onthe geochemical and isotopic response of surface streams and springs to storm
              events would determine the timescales of complex natural responses.  Data
              colllected in the first 
stage of this project show that different parameters
              (ionic concentraions, total dissolved organic compounds, nutrients, sediment,
              oxygen isotopes, etc.) have in a qualitatively similar manner, explicable by
              the model, but that the timescales vary greatly among the  parameters that
              collectively define the response of the natural system. Rigorous tests of this
              model will be conducted with
geochemical and isotopic data collected from
              several sites within an unimpounded river basin (the Meramec Basin, eastem
              Missouri). This endeavor will be facilitated by an	autosampler
installed a
              karst spring at Washington University's Tyson Research Center, and a new
              autosampler nearby on the Meramec River.  These programmable devices will allow
              intensive sampling to resolve timescales accurately,  and will permit detailed
              comparisons of simultaneous groundwater and riverine responses to precipitation
              events. Key questions concerning the sources, the reactions (solubility, ion
              exchange, adsorption, biological uptake, etc.), the migration paths, and the
              timescales of pollutant and pathogen transport through surface and near-surface
              environments will be explored.  The new approach appears to be applicable to
              diverse geochemical, physical, and isotopic constituents.  It has the unique
              potential to resolve the complexity of natural systems using natural events.

