Title       : Improvements and New Techniques for Deterministic and Stochastic SIR based Power
               Control for 3-G Wireless CDMA Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0106857

Award Number: 0106857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoran R. Gajic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research is about the use of optimal control theory and modern
              numerical linear algebra
techniques to improve existing power control schemes
              and to formulate and solve more general and more
realistic formulations of
              power control problem in 3-G wireless CDMA networks. The first two parts of
              the
proposal deal with the deterministic power control problem and its
              variants, and the third part is on
stochastic versions of the same problem.
 
                 In the first part of the proposed research, an improvement of distributed
              constrained power control
algorithm (PCPC), which is presently considered in
              the literature as the most efficient one, is suggested
via the use of the
              acceleration techniques for fixed-point iterations and via the use Krylov
              subspace
iterations (presently considered as the most efficient numerical
              method for solving systems of linear
large scale algebraic equations).
    
              The second part of the proposal considers an optimal fast closed-loop SIR-based
              power control
scheme for 3-G wireless CDMA network, based on the recent
              research work of the author of this proposal
and his doctoral student. In
              addition of being optimal, the scheme obtained theoretically converges in
              one
iteration. This scheme follows perfectly channel variations and assumes
              that the link gains constantly
change in time. Due to the fact that the scheme
              needs a scalar discrete-time estimator (predictor), it
practically converges
              in 4-5 iterations. Simulations on a CDMA system demonstrate the effectiveness
              of
the optimal power control algorithm and its superiority over the
              corresponding IS-95 algorithm and the
present version of the DCPC algorithm.
              As a future research topic, a comparative analysis between the
optimized power
              control algorithm and the improved versions of the DCPC algorithm (accelerated
              and
Krylov subspace based) to be obtained in the first part of this proposal,
              is suggested first. Secondly, since
during optimization, the weighted sum of
              the transmission power and the SIR (signal-to-interference)
error, are jointly
              optimized, the power control problem can be put in the framework of Nash
              dynamic
games. It is suggested to extend the optimized power control results
              to capture the conflict situation
among users in a wireless network, which
              leads to the formulation of a Nash dynamic game problem.
     The third part
              of this proposal deals with the stochastic formulation of the power control
              problem. This
is a pretty much new and widely open research problem. The basic
              problem formulation extends the
deterministic optimized power control problem
              to a stochastic environment, and leads to the linear power
evolution equation
              with additive Gaussian white noise. This problem formulation assumes that
              either link
gains or background noise or both are modeled as Gaussian white
              noise stochastic processes. Its variant
of colored background noise and
              colored link gains noise are also suggested for future research. In
addition,
              more realistic situations of state- and control-dependent noise using optimal
              control theory
results will be considered. The control variables will be the
              ones that regulate the convergence process of
the state variables
              (transmission powers and SIR errors) to their optimal values in a noisy
              environment.
Note that the state- and control-dependent noise optimal control
              problems in discrete-time domain have
been solved recently in the optimal
              control literature. In the final stage of this proposal, it is suggested
              to
study the power control problem assuming that the link gains change
              according to Poisson stochastic
processes.
     The impact of the proposed
              research will be in the area of improvements of the capacity of 3-G
wireless
              CDMA networks, reliability of quality of service (QoS) and durability of user's
              battery life. All
these will be achieved by controlling interference in an
              optimal manner.
