Title       : Synoptic Control of Mesoscale Precipitating Systems in the Pacific Northwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0106584

Award Number: 0106584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Roebber roebber@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jugal K. Ghorai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kyle L. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine the extent to which an adequate representation of
              flow features on the synoptic scale allows for the skillful simulation of
              mesoscale precipitating systems.  The research will emphasize independent
              verification and rigorous hypothesis testing within a controlled setting in
              order to quantify the significance of the results.  The focus of the research
              is on the specific problem of landfalling precipitating systems on the West
              Coast of United States.  The Principal Investigators will explore a broad
              variety of landfalling systems that lead to significant rainfall in this
              region. 

The primary tools of the research will be an advanced mesoscale
              numerical model, NCEP and ECMWF reanalysis data sets, and independent
              precipitation measurements from all available surface sites in the Pacific
              coast states (Washington, Oregon and California).  The role of lateral boundary
              conditions (LBC) will be explicitly accounted for by the study design and
              ongoing evaluation of study results will be used to control for biases that may
              be introduced by model physics limitations.

Separating initial and boundary
              condition errors, LBC errors due to the placement of the boundaries of the
              nested grid model, and error by type of synoptic system will represent a
              significant advance in understanding of these weather systems.  The results of
              this study will be of considerable interest to short term weather forecasting.
