Title       : The Role of Fluid Flow in the Cooling of Metamorphic Core Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106953

Award Number: 0106953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian Teyssier teyssier@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The role of fluid flow in the cooling history 
of metamorphic core
              complexes

Christian Teyssier, University of Minnesota
Mark Person, Indiana
              University

The aim of this project is to quantify the effects of fluid flow
              on the thermal history of metamorphic core complexes during exhumation using a
              hydrothermal model that incorporates the kinematics of crustal deformation. 
              The numerical model is constrained by field studies based on extensive
              structural, metamorphic, and thermochronologic data for the Shuswap metamorphic
              core complex, British Columbia.  The modeling allows for quantitative
              comparison of heat transfer with rock thermochronology and fluid-rock isotopic
              exchange within the Shuswap system.  The modeling helps to test the sensitivity
              of fluid flow to fault geometry, kinematics, and permeability in the upper
              crust (horst and graben, domino-style blocks, listric systems), as well as
              ductile flow and attending heat advection in the lower crust.  The modeling
              also evaluates the effect that fluid flow has on heat distribution and
              geothermal gradients below the detachment zone, which has implications for the
              understanding of metamorphic zoning in core complexes.  Quantitative results
              are being compared to the large-scale thermochronology database we developed in
              the Shuswap metamorphic core complex, British Columbia; this type of generic
              modeling is directly exportable to other metamorphic core complexes as well as
              rift zones.

The research also sheds light on the systematics of fluid-rock
              interactions and thermal history in the detachment zones of the Shuswap
              metamorphic core complex. Towards this end, we are conducting a detailed
              thermochronologic study based on the fission-track and (U-Th)/He methods on two
              transects across the Columbia River detachment and fault system that bounds the
              metamorphic core complex to the east.  In the same regions, we are examining
              fluid-rock interaction by analyzing the stable isotope signature and fluid
              inclusions within veins, fault rocks, and unfractured rock.  This part of the
              study constrains the nature of the fluids, the extent of fluid pathways, the
              degree to which surficial fluids penetrate the metamorphic crust, the fluids
              paleo-temperatures, and possibly also fluid fluxes.  We are constructing a
              suite of numerical experiments to represent isotopic fluid-rock interactions as
              well as thermochronologic data within this smaller-scale framework in order to
              better understand fluid flow in detachment/normal fault systems.  The detailed
              field work and geochemical results also serve as ground truth against which the
              modeling results are tested. The quantitative analysis of fluid flow as a major
              heat transfer mechanism will help to refine the method in which geologists use
              cooling rates to determine exhumation rates.

