Title       : Early Complex Societies in North China: The Chifeng International Collaborative
               Archaeological Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106048

Award Number: 0106048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70446              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katheryn M. Linduff linduff+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gideon Shelach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Drennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Katheryn M. Linduff and
              her colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh, Jilin University, Hebrew
              University and the Inner Mongolia Institute of Archaeology will conduct three
              more seasons of archaeological fieldwork in the Chifeng region of southeastern
              Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region in northeastern China. The region is
              strategically positioned between the center of early Chinese dynasties in the
              agriculturally productive Yellow River basin and the steppe land to its north
              and west where a pastoral nomadic adaptation developed.  The region shows a
              long sequence of relatively independent development before it was fully
              incorporated into the dynastic system.  The team seeks to record and clarify
              what conditions led to greater social complexity in the region.  The principal
              research activity is a regional-scale settlement study.  The first two field
              seasons (1999-2000) have already begun to provide information on the period
              from c. 6000 B.C. through c. A.D. 200 that will be necessary to understand the
              relationships among sites already investigated through stratigraphic excavation
              during several decades of research by Chinese archaeologists.  Work in the
              Chifeng region to date has covered 550 sq km of a projected 1350 sq km area and
              aims to broaden our knowledge beyond the subjects treated in ancient Chinese
              historical documents that saw the Central Plain as the primary location and
              motivator of change across north Asia.  Second, it is focused on a region
              outside the heartland of early Chinese states, in which no historical documents
              were written, but where excavated mortuary materials suggest the existence of
              more complexity than reported in the texts.  The research has begun to collect
              information necessary to contextualize existing archaeological data and bring
              it to bear on reconstructing social, political, cultural, and economic patterns
              for the whole region.The team will conduct further stratigraphic excavations in
              order to clarify the chronological sequence, conduct instrument mapping and
              intensive surface collection of surface remains of several sites with extensive
              above ground architectural remains so a to understand their functions better. 
              Although China has long been recognized as vital to comparative study of the
              origins and development of complex society, data from there is absent even from
              most recent syntheses and is only recently been systematically collected in
              this way.  Dr Linduff's project is the one of very few international
              collaborative archaeological endeavors in China and the first of its kind in
              the northern region. The resulting information will contribute to a broadened
              understanding of the variability to be observed in the trajectories of
              development of early complex societies in a global comparative context.


