Title       : ROLE: An Infrastructure for Research on Online Teacher Communities of Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0106926

Award Number: 0106926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Schlager Mark.schlager@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Schank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers are converging on the view that
              online
communities of practice (CoPs) in the teaching profession can be
              powerful catalysts for
improving teaching and facilitating systemic reform.
              Although the promise of online CoPs is compelling and theoretically sound, the
              reality of online teacher communities has been less promising. The reason, we
              believe, is that research into the marriage of TPD pedagogy and online
              technology is missing a necessary third component-the infrastructure for online
              CoP (as distinct from particular online TPD strategies). Research cannot
              continue to treat community as a side effect of a TPD intervention or the
              inevitable outcome of a Web portal or electronic network. We must study online
              CoP as a valid component of the education system in its own right or risk
              continuing the same pattern of a few irreproducible successes and many
              redundant failures as practitioners and providers struggle to keep pace with
              emerging technologies and the rapidly changing Web landscape. To move beyond
              the CoP promise toward measurable benefits for SMET teacher professional
              development on a national scale, we must conduct the research
needed to better
              understand the social and organizational structures of online CoPs as an
              integral component of the teaching profession. To embark on this research
              agenda, we must also break out of the constraints that popular "distance
              learning" technologies place on the research by designing and building
              technological infrastructures that reflect and augment the social and
              organizational structures of a CoP.

We will apply what we and others are
              learning about online education CoPs and their
applications to design and
              prototype a new technical infrastructure for supporting and studying online
              CoPs. We will adopt a participatory, scenario-based design approach to develop
              our prototype infrastructure. Our project brings together a design team
              representing researchers (SRI and Virginia Tech), teacher educators (Pepperdine
              University), technology developers (WebCT, PBS), regional education support
              providers (New England Aquarium, AEL, Inc.), national TPD organizations (PBS
              TeacherLine), and our core constituency, TAPPED IN members. The team will also
              include experts in Web-based systems development and graphical user interface
              design. The basic design will be modular to enable us to plug in new
              capabilities as they emerge. The prototype infrastructure will serve as a
              platform for online CoP research and further development by many different
              organizations over the next several years. We will also document the design
              process, artifacts, and commentary on a public Web site and solicit input from
              the research and practitioner communities to widely disseminate knowledge of
              online CoP design issues and generate design guidelines that will inform
              technology research and development aimed at supporting online education
              communities. 

