Title       : Collaborative Research: Record of Mafic Inputs to an Arc Magma System: Analysis
               of Enclaves and Their Host Lavas Cored During Phase I, Unzen Scientific
               Drilling Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0106834

Award Number: 0106834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59582              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Eichelberger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Dehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eichelberger
EAR-0106834


This proposal seeks support for the PIs to
              participate in internationally collaborative geochemical investigations of
              samples now being obtained during the first phase of the Unzen Scientific
              Drilling Project (USDP), Japan. USDP is a developing project of the
              International Continental Drilling Program (ICDP), which seeks to use drilling
              as a tool to advance understanding of fundamental processes of continental
              crust. The United States is a major partner and funding source for ICDP,
              through the National Science Foundation. The goal of USDP is to understand the
              eruptive behavior of Unzen as representative of an important class of andesitic
              arc volcanoes. This is to be done through a program of drilling, borehole
              observation, and core analysis in complement with ongoing surface geological
              and geophysical studies as well as the remarkable suite of geophysical and
              geochemical observations made during the recent eruption. That devastating
              episode occurred during 1991 to 1994, claimed 44 lives, and did some $2 billion
              in damage.
In the first phase of the project, for which support is requested
              through this proposal, flank holes of 750 m and 1500 m are being drilled to the
              base of the edifice in order to obtain a complete physical and chemical record
              of the volcano's activity. Simultaneously, and also to be supported under this
              request, planning will be undertaken for the second phase in which multiple
              core sections through the conduit will be obtained in order to address problems
              of magma transport and degassing. These observations will aid in understanding
              the paradox of effusive eruption of water-rich magma. The overall scientific
              rationale and plan for this undertaking are presented in the proposals to ICDP
              and will be repeated in condensed form here to provide context. ICDP itself
              supports drilling only, not the associated science, hence the need for this
              request.
Recent eruptions of Unzen, Pinatubo, and Soufriere Hills volcanoes
              have graphically demonstrated the concept that injection of mafic magma into a
              crustal slush is an important petrologic process and a volcanic trigger. The
              high visibility of these events has served to strengthen a dialog between
              workers on volcanic and plutonic rocks, and reinvigorated the investigation of
              mafic enclaves and disequilibrium phenocryst assemblages. A basic question has
              become: how do we fit these products of open system behavior of magma systems,
              produced by mafic recharge or replenishment, into the broader picture of
              crustal plutonism and volcanism? A subset of that question, which this proposal
              seeks to answer, is: What are the long term-petrologic consequences of repeated
              mafic inputs to the crustal magma system? Studies to date have elucidated
              single events as sampled by eruption products or viewed the end product of many
              such events in the form of mafic and silicic layered intrusions (MASLI). We
              wish to look at the time series provided by 500,000 years of Unzen eruptions,
              to characterize the inputs to the system and understand their influence on its
              chemical evolution. The work will be coordinated with complementary efforts in
              Japan on dating the sequence and documenting the geologic and chemical
              evolution of the volcano.

