Title       : Impact of Varied Slab Thermal Structure on Subduction-Related Fluxes and Source
               Regions of Northern Cascadia Basalt Magmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0106900

Award Number: 0106900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan L. Green ngreen@wgs.geo.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Green
EAR-0106900

Subduction zone magmas have geochemical signatures
              atypical of mantle-derived melts. The source of their distinctive geochemistry
              remains controversial, as considerable uncertainty exists about the nature of
              processes that transport elements from the subducted plate to the overlying
              mantle. A central issue is determining how much of the characteristic
              geochemical signature results from transport processes and how much is due
              simply to the composition of subducted materials. Another factor is the
              intrinsic characteristics of the mantle wedge. Correctly identifying the
              importance of these different factors is critical in attempting mass balance of
              elements at the subduction zone and hence, in determining the flux of
              continental material recycled into the mantle.


Basalts of the northern
              Cascadia subduction system share tectonic and geochemical relationships with
              many convergent margin volcanic suites, but occur within a geophysically
              well-constrained "hot" subduction environment for which it can be shown that
              (1) the thermal state of the subducted plate varies along the convergent
              margin; (2) the nature of the subduction component added to the mantle wedge
              and/or the state of mantle depletion likely changes along strike of the
              volcanic front; and (3) the subduction signature of the basaltic lavas probably
              reflects processes operating primarily within the forearc region. Because slab
              melting may occur under 'hot' subduction conditions, these volcanic rocks
              provide a unique opportunity to evaluate the extent and nature of fluid versus
              slab melt (sediment and/or basaltic crust) contributions to the chemical budget
              of arc source regions in the overlying mantle.

This project will utilize
              major-element, trace-element, and isotopic compositions of primitive to
              near-primitive basalts to: (1) detail the nature of arc-parallel geochemical
              variations in the lavas and  implications for melting processes within the
              mantle wedge; (2) evaluate the degree of mantle source depletion and
              heterogeneity prior to introduction of slab-derived fluxes; (3) quantify
              subduction fluxes (fluids or melts) recorded in the basalts along the volcanic
              front; and, (4) establish the influence of slab thermal structure on the extent
              and nature of mantle-slab interactions.


The results will provide crucial
              information for identifying different factors controlling the nature and origin
              of subduction-related fluxes (in particular, sediment melts), and will place
              important constraints on proposed relationships between generation of
              intermediate-depth earthquakes and metamorphic reactions in the subducted plate
              benearth convergent margins.


