Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Host Affiliation in an Ant-Plant Mutualism:
               Phylogeny of the Crematogaster Inhabitants of Macaranga (Euphorbiaceae).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0106866

Award Number: 0106866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7788               (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi E. Pierce npierce@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In the aseasonal rain forests of Southeast Asia, ants of the genus Crematogaster
              live exclusively inside stems of trees in the genus Macaranga (Euphorbiaceae),
              forming an obligate partnership from which both parties benefit. The ants
              remove vines and herbivores from their hosts and subsist exclusively on food
              bodies produced by the plants and honey-dew from scale-insect which they tend
              inside the stems. The interaction involves ca. 8 ant lineages and ca. 26 host
              species. Based on a molecular phylogeny of the Crematogaster, we will
              investigate evolutionary trends in their association with Macaranga hosts. In
              particular we will examine correlations between host traits and ant traits that
              influence patterns of association. Preliminary results indicate that the
              presence or absence of copious epicuticular wax blooms on the stems of
              Macaranga have played an important role in determining the identity of the ant
              tenants on Macaranga. We also aim to address some of the mechanisms that
              underlie the phylogenetic patterns in host association, for example, what are
              the relative contributions of contemporary and historical processes in
              explaining patterns of association? Additionally, using the molecular phylogeny
              and Scanning Electron Microscopy, we seek to resolve species limits in the ants
              as suggested by morphological data. Because the integrity of our conclusions
              are contingent upon the assumption that the Macaranga-inhabiting ants form a
              natural group, we will verify the monophyly of the ants by including in the
              molecular phylogeny other members of their subgenus not found with Macaranga.
              The ecology, systematics and biogeography of Macaranga have been thoroughly
              investigated, affording a more holistic understanding of the system beyond an
              investigation based solely on the ants.

The phylogenetically comprehensive
              scope of our study will afford an evolutionary perspective to the growing body
              of research on the ecological aspects of this interaction. This study will
              provide a comparison for other phylogenetically-based ant-plant studies and
              help illuminate ecological and evolutionary themes in ant-plant mutualisms.
              Contrasts with mutualistic systems where symbionts are directly inherited from
              the previous generation (such as yucca and yucca moths, and figs and fig wasps)
              may reveal why cospeciation more often explains the evolution of pollinating
              mutualisms than it does ant-plant mutualisms.

