Title       : Hinterlands and Cities: Archaeological Investigations of Economy and Trade in
               Tsavo, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0106664

Award Number: 0106664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146702             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chapurukha M. Kusimba   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sibel B. Kusimba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Chapurukha Kusimba and Sibel Kusimba will conduct two field seasons of
              archaeological and ethnographic research in the Tsavo region of southeastern
              Kenya.   They are studying how small-scale but diverse societies participated
              in and were impacted by burgeoning trading systems that moved ivory, precious
              metals, agricultural foodstuffs, ceramics, textiles, human beings and cultural
              knowledge across port cities of the Old World during the period 2000 b.c.e. -
              1800 c.e.  In Tsavo, hunter-gatherers, farmers, and pastoralists interacted and
              traded amongst themselves and with merchants from the Kenyan Coast, where
              Muslim urban trading polities developed from 900-1700 c.e.  The Tsavo region
              was an important source and conduit for African trade goods bound via Coast
              cities into Indian Ocean and Mediterranean trade, such as ivory, slaves,
              rhinoceros horns, animal skins, and rock crystal.  From 1000-1500 AD Tsavo
              ivory became an increasingly valuable commodity and form of currency on the
              world market.  The East African Coastal cities had a diverse and well-defined
              social hierarchy composed of a social and religious elite, commoners,
              foreigners, and slaves.  The elite managed and financed complex and extensive
              interregional trade networks. They also sponsored craft specialists including
              ironworkers, specialized fishermen, and sailors.  They owned the most
              productive land and leased out the land to commoners, newcomers, and slaves. 
              They may also have financed and supported specialized hunters in the hinterland
              to provide export trade goods such as ivory. 
 The actions of urban elite were
              no doubt important in the involvement of East Africa in global trade. However,
              the participation of ordinary people in hinterlands like Tsavo enabled elite
              accumulation of wealth, power, and status.  Because elite actions have been an
              almost exclusive focus of East African archaeology, little is known about the
              impact of Coastal trade on Tsavo communities.  The project team brings together
              Western and Kenyan specialists in archaeology, historical linguistics,
              geoarchaeology ethnography and archaeology to conduct a coordinated
              investigation into the development and cultural/ecological impact of trade in
              Tsavo.  In three field seasons, the Kusimba's and colleagues have identified
              over 200 sites, including an extensive iron production complex, rockshelter
              agropastoralist and hunter-gatherer settlements including preserved dry
              stonework cattle pens and human sleeping and food processing areas, open-air
              sites, and sites of mortuary activity, including secondary reburial. They
              hypothesize that Tsavo communities and individuals used alliances, competition,
              and intensification to increase their participation in trade.  These strategies
              may have caused ecological disruption through overexploitation of the elephant,
              whose foraging of woody and shrubby vegetation maintains ecosystem biodiversity
              and grazing areas for human pastoralists.  Their research will examine the use
              and ecological effects of these three strategies through excavations in four
              areas of Tsavo and subsequent chemical and attribute analysis of pottery,
              lithic artifacts, faunal remains, and site architecture and location. 
              Paleoecological analysis, including palynology and soil chemistry, will look
              for evidence of environmental degredation associated with elephant
              overexploitation.

