Title       : Refinement of Measurement of Crystal-Mush Compaction in the Palisades Sill, New
               Jersey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106538

Award Number: 0106538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90317              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Philpotts philpotts@geol.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman H. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Philpotts/Gray 
EAR-0106538

     The goal of this research is to determine
              directly the amount of compaction that occurred during the solidification of
              the Palisades Sill, New Jersey, one of the simplest and best studied intrusive
              igneous bodies.  Previous studies revealed that a possible explanation for the
              chemical variation through this sill involved compaction of crystal mush with
              upward expulsion of the residual liquid.  The evidence, however, is entirely
              chemical and open to other interpretations.  Recent studies of a thick
              flood-basalt flow have shown that plagioclase crystals link together to form a
              three-dimensional network of chains early in the crystallization of the magma. 
              If compaction of crystal mush occurs during solidification, the network of
              plagioclase crystals is deformed, and its degree of anisotropy is a direct
              measure of the amount of compaction.  In the case of the thick lava flow, the
              compaction amounts independently determined from the anisotropy of the
              plagioclase network and from the chemical variation through the flow agree
              remarkably well.  Initial measurements of the fabric of rocks in the Palisades
              Sill document that they are indeed anisotropic and that the compaction inferred
              from the chemical evidence did occur.  Three new, independent methods have been
              developed for measuring the anisotropy of a rock's fabric.  The methods involve
              measuring various aspects of the plagioclase network in oriented thin sections.
               One is based on the average intercept length between plagioclase chains along
              mutually perpendicular traverses; another considers links in the chains as
              vectors whose distribution can be analyzed for anisotropy; and the third
              determines the average moment ellipse that can be fitted to the interstitial
              patches between the chains.  Each of the methods is amenable to a thorough
              statistical analysis of the standard errors for the degree of compaction and
              orientation estimates.  These techniques will be used on sets of three mutually
              perpendicular thin sections cut from a series of oriented samples through the
              sill. These measurements will allow us to determine, for each sample, the 3-D
              ellipsoid of the anisotropy of the rock1s fabric, from which will be calculated
              the amount and direction of compaction.  Differences between the three
              independent methods of measuring compaction can be used to shed light on the
              mechanism of the compaction process and its relation to layering in the sill. 
              The anisotropism of magnetic susceptibility, which has commonly been used as an
              indirect measure of the anisotropy of a rock1s fabric, will be measured in each
              sample to determine how it relates to the anisotropy of the plagioclase-chain
              network.  The direct measurement of compaction in a crystal mush is of
              importance, because of the insight it will provide into the chemical and
              physical processes involved in the differentiation of magma bodies and in the
              extraction of magma from partly melted mantle sources.

