Title       : Non-Contact River Discharge and Precipitation Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0106391

Award Number: 0106391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Plant plant@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Nystuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106391
Plant

The US Geological Survey routinely measures river discharge at
              more than 7000 sites in the United States by monitoring the height, or stage,
              of the rivers.  This requires that the relation between stage and discharge be
              accurately known.  Present methods of acquiring such calibration data place
              instruments and, often personnel, in the water.  At high flow rates such
              measurements are both difficult and hazardous; at extremely high rates, they
              cannot be made at all.  Yet the need for these measurements is especially acute
              at very high flow rates in order to monitor and predict flooding conditions. 
              In this proposal we outline research to develop a microwave system capable of
              remotely measuring river discharge under nearly all flow conditions. 
              Additionally, the system will provide infon-nation on rainfall.
Our approach
              is to construct an array of simple continuous-wave microwave systems and
              algorithms for analyzing their output in order to obtain river surface
              velocities and rain rates remotely and continuously.  The primary focus of the
              project will be on the algorithms needed to obtain accurate currents and rain
              rates since the microwave and data acquisition systems will be relatively
              simple.  Current information is contained in the Doppler shift of the
              microwaves backscattered from the river while rain rates are related to the
              intensity of the return from raindrops.  The initial application of the
              prototype system will be long-term measurements from a bridge on the Cowlitz
              River near Castle Rock, WA.  The work will be carried out in collaboration with
              the USGS, who will mount the antenna of a ground-penetrating radar on a
              cableway near the bridge.  The combined measurements have the potential to
              yield discharge.
This research will provide inexpensive, portable systems for
              making river discharge and precipitation measurements.  Continuous, remote
              measurements with these systems will improve development and monitoring of
              international and interstate agreements on allocation of water resources;
              provide streamflow data to manage and improve water quality; assess changes in
              the riverine environment that affect the quality of river and riparian habitat;
              and improve the estimation of flood frequency and flood inundation areas.

