Title       : Geochemical and Petrologic Evolution of Chromitites and Other Platinum Group
               Element-Rich Rocks From Study of the UG2 Layer, Bushvel Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0106750

Award Number: 0106750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmond A. Mathez mathez@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathez
EAR-0106750

The Bushveld Complex and other large layered intrusions
              have experienced a long and complex evolution following crystal accumulation
              and while the rocks were still partially molten.  During this time the
              textures, compositions, and in some cases lithologies of the rocks were
              modified.  In the Bushveld Complex this history bears on the fundamental
              geochemistry of the platinum group elements (PGEs) because the PGE-rich layers,
              namely the Merensky reef and the UG2 chromitite, exhibit evidence for extensive
              post-accumulation modification.  The objectives of this proposal are to
              understand the dynamic and chemical evolution of the partially molten rocks and
              how the PGEs were redistributed during this evolution.
The meter-thick UG2
              chromitite possesses internal stratigraphic variations in texture and PGE
              contents.  Geochemical profiles for PGEs and other elements will be produced in
              carefully mapped underground sections.  Data on crystal size, shape, and mode
              will be collected to understand how the textural and geochemical variations are
              related and when and how they formed.  The interstitial silicate minerals will
              be analyzed for rare earth elements to deduce the role of interstitial melt in
              textural and geochemical modification.  Chromite grains contain inclusions of
              Os-bearing minerals.  Their Os isotopic compositions will be measured and
              associated with the textural analysis to establish when and how the inclusions
              formed.  Mapping in the mine revealed that the UG2 is associated with several
              complex rock layers.  These will be studied to determine their origins and gain
              insight into the emplacement of the UG2 and its possible role as a permeability
              barrier to the flow of interstitial melt and fluid.
The Merensky reef is
              believed to mark the introduction of new magma into an extant magma chamber. 
              The complex stratigraphic profiles of Sr isotopic ratios associated with this
              layer are inconsistent with simple magma mixing and may have developed later,
              when the rocks were partially molten and compacting.  A Pb isotopic study
              featuring analysis of individual Pb-bearing minerals will be conducted to gain
              insight into the geochemical development of the Merensky reef.



