Title       : Modular Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0106200

Award Number: 0106200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Parshall bjp8w@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard L. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The modular representation theory of finite groups of Lie
type is a major,
              active topic of mathematical research.  
The area has both inspired and been
              strongly
influenced by developments in other areas, e.g., 
the cohomology of
              groups and Lie algebras,
quantum groups, characteristic zero representation
              theory,
perverse sheaves, and the theory of finite dimensional algebras.
The
              project treats both the
describing and  non-describing theories.  The
              
describing (resp., nondescribing) theory concerns 
the modular
              representations in which the underlying module 
is taken over a field having
              the same (resp., different) 
characteristic as the defining characteristic of
              the group.  
In the describing theory, the investigators look for 
an
              increased role of the relatively
unexplored area of affine Lie algebra
              representations in
positive characteristic.   In the non-describing
              theory,
they plan to attack several important conjectures 
aimed at finding a
              unified approach valid for all types.  
They also continue to explore possible
              analogies between the two theories.
Finally, Parshall continues his recent
              work on cohomology
computations, while Scott extends his recent computational
              work.

     In mathematics, a "group"  is an abstract embodiment of symmetry.
              
In addition to applications to other parts of mathematics, concrete
              
realizations of groups can provide powerful constraints on the behavior
              of
complicated physical and communications systems. This project
              concentrates
on determining the ways in which the most important abstract
              finite groups
find concrete representations as square matrices over finite
              number systems.
The groups and representations the investigators study
              comprise the most
important basic ingredients for creating a general theory of
              all finite
group representations. Over the past century, similar theories
              for
continuous groups have played a large role in quantum theory and the
              theory
of elementary particles. Their finite analogs have already proved
              valuable
in the design of communications and data storage devices, though this
              finite
theory remains very incomplete. In the future,  one reasonably expects
              that
the finite discrete worlds of computers and communications will become
              even
more important. The task of creating a viable general theory of finite
              group
representations -- as is the investigators' long-term goal -- is, thus,
              a
central problem for the future. 
