Title       : Biogeochemical Weathering Controls on Soil Formation and Landscape Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0106054

Award Number: 0106054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield jill@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Biogeochemical weathering controls on soil formation and landscape
              development.


The soil production rate is defined as the rate at which
              bedrock, in this study chemically weathered granodiorite, converts to a mobile
              layer (soil, defined by loss of granitic texture).  Previous studies have
              established the form of the inverse relationship between soil production rates
              and soil thickness.  However, these studies have not compared erosion to solute
              losses during landscape lowering, or incorporated detailed consideration of the
              biogeochemical weathering processes that must precede, and generally follow,
              soil formation. In this project, conservation of mass equations will be solved
              using geochemical tracer results and existing cosmogenic dating information to
              determine long-term mass transfers due to erosion and solute loss during
              landscape development on the Bemboka Granodiorite in SE Australia. Variation in
              solute versus erosional fluxes with soil thickness and landscape position will
              be evaluated, and possible relationships between the solute loss rates (prior
              to soil formation), soil thickness, and microbial processes in the weathered
              granite will be examined. The analysis will also yield values for long-term
              erosion and solute losses for most elements per unit area of land surface per
              unit time. This investigation extends prior geomorphological approaches to
              incorporate biogeochemical as well as biophysical weathering contributions to
              soil formation and landscape evolution. Broader impacts of the research will
              stem from new insights into factors controlling rates of soil formation,
              improved understanding of the processes by which landscapes respond to
              perturbation, and the quantification of long-term sediment and solute fluxes to
              the oceans.


