Title       : Late Ordovician Epeiric Sea Circulation, Environmental Change, and Biotic
               Turnover: Model and Data Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0106737

Award Number: 0106737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Patzkowsky brachio@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Seidov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudy L. Slingerland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Late Ordovician Epeiric Sea Circulation, Environmental Change, and
              Biotic Turnover: Model and Data Synthesis

One of the most difficult problems
              facing the earth science community today is identifying the ultimate causes of
              extinction and migration in the history of life.  In the sedimentary record,
              biotic change such as extinction is often linked to evidence of environmental
              change, however the processes underlying environmental change are often complex
              and poorly understood.  Numerical models of physical systems that are tested
              against the sedimentary record provide a means by which the ultimate causes for
              bioevents can be investigated.  We propose to use a numerical model of ocean
              circulation to determine the ultimate causes for an extinction event in the
              Late Ordovician of North America.
This study has two main components.  In the
              first component we hypothesize that rapid shifts in environmental conditions
              linked to extinction during the Late Ordovician of North America were caused by
              changes in bathymetry, paleogeography, and precipitation associated with
              mountain building.  We will model ocean circulation for two time intervals that
              span the abrupt shift in environmental conditions and related extinction event.
               We will test the validity of the model results against the distribution of
              sedimentary indicators of oceanographic conditions.  
In the second component
              of the study we will investigate the relative importance of single variables
              like changes in sea level, paleogeography, bathymetry, and precipitation in
              producing rapid oceanographic shifts in the epeiric seas that may have caused
              significant extinction of species.  In investigating the ultimate causes of
              extinction, modeling has the advantage that single variables can be isolated
              and their effects on the system evaluated.  We will identify plausible causes
              of the extinction event by determining how well the model results match the
              spatial and temporal faunal changes.  By gaining insight into the causes of
              rapid oceanographic changes in these epeiric seas, this study has broad
              implications for understanding environmental change and extinction during any
              time in Earth's history when epeiric seas were important components of marine
              ecosystems. 

