Title       : A Posteriori Error Analysis and Adaptive Algorithms for Variational Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0106781

Award Number: 0106781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weimin Han whan@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a systematic theory on a posteriori
              error estimation and adaptive algorithms for finite element solutions of
              variational inequalities. A posteriori error estimates play an essential role
              in assessing the reliability of numerical solutions and in developing efficient
              adaptive algorithms. Although several standard techniques have been developed
              to derive and analyze a posteriori error estimates for finite element solutions
              of differential equation problems, they do not work directly for a posteriori
              error analysis of numerical solutions of variational inequalities. In the
              proposed research, the duality theory of nonlinear analysis will be employed as
              a basic mathematical tool for the development of a posteriori error estimates
              of numerical solutions of variational inequalities.

Variational inequalities
              form an important family of nonlinear problems arising in a wide range of
              applications.  A partial list of the applications where variational
              inequalities arise include contact mechanics, plasticity, non-Newtonian fluid
              flows, metal forming, metal extrusion, financial mathematics.  A systematic
              approach will be developed to derive a posteriori error estimates and to form
              and test efficient, reliable adaptive solution algorithms for finite element
              approximations of variational inequalities. The research results will have a
              direct impact on many areas of science and technology. 

