Title       : Data Mining and GIS Spatial Analysis to Study Epidemiological Trends in Asthma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0106315

Award Number: 0106315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia B. Cerrito pcerrito@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clara Leuthart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Medical geography is an interdisciplinary collaboration between geography and
              medicine to apply geographic methods to study disease distributions using the
              geographical information systems (GIS) containing information that can be
              cross-linked to hospital and county health data to examine the relationship
              between chronic diseases such as cancer and asthma and air quality and other
              environmental hazards. Substantial environmental data are currently available
              in the GIS, but the data are underutilized in investigating chronic health
              problems. Local hospitals provide emergency treatment for asthma for patients
              and patient addresses can be cross-linked to geographic information. Health
              data can be correlated to the geographic information to determine the
              relationships between air and water quality, and asthma emergencies. Standard
              statistical methods cannot be readily applied to the complex, observational
              data. Therefore, the analysis will use data mining techniques, including
              artificial neural networks, visualization, and kernel density estimation.
              Structural equation modeling examines the causal flow. The investigator will
              work with geographers in the Department of Geography/Geosciences and with
              health researchers to expand skills to include knowledge of the GIS system and
              software, and to use those skills to examine the epidemiology of chronic
              diseases related to environmental factors. The methods studied can be applied
              to many chronic diseases.   This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
