Title       : On Being Explicit: Toward a New Pedagogical Synthesis in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0106194

Award Number: 0106194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1232836            (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Warren Beth_Warren@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann S. Rosebery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              How do children, especially children who traditionally have been unsuccessful in
              science, learn to see the relationships between their own and scientific
              accounts of phenomena and to work with these productively in support of
              understanding?  Would all children benefit academically from close attention to
              the relationships between "everyday" and "scientific" meanings and ways of
              representing those meanings?  What is the nature of these relationships, and
              how can they be built upon pedagogically in science?  The overarching goal of
              this three-year project is to develop an understanding of how all children, as
              they develop understanding of scientific ideas, also learn to see "inside" the
              ways in which "everyday" and "scientific" accounts represent knowledge about
              the physical and biological world.  It is motivated by our concern with the
              persistent achievement gap in science separating low-income ethnic, racial and
              linguistic minority children from more economically privileged students. 
              

To address our questions, we will engage in a series of design experiments,
              to be undertaken in close collaboration with practitioner researchers in
              heterogeneous and bilingual classrooms, grades 1-4.  These will entail two main
              research activities.  (1) We will iteratively develop a pedagogical approach
              that integrates "progressive" emphases on the centrality of students' ideas and
              questions in inquiry-based learning with "post-progressive" concerns on the
              importance of explicit teaching about the forms and functions of language and
              symbol use in organizing meaning-making in science.  This new pedagogical
              synthesis will harness the diversity in children's ideas and ways of talking
              and knowing as an intellectual resource in science learning and teaching and
              make this diversity into an explicit object of discussion and inquiry in the
              classroom.  In this approach, students and teachers will engage in active
              inquiry into the ways in which core ideas in physics (e.g., motion and force)
              and biology (e.g., organismal growth and development) are represented in
              "everyday" and "scientific" accounts (e.g. spoken and written descriptions,
              explanations, theories, arguments; graphs; drawings; models; tables; etc.). 
              The focus of these inquiries will be on meaning and form as well as perspective
              and purpose.  (2)  Our main conjecture is that through participation in this
              approach to inquiry students will develop robust scientific understanding,
              begin to develop command over multiple discourses and their uses, and
              demonstrate high achievement.  Toward this end, we will study what children
              learn as a result of their participation in such inquiry practices.  We will
              examine children's learning as reflected in multiple kinds of performances,
              including classroom benchmark discussions, performance assessments, and
              achievement tests. 


