Title       : Collaborative Research: Explaining the Eruption of Huge Volumes of
               Magma-Sediment Mixtures Preceding Flood Basalt Effusion, Karoo Lip, South
               Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0106103

Award Number: 0106103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Skilling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Skilling
EAR-0106103

The onset of flood basaltic volcanism is frequently
              explosive but this explosive volcanism is often overlooked with respect to the
              voluminous flood basalts that follow.  We document here unusual voluminous
              basaltic breccias that predate and are interbedded with the earliest flood
              basalts of the Karoo Large Igneous Province (LIP), South Africa.  No detailed
              studies or facies models for these deposits exist, nor can existing models for
              explosive volcanism explain them.  The Karoo breccias have an outcrop area of
              >1000km2, a total volume of at least 500km3, which can be divided into flow
              units with volumes which may be as high as 27km3.  The breccias consist of
              juvenile vitric clasts in a matrix dominated by sedimentary sand grains.  These
              sediment-magma mixtures infill large caldera-like collapse structures from
              which they were probably erupted, and also form outflow sheets interbedded with
              the earliest Karoo lavas.  Juvenile clasts in the breccias are very similar to
              those of associated fluidal peperites suggesting a continuum of mixing
              processes from the subsurface to surface.  The collapse structures contain
              bodies of dolerite juxtaposed with large blocks of fused sandstone, suggesting
              prolonged intervals of efficient heat transfer.
This study will look at
              pre-eruptive, eruptive and emplacement mechanisms that led to the production of
              the Karoo lavas, by studying and comparing infill and outflow facies, and by
              looking at proximal to distal variations within a representative outflow sheet.
               We will develop and test the hypothesis that mixing was preceded by
              underplating of large areas of wet unconsolidated sand by sustained and
              constantly replenished high-level sills of basalt.  Mixing and eruption may
              have been accompanied by upwelling of gravitationally unstable slurries, or
              jetting of magma-sediment mixtures issuing from close-spaced, but ephemeral
              vents.  We will use detailed geological mapping and facies analysis to infer
              emplacement processes and SEM and image analysis of juvenile clasts to
              constrain pre-eruptive degassing and fragmentation mechanisms.  In year 1, we
              will study the infill sequence of the Sterkspruit Complex, selected because, in
              addition to excellent exposure, it contains an unusual near-vent deposit on its
              margin.  In year 2, we will extend the study beyond the Complex to characterize
              outflow deposition and place the complex in a regional context.  We will use
              chemical stratigraphy to construct the interplay between effusive and explosive
              phase, and will constrain this work by Ar/Ar age determinations.
The study has
              implications for the onset of eruption in all flood basalt provinces.  Similar
              deposits are currently under study, by White and students, for the
              stratigraphically equivalent Ferrar LIP of Antarctica.  Little studied
              voluminous breccias also occur at the base of the flood basalts in the East
              Greenland area of the North Atlantic Tertiary LIP, and in the Siberian Traps
              LIP.  Models for the global impact of flood basalts are predicated only on the
              effusive component.  This study will add data that will enable refinement of
              these models.

