Title       : Probing the Quantum Hall State by Electrically Detected ESR and ENDOR in GaAs
               and Si-MOSFET Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0106058

Award Number: 0106058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270270             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Russell Bowers russ@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1710,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support a project to elucidate
              properties of correlated 2 dimensional electron systems (2DES) in the Quantum
              Hall regime.  These studies will include: the measurement of the magnetization
              of the 2DES, the study of current induced dynamic nuclear polarization, and the
              role of spin in metal-insulator transitions in a Si-MOSFET 2DES.  The
              experimental methods to be employed in the proposed investigations are
              electrically detected electron spin resonance and electrically detected
              electron-nuclear double resonance. Furthermore, a magnon model for the
              mechanism of the electrically detected electron spin resonance in the quantum
              Hall state will be developed and compared with the experimental temperature and
              microwave power dependence of the signal response. Experiments are to be
              conducted on high mobility GaAs/AlGaAs quantum wells fabricated at Sandia
              National Labs and Si-MOSFET heterostructure devices. Instrumentation at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and in the P.I.'s laboratory at the
              University of Florida will be employed to carry out the proposed
              investigations.  Students involved with this research will gain skills that
              will prepare them for future careers in industry and academia.  In addition,
              they will gain the experience of collaborating with scientists at national
              facilities.

A fundamental understanding of the processes associated with the
              flow of electrons through composite semiconductor materials is key to the
              development of new types of devices with improved performance and novel
              characteristics. The "spin" of the electron plays a central role in the
              conductivity properties of high performance nanostructured semiconductors at
              low temperatures and high magnetic fields. Under these conditions (referred to
              as the quantum Hall regime), the flow of electrons is strongly affected by
              quantum mechanics where the available states of the electron are restricted to
              certain energies.  This individual investigator award will support research
              aimed at probing the spin degree of freedom by resonance absorption of
              microwave energy. The spin of the electron can be "flipped" by this absorption,
              and as was first shown by the German Nobel Laureate Klaus von Klitzing, this
              can be detected as a change in the conductivity. This project will attempt to
              explain the mechanism of this electrically detected spin resonance effect, and
              to use it to probe the quantized energy levels in the nanostructured
              semiconductor.  The research could impact on the development of "quantum
              computation" devices or new types of "spin transistors" with improved
              performance over conventional devices. The commercialization of these potential
              applications could have major long-term economic impact in the technology
              sector. Thus, representation in this research area by a US research group is
              crucial to the National interest. Students involved with this research will
              gain skills that will prepare them for future careers in industry and academia.
              In addition, they will gain the experience of collaborating with scientists at
              national facilities.

