Title       : Molybdenum Isotopes in the Geologic Record: Paleoredox Proxies?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0106712

Award Number: 0106712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Barling barling@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel D. Anbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Molybdenum Isotope in the Geologic Record: Paleoredox
              Proxies?

This project aims to investigate natural variations in the isotopic
              composition of the element molybdenum (Mo). Mo is an element that is sensitive
              to the presence of oxygen.
As the abundance of oxygen in the environment
              varies, so does the chemical behavior of
Mo. 

We have made a preliminary
              study and found that Mo that has accumulated from seawater under oxygen-rich
              conditions is lighter than Mo that accumulates in sediments under oxygen-absent
              conditions in the presence of sulfur. Of the two types of accumulation, it is
              the Mo that accumulates under oxygen-absent conditions that is similar to Mo in
              seawater. We therefore believe that changes in the relative proportion of light
              Mo extracted from the oceans under oxygen-rich conditions will be reflected in
              the isotopic composition of Mo in seawater and in sediments deposited under
              oxygen-absent conditions. The more of the ocean that is oxygen-rich, the more
              light Mo will be extracted from seawater and the heavier the Mo remaining in
              seawater will become.

The key to this hypothesis is the extraction of light
              Mo from seawater under oxygen-rich conditions. It is therefore the purpose of
              this project to investigate this process both in the laboratory and in natural
              samples in order to understand the mechanisms involved and to quantify their
              effects.

If we are correct, then the isotopic composition of Mo in sediments
              deposited under oxygen-absent waters could be used to track the relative
              proportions of oxygen-rich and oxygen-absent ocean water through time. An
              understanding of the evolution of our present-day oxygen-rich ocean is one of
              the keys to understanding the evolution of the
Earth 's environment, and of
              life itself, from primordial times to the present.

