Title       : SGER: Self/Brain/Behavior Systems: Cognition and Neurophysiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0106905

Award Number: 0106905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67721              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Strauman tjstraum@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the cognitive processes that represent personally
              significant goals and which provide for continuous self-evaluation. Recent
              theory and research suggests that such processes may be linked with underlying
              neurophysiological mechanisms for approach and avoidance, and that such a
              linkage accounts for the affective consequences of self-evaluation. However,
              few studies have been conducted to determine whether the cognitive and
              neurophysiological correlates are functionally associated. A model of
              self-regulation postulates two regulatory systems: the promotion (approach) and
              prevention (avoidance) systems. These systems are thought to operate in the
              pursuit of specific classes of interpersonal goals and could account for the
              associations observed among self-regulatory cognition, motivation, and affect.
              Furthermore, these systems have been characterized as self/brain/behavior
              systems and bi-directional functional links between self-regulatory cognition
              and each system's physiological substrates have been hypothesized.

If the
              promotion and prevention systems constitute self/brain/behavior systems
              involving cognitive, motivational, affective, and neural processes, then
              activation of either system  should induce: (1) a pattern of neural activation
              consistent with the priming task, (2) a distinguishable pattern of neural
              activation associated with the motivational orientation represented by the cue,
              and (3) a separately distinguishable pattern of neural activation, and
              associated behavioral and physiological responses, corresponding to the
              affective consequences associated with an anticipated positive or negative
              outcome within that motivational orientation. In addition, within the limits of
              the temporal resolution of available measures, these three patterns should be
              identifiable in sequence.

The purpose of this research is to test the
              self/brain/behavior systems model by determining whether the promotion and
              prevention systems are reliably associated with specific, discriminable neural
              substrates. Three studies will examine whether the presentation of goals
              relevant to one of the two systems leads to simultaneous activation of
              characteristic cognitive, affective, and neurophysiological components of the
              two systems, both acutely (in the presence of relevant cues) and chronically
              (as individual differences). In Study 1, people will participate in a
              replication of previous priming research examining the affective consequences
              of exposure to self-relevant goals, using functional magnetic resonance imaging
              (fMRI) to quantify patterns of brain activation associated with four types of
              motivationally significant cues: promotion/success, promotion/failure,
              prevention/success, and prevention/failure. Study 2 will extend the fMRI
              priming method to the domain of autobiographical memory, again examining
              patterns of brain activation in response to the motivational significance of
              goal-relevant cues. In Study 3, college students who have already been assessed
              for individual differences in prefrontal cortical asymmetry via EEG will be
              administered a series of measures assessing motivational orientation and
              self-regulatory cognition, to test the hypothesis that individual differences
              in orientation toward promotion versus prevention will be associated with
              stable differences in prefrontal brain asymmetry.

