Title       : Distribution and Genesis of Unusual Carbonate Fabrics (Atar Group, Mauritania) -
               Understanding the Evolution of the Proterozoic Carbonate Factory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106089

Award Number: 0106089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie K. Bartley jbartley@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

DISTRIBUTION AND GENESIS OF UNUSUAL CARBONATE FABRICS (ATAR GROUP,
              MAURITANIA) - UNDERSTANDING THE EVOLUTION OF THE PROTEROZOIC CARBONATE
              FACTORY

JULIE K. BARTLEY
EAR-0106089

Recent studies of Archean and
              Proterozoic rocks indicate broad temporal trends in carbonate depositional
              style. Abiotic, macroscopically crystalline carbonate, for example, is abundant
              in both subtidal and peritidal environments in the late Archean and Early
              Paleoproterozoic. By the late Neoproterozoic seafloor precipitates are
              virtually absent, supplanted by micritic carbonate textures, except where
              associated with highly evaporitic conditions or Neoproterozoic glacial
              deposits. Carbonate textures in the Mesoproterozoic display features
              characteristic of both older and younger Proterozoic carbonate successions.
              Furthermore, Mesoproterozoic to early Neoproterozoic carbonate platforms record
              a diversity of fabrics unknown elsewhere in the geologic record. A
              Mesoproterozoic peak in the diversity of stromatolite morphologies suggests a
              dynamic interplay among mat growth and decomposition, carbonate precipitation,
              and micrite deposition. Similarly, a Mesoproterozoic peak in the abundance of
              molar-tooth fabric - an enigmatic carbonate fabric that contains rapidly
              lithified carbonate cement juxtaposed with slowly lithified matrix - suggests a
              dynamic interface between two contrasting carbonate precipitation regimes.
              Together, these lines of evidence serve to underscore a recurrent theme: The
              Mesoproterozoic represents an interval that lay at a critical threshold with
              respect to the kinetic ease of carbonate nucleation and precipitation. In such
              a system, relatively minor modification of the physiochemical environment may
              have inhibited or enhanced carbonate precipitation, resulting in marked changes
              in the style of carbonate deposition. These inferred environmental changes
              should therefore be sedimentologically predictable and their consequences
              geochemically testable. 

This project aims to systematically examine a wide
              array of carbonate fabrics within a single basin and delineate the
              environmental parameters, observable in the field, that control carbonate
              nucleation and growth. In exploring these relationships it may be possible to
              explicitly address the complex mechanisms governing Precambrian carbonate
              production. The late Mesoproterozoic to earliest Neoproterozoic Atar Group,
              Mauritania, is an ideal succession in which to explore these relationships.
              Carbonates of the Atar Group contain diverse stromatolites, deep- and
              shallow-water precipitates, herringbone carbonate cement, and numerous horizons
              of molar-tooth fabric. As the first step in a multi-faceted approach utilizing
              field, petrographic, and geochemical datasets, we will conduct field research
              in the Atar Group, Mauritania and examine the field relationships among the
              observable carbonate fabrics and the facies in which they occur. This approach
              provides the most effective method to decipher the relative roles of individual
              variables in controlling carbonate deposition and, in this way, will address
              fundamental questions regarding the mechanisms underlying changing carbonate
              regimes throughout the Precambrian. 

