Title       : ROLE: Extending the Understandings of Consequence Project: Investigating
               Strategic Pedagogical Challenges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0106988

Award Number: 0106988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $885239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina A. Grotzer tina_grotzer@pz.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Perkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Extending The Understandings of Consequence Project: Investigating Transfer and
              Persistence 

Scientifically accepted explanations often require students to
              structure knowledge in ways that contradict their expectations about the nature
              of how causes and effects behave. Such explanations can involve: causal
              mechanisms that are inferred or abstract; causal patterns that extend beyond
              linear and unidirectional to cyclic, reciprocal, and non-sequential;
              correspondences between causes and effects that are in various respects
              probabilistic; and causal agents that are decentralized and involve aspects of
              emergence. These are ways of thinking and abstractions students typically are
              not familiar with. "The Understandings of Consequence Project" revealed that
              students and scientists' explanations tend to have very different types of
              causal structures at the core. The project demonstrated that impacting
              students' assumptions about the nature of causality is a promising approach for
              helping students restructure their knowledge and achieve scientific
              understandings. However, there are lingering questions to be answered, such as
              the transferability of learning about causal forms in one topic to another and
              the persistence of the subsequent restructuring. The current project extends
              "The Understandings of Consequence Project" to systematically investigate these
              questions. We will assess the transfer of understanding of causal forms to
              topics with isomorphic and non-isomorphic causal forms and to science learning
              more generally. The impact of minimal levels of student-focused and
              teacher-directed transfer support will be assessed. Persistence of learning
              will be examined later in the same school year and again two years later.
              Findings will result in revisions to the Understandings of Consequence
              curriculum units. This research has the potential to impact how deeply and
              lastingly all students learn science.  


