Title       : Ancient Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, Paleoclimates, and the Stable Isotope
               Geochemistry of Low Temperature Iron (III) Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0106257

Award Number: 0106257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Crayton J. Yapp cjyapp@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0606257
Crayton J. Yapp


Abstract

Ancient Atmospheric CO2,
              Paleoclimates, and the Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Low Temperature Iron
              (III) Oxides

The geologic record has revealed that climate change on Earth
              occurs on a wide range of
temporal and spatial scales. As a result, the search
              for answers to questions about causality in climate change has become more
              complex. Development of a deep understanding of the mechanisms by which natural
              systems were (and are) linked through the Earth's fluid spheres(the atmosphere
              and hydrosphere) requires new sources of information on both modern and ancient
              environments. Among the requirements are data on the composition of ancient
              atmospheres, surficial temperatures and the behavior of the hydrologic
              cycle.

Studies of the oxygen and hydrogen isotope systematics of the common,
              low-temperature
iron oxyhydroxide, goethite ( -FeOOH), have established its
              value as a source of information on wet, oxidizing, continental environments
              such as lateritic soils. Moreover, it was discovered that a small amount of CO2
              is istrapped in the crystal structure of goethite as an Fe(CO3 )OH component in
              solid solution. This Fe(CO3 )OH serves as a proxy for the partial pressure and
              carbon isotope composition of CO2 present at the time of goethite
              crystallization. Therefore, goethite from ancient soils can be used to
              determine the isotopic composition of waters, paleotemperatures, the presence
              of ancient biological activity, soil CO2 pressures, and, under the right
              circumstances, the partial pressure of CO2 in the Earth's atmosphere.

A
              continuation of efforts to contribute information on long-term changes in
              continental climate and atmospheric chemistry during the Phanerozoic is
              proposed here. Two paleosols (Late Paleocene and Middle Eocene laterites) that
              bracket the Early Tertiary thermal maximum have been identified as promising
              candidates for study. Carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen isotope, chemical, XRD and
              petrographic data would be obtained from multiple samples of these highly
              leached soils. These data should provide information on atmospheric CO2
              pressures, climatic temperatures, isotopic compositions of waters and
              biological activity.


