Title       : Compressing and Analyzing Microarray Images for Genetic Information Extraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0106656

Award Number: 0106656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin Yu binyu@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Bioinformatics is the application of information technology to study and analyze
              biological and genetic data.  Functional genomics, the second phase of the
              Human Genome Project, assigns function to DNA sequences, and is gearing up
              rapidly based on the new microarray technology.  Microarray images make
              possible the simultaneous expressions of thousands of genes, and hold the keys
              to understanding of gene regulation and interaction, genetic pathways for
              diseases such as cancer, and finding the subpopulations most responsive to
              certain drugs.  They are widely used in laboratories of academia and industry
              alike.  The emergence of the microarray imaging technology puts image
              processing in an important position in functional genomics, and calls for
              interdisciplinary research between image processing and statistical data
              analysis.  The investigators will be studying problems at exactly this
              interface.

The amount of data for even one microarray image is HUGE (>30
              MB/scan and two scans/image).  The need for compression is pressing because of
              the exponential explosion of its use and (despite of the cheaper disk space)
              the bottleneck on the conversion cost to tapes, the only reliable permanent
              storage.  The investigators are addressing this need for microarray image
              compression with a progressive or multi-level coded data structure which is
              useful for transmission and statistical analysis.  A case is made for lossy
              compression to obtain aggressive compression ratios such as 15:1 without much
              loss of statistical information.  This research is also investigating the
              optimality question of statistical estimation based lossy compressed data with
              applications to microarray data.  Finally, this research is using the
              statistical modeling principle based on data compression: Rissanen's minimum
              description length (MDL) principle, for gene clustering and other biological
              information extraction.

