Title       : Correlated Stochastic Processes in Physical Meteorology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0106271

Award Number: 0106271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander B. Kostinski kostinsk@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Observations of cloud droplets and raindrops indicate that the drop
              concentration, regarded as a random variable, may have a probability
              distribution that deviates from the Poisson distribution, which would be
              expected if the drops had equal probability of being located anywhere and were
              independent of each other.  Drops therefore are said to have a tendency to
              cluster.  At any given time, some regions of space may have greater
              concentrations than expected for a Poisson distribution and other regions less.
               The deviations may be characterized quantitatively by the pair-correlation
              function, which in turn is related to the spatial autocorrelation function of
              drop concentration.  Building on the theory of correlated stochastic processes,
              this project has three objectives:

1. Advance the understanding of the
              fine-scale structure of clouds and rain by analyzing data from cloud probes and
              disdrometers; assess the implications for droplet growth by collisions and
              coalescence.
2. Determine whether clustering can give rise to a coherent
              scattering component in radar signals from clouds and precipitation; devise
              methods to recognize this component.
3. Study the effects of clustering on
              radiative transfer; in particular, determine whether clustering can explain
              deviations from the Beer-Lambert law of extinction.

The work contributes to
              the foundations of cloud physics by providing a more complete description of
              the random variability of drop populations.  It may lead to improved
              understanding of rain formation by coalescence of cloud droplets and to a
              refinement of methods of cloud remote sensing.
