Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Compaction
               and Dilation Bands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0106932

Award Number: 0106932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Issen issenka@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Issen/Wong 
0106932/0106580 

Compaction bands, a recently identified type of
              localized deformation, form in high porosity sandstone, perpendicular to the
              direction of maximum compressive stress.  They occur for stress states
              associated with the transition from brittle faulting to distributed cataclastic
              flow, where microstructural observations show damage partitioned between at
              least two damage mechanisms: axial microcracks that may grow and coalesce to
              form a shear fault, and pores that collapse while grains are crushed. 
              Theoretical predictions from recent reassessments of the bifurcation approach
              to strain localization do not correlate well with the scarce existing
              experimental data.  This proposal suggests that an inadequate constitutive
              model causes the discrepancy.  Thus, a two-yield surface constitutive model,
              representing both damage mechanisms, will be used with experimentally derived
              constraints for the important material parameters to enable further theoretical
              analyses regarding the onset of localization.  Experimental and theoretical
              results will be synthesized to extrapolate a model to predict failure modes and
              localization development in crustal settings for different stress states and
              loading paths.   Recent theoretical works have also highlighted two potentially
              important, but previously neglected failure modes: "dilation bands" and
              "dilating shear bands".  A lack of data has hampered the mechanical analysis of
              analogous structures that structural geologists refer to as "hybrid shear
              fractures" or "transitional tensile fractures."  Theoretical work predicts
              formation of these bands in low porosity rocks under overall compressive
              loading.  Thus, the proposed work also includes experimental and theoretical
              investigation of dilation band formation using low porosity rock in triaxial
              extension tests. 

