Title       : Elementary Science Notebooks: Impact on Classroom Practice and Student
               Achievement in Science and Literacy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0106994

Award Number: 0106994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1652277            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela R. Aschbacher pama@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome Pine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study is a three year effort to examine what students learn in two
              different kinds of elementary science classrooms: traditional expository,
              text-oriented instruction compared with hands-on, inquiry-oriented instruction.
              The latter describes an approach to learning in which students acquire
              knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas as well as first hand
              experiential understanding of how scientists study the natural world. The
              emphasis is on learning by doing and discussing, and the priority is on
              scientific thinking skills and conceptual understanding. In a second phase, the
              study examines the teaching associated with high- and low-achieving classrooms
              for each of the two instructional conditions.  

Millions of dollars have
              gone into supporting hands-on inquiry science reforms over the past several
              decades. These large-scale efforts, particularly important for less affluent
              students across the country, are vulnerable however, for they are viewed by
              some as too expensive or too demanding of teachers. Furthermore, there is
              little evidence of the relative merits of the two approaches. The nationwide
              emphasis on accountability, with an intense focus on literacy and math and a
              bias towards easily tested factual knowledge, pressures schools away from
              hands-on inquiry science. This study will contribute substantially to our
              knowledge base on the relationship between elemetary science instruction and
              student learning, with important implications for practitioners, policy makers
              and the public.

This study compares 5th grade students' learning in two
              instructional conditions, with 20 classes in each condition matched for key
              characteristics. In addition, the study explores connections between student
              performance and instruction, utilizing data from teacher surveys, interviews,
              assignments, and classroom observations. Student achievement is assessed with
              an array of measures, including standardized tests of language arts and math;
              standardized science knowledge items and a performance task from NAEP or TIMSS;
              other short science performance tasks; and extended science investigation tasks
              developed and validated for this research. The study will address long-term,
              important outcomes such as those called for in Project 2061:  deep conceptual
              understanding, persistence at difficult problems, retention of important
              knowledge over time, and transfer of investigation strategies to challenging
              novel situations.

