Title       : Collaboration for Earthquake Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a0106924

Award Number: 0106924
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13830000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Jordan tjordan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1576,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              EAR/0106924
Jordan

COLLABORATION FOR EARTHQUAKE RESEARCH

The University
              of Southern California, in collaboration with the California Institute of
              Technology, Columbia University, Harvard University, Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology, San Diego State University, Stanford University, United States
              Geological Survey, Golden, United States Geological Survey, Menlo Park, United
              States Geological Survey, Pasadena, University of California, Los Angeles,
              University of California, San Diego, University of California, Santa Barbara,
              and University of Nevada, Reno form the core of the newly organized Southern
              California Earthquake Center.  Other academic institutes and private
              corporations participate as associate members in research projects.  The Center
              is a regionally focused organization with the mission to gather new information
              about earthquakes in southern California, integrate knowledge into a
              comprehensive and predictive understanding of earthquake phenomena, and
              communicate this understanding to engineers, emergency managers, government
              officials, and the general public.  It does this through the application of
              research findings from the various disciplines in earthquake-related science
              and engineering.  Extensive data bases are being developed including
              seismicity, strong motion and geodetic data that are available to all users
              both within and outside the center through remote access such as the Internet. 
              The Center leads a consortium of university and government scientists in
              development of a fixed array of Global Positioning System stations to monitor
              crustal distortion in southern California.  The Center brings together
              scientists from core and participating institutions, a visiting scientist
              program, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the user community.  It is also a
              highly effective intellectual training ground for undergraduate students,
              graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows.  Earthquake hazard mitigation is
              also done through public information and education programs, museum displays,
              and the training of teachers and K-12 students.  The center is led by Professor
              Thomas H. Jordan as Principal Investigator/Center Director and Professor Thomas
              L. Henyey as Deputy Director.
*** 


