Title       : ROLE: Researching the Role of Qualitative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0106771

Award Number: 0106771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $864375             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Gerace wjgerace@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose P. Mestre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Dufresne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Leonard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose a research project to investigate the impact of qualitative analysis
              on undergraduate students' conceptual understanding and problem-solving skills
              within the realistic setting of large introductory physics courses.  The impact
              of qualitive analysis (QA) will be investigated both within a web-based
              homework environment and during acttive-learning, in-class formative assessment
              activities facilitated by a classroom communication system.  The applications
              of web-based homework, and classroom communication systems, are proliferating
              in large introductory science courses nationwide.  Yet, little is known about
              how to structure web-based homework, and active-learning in-calss activities in
              ways that engage students in qualitive analyses that promote a deeper
              understanding of scientific concepts and skilled problem solving.  The QA
              materials that will be ddeveloped and investigated will engage students in four
              types of qualitative analyses performed by skilled problem solvers
              corresponding roughly to four stages of expert-like problem solving: conceptual
              alnalysis, strategic analysis. quanititative analysis, and meta analysis.  We
              will investigate the effectiveness of these materials and their impact on: a)
              students' understanding on concepts and their ability to analyze and solve
              problems, b) students' approach to, and level of success with, web-based
              homework, and c) students' attitudes as they relate tot their web-based
              homework and in-class experience.  The proposed research will utlimately infor
              the design and implemention of qualitative analyses in large,
              techonology-assisted introductory science courses in order to promote deep
              conceptual understanding and skilled problem solving in students.
