Title       : Visual and Interactive Issues in the Design of Web Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0106222

Award Number: 0106222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Tourangeau rtourangeau@survey.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mick P. Couper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reginald P. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick G. Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The rapid growth of the Internet as a vehicle for surveys raises important
              questions about this new method for data collection.  Web surveys are the
              latest in a series of methods in which computers administer questions directly
              to respondents.  Like many of the earlier methods, Web surveys present
              questions visually and offer some capability for interacting with respondents. 
              This project encompasses a series of experiments that examine the implications
              of the visual and interactive character of Web surveys.  One set of experiments
              examines how respondents interpret visual cues in Web questionnaires.  These
              studies test the general proposition that incidental visual features of the
              questions (e.g., the spacing of response options) can give rise to unintended
              inferences about their meaning.  The studies examine specific hypotheses about
              the heuristics respondents use in interpreting visual features of questions. 
              These hypotheses state that respondents expect response categories to proceed
              in a logical progression from left to right; that they expect spatially
              isolated options also to differ conceptually from the other options; and that
              they assume that items that look alike must somehow be conceptually related. 
              Two additional experiments examine the effects of including images to
              supplement the text of a question.  Images are necessarily concrete, and one
              experiment tests whether this leads respondents to interpret the question more
              narrowly than they otherwise would have.  Another experiment tests whether
              items depicted in an image may serve as standards of comparison for
              respondents' judgments.  The final series of studies examines when respondents
              take advantage of interactive features of a questionnaire.  These experiments
              test three general hypotheses: Respondents are more likely to utilize
              information available to them interactively when 1) the information is easy to
              obtain, 2) it is clearly helpful, and 3) they are highly motivated to seek
              help.

Collectively, the results are likely to lead to practical guidelines
              for the design of Web surveys.  For example, the initial experiments should
              help settle some important practical questions-Does it matter whether the
              response categories are arrayed vertically or horizontally?  Does the spacing
              of the response options affect the answers?  Does the use of color in response
              scales influence the distribution of answers?  The final experiments could
              yield better methods for getting respondents to take advantage of features that
              might improve their answers.  This research is supported by the Methodology,
              Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
              agencies under the Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding
              Opportunity.
