Title       : Late Cretaceous Vertebrates from Madagascar: Implications for Gondwanan
               Biogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0106477

Award Number: 0106477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280177             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Krause David.Krause@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond R. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Forster  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

LATE CRETACEOUS VERTEBRATES FROM MADAGASCAR:
IMPLICATIONS FOR
              GONDWANAN BIOGEOGRAPHY

David W. Krause, Gregory A. Buckley, Catherine A.
              Forster, Raymond R. Rogers, and Scott D. Sampson
EAR-0106477

PIs previous
              NSF-funded research has established the Mahajanga Basin of NW Madagascar as
              having some of the most complete and spectacularly preserved specimens of Late
              Cretaceous vertebrates from the southern hemisphere.  Their discoveries have
              quintupled the previously known species diversity of Late Cretaceous
              vertebrates from the island and now include specimens of fishes, frogs,
              turtles, snakes, crocodyliforms, dinosaurs, birds, and mammals.  More broadly,
              investigators involved in the Mahajanga Basin Project have elucidated the
              anatomy, paleobiology, and phylogenetic relationships of several vertebrate
              higher taxa, documented the Upper Cretaceous stratigraphy and sedimentology of
              the basin, provided key insights into the biogeographic origins of both the
              extinct and extant vertebrate faunas of the island, and shed significant new
              light on Gondwanan plate tectonics during the Mesozoic.  Much remains to be
              done, however, in the vast expanses of paleontologically and geologically
              unexplored Cretaceous rocks of the Mahajanga Basin.  It is clear that, even in
              the primary study area, the diversity of vertebrates remains inadequately
              sampled when compared to more thoroughly studied areas elsewhere in the world. 
              Furthermore, despite the exquisite quality and completeness of the specimens of
              some taxa, the vast majority of species are represented by only fragmentary and
              isolated specimens.  Finally, the unconsolidated nature of the Upper Cretaceous
              strata and the high annual rainfall ensures that the supply of new localities
              and new specimens is replenished on an annual basis.  With continued work, the
              PIs are confident that the Mahajanga Basin vertebrate fauna will become one of
              the best sampled faunas of Cretaceous age and one of the primary standards
              against which other Gondwanan faunas are compared. The primary goals of the
              current proposal are to expand preliminary efforts through additional
              discoveries of fossil vertebrates in the still under-sampled primary field
              area; investigation of new field areas discovered in 1999; anatomical,
              functional, and phylogenetic analysis of specimens already discovered but still
              unstudied or only partly studied; additional elucidation of geologic context,
              including paleoenvironment and paleoclimate; and testing of biogeographic and
              plate tectonic hypotheses related to the breakup of Gondwana.  

