Title       : Travel support for AGU Chapman Conference: State-of-the-Art in Hillslope
               Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0106612

Award Number: 0106612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Band lband@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0106612
Band

We request funding to help support travel expenses for invited
              international and domestic speakers as well as additional junior scientists and
              students for and AGU Chapman Conference.  The Chapman Conference is entitled
              "State-of-the-art in hillslope hydrology," and will occur in October, 2001.  It
              is already approved by AGU and cosponsored by the Hydrology and Biogeoscience
              Sections.  This conference will focus on a review and assessment of our current
              knowledge in hillslope hydrology, with an emphasis on the processes by which
              water enters and moves through hillslope systems and into a receiving stream. 
              Major subtopics for which we will solicit papers will include mechanisms and
              patterns of water input and output from hillslopes, the distribution and
              dynamics of flowpaths, spatial patterns of surface and subsurface soil moisture
              and soil hydraulic properties, methods of measurement or inference of these
              processes and states, and their representation in models. This focus has
              important implications for the formation of hillslope and watershed hydrographs
              at the storm to seasonal time scale, the transformation and export of sediment
              and chemical load to streams, the distribution and dynamics of the vegetation
              canopy, and land/atmosphere interactions.  The conference will bring together
              internationally recognized researchers in the field with younger scientists and
              students and will promote an extensive exchange of research finding,
              outstanding questions and developing theories and techniques.  The conference
              format will include invited plenary presentations in the morning, followed by
              poster sessions and moderated discussion in the afternoons, and an additional
              plenary talk and discussion in the evening.  Sufficient free time during the
              afternoon will be reserved to allow both recreational activity and smaller
              group discussion.  One day will be devoted to a field trip to the HJ Andrews
              Experimental Watershed for brief presentations and a half day field trip
              revolving hillslope hydrology related research at the site.  Peer review
              research papers will be solicited for publications of the proceedings, either
              as an AGU Monograph or as a special issues of Water Resources Research.

