Title       : Archaeological Excavations at Bosutswe: Trade, Cattle and Transformations in the
               Political Economy of the Eastern Kalahari between 700 and 1700 CE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0106500

Award Number: 0106500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136365             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Denbow jdenbow@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. James Denbow and collaborators
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological excavation at the site of
              Bosutswe on the eastern fringes of the Kalahari Desert in Botswana.  The site
              of Bosutswe has one of the longest Iron Age sequences in southern Africa,
              comparable in scale to only two other contemporary centers south of the
              Zambezi: Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe.  The excavations thus provide an almost
              unique opportunity to measure social, cultural, economic, and ecological change
              over a thousand year period from 700 to 1700 CE.  The project brings together
              an international team of specialists in archaeology, metallurgy, stable isotope
              analysis, osteology, and archeo-zoology from the United States, Botswana, and
              South Africa.  New and innovative methods that include stable isotope and trace
              element source-tracking of metals, slags and alloys, lithics, ceramics, and
              even hunted and domestic game, will be used to examine questions related to the
              operation of exchange networks beyond the site.   The excavations will focus on
              three major issues:  1) an investigation of one of the earliest incidences of
              bronze manufacture and trade in southern Africa; 2) an analysis of how
              transformations in early state development occurred as cattle, and then long
              distance trade in precious metals, led to major restructurings in the political
              economy of the region; and 3) an examination of the ways in which these changes
              affected not only the internal dynamics of agro-pastoralist societies, but also
              created new sets of relations with neighboring hunters and gatherers.  
              

This research is important because it will shed new light on the
              development of complex societies in southern Africa, and on the historical
              trajectories that have led to contemporary social formations in the region. 

