Title       : A Test of Paleomagnetic Field Variability at Equatorial Latitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0106685

Award Number: 0106685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155381             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Lund slund@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lund 
0106685 

Paleomagnetic studies of the Earth' magnetic field secular
              variation (PSV, both directions and paleointensity) require knowledge of its
              spatial and temporal pattern of variability. At present, we have no detailed
              PSV records in Equatorial regions prior to the last 3000 years. Yet, several
              recent models of field variability require an understanding of Equatorial PSV
              in order to properly interpret PSV records at other latitudes and make
              predictions about possible dynamo sources in the Earth's deep interior.  
This
              proposal has five scientific goals. (1) recover two replicate deep-sea sediment
              PSV records (both directions and paleointensity) spanning the last 130,000
              years from Equatorial latitudes in Indonesia/Philippines, (2) carry out a
              careful rock magnetic study of all sediments (magnetic mineralogy, ARM, IRM,
              CHI, plus selected AMS and hysteresis measurements) to assess where
              environmental effects might be biasing the directional or paleointensity data,
              (3) carry out a detailed statistical study of the final PSV records focussing
              on the temporal variability of vector and VGP angular dispersion associated
              (almost entirely) with quadrapole-family dynamo sources, (4) carry out a 
              comparison of all Holocene PSV records extending from Lake Baikal (Russia) to
              Lake Pounui (New Zealand) including the new records from this study, (5)
              compare the PSV records of the Laschamp and Blake excursion time intervals in
              these cores with similar PSV records from the North Atlantic Ocean. Final
              paleomagnetic datasets will be available on the PI's website
              (http://earth.usc.edu/~slund). 
The investigators' previous work indicates
              that they can recover high-resolution PSV records (both directions and
              paleointensity) for the last 130,000 years from several deep-sea cores in the
              Equatorial Indonesia/Philippines region. Their preliminary PSV data suggest
              that times of low paleointensity have higher PSV angular dispersion in both
              Equatorial and higher-latitude bands, but the relative increase in dispersion
              at Equatorial latitudes appears to be significantly greater. Assuming that the
              quadrapole-family dispersion level is constant as a function of latitude, it
              could be that the quadrapole family of dynamo sources is the sole cause of PSV
              dispersion at mid latitudes during the Laschamp excursion! They have also
              recovered an excursion record equivalent in time to the Laschamp Excursion.
              Comparison of this record with detailed Laschamp Excursion records from the
              mid-latitude North Atlantic Ocean suggests that the excursions on opposite
              sides of the Earth are virtually identical in age. Both regions have waveform
              characteristics of Class I excursions, but the Laschamp excursion in the North
              Atlantic Ocean has two cycles of clockwise-looping excursional VGPs while the
              Equatorial excursion has two cycles of counterclockwise-looping excursional
              VGPs. Careful comparisons of the proposed Equatorial PSV records with data from
              other latitude bands should provide significant new insight into magnetic field
              variability and dynamo processes that cause it. 
