Title       : Isotopic Geochemistry of Mercury in Hydrothermal Ore Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0106730

Award Number: 0106730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Kesler skesler@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel D. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bjoern Klaue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kesler
EAR-0106730

This proposal requests funding for a study of the
              magnitude, possible causes and applications to ore genesis of variations in the
              isotopic composition of Hg in hydrothermal systems. It is designed to follow up
              on our recent development of a highly precise and sensitive MC-ICPMS method to
              measure the isotopic composition of Hg. 
Hydrothermal systems are the main
              cause of Hg migration in the upper crust and Hg could undergo both organic and
              inorganic isotopic fractionation during transport. The main organic process
              under low-temperature, anaerobic conditions is bacterially mediated production
              of mono-methylmercury (HgCH3+, MMHg), a critical compound in the cycling and
              toxicity of Hg in the environment. Inorganic processes such as evaporation,
              condensation, decomposition, diffusion, oxidation-reduction, precipitation,
              dissolution, complexation, and ion exchange, might also cause fractionation of
              Hg isotopes, and will dominate in hydrothermal systems because methylating
              bacteria are absent. 
Our goal is to evaluate the relative importance of
              inorganic fractionation processes on the isotopic composition of Hg in
              hydrothermal systems and then determine whether Hg isotope compositions can be
              used as tracers of the source of Hg in these systems. Our preliminary analyses
              show that Hg from deposits over boiling geothermal systems at Coso (California)
              and Monte Amiata (Italy) have low 198Hg/204Hg ratios that could have been
              produced by evaporation. Samples of native Hg and cinnabar from the Idria
              (Slovenia) deposit have significantly different 198Hg/204Hg ratios that could
              reflect oxidation-reduction or the thermal decomposition of cinnabar,
              respectively. Samples from different parts of the Almaden Hg deposit have the
              same isotopic composition, suggesting that Hg in this large deposit came from a
              homogeneous source. Finally, 198Hg/204Hg ratios in meteorites (as a proxy for
              Hg in igneous rocks) and methylmercury in fish (as a proxy for Hg in most
              organic sediments) differ, suggesting that Hg isotope compositions might
              distinguish between these two possible sources of Hg in hydrothermal systems.
              
The proposed research will focus on studies of actual mercury mineral
              deposits, with two main goals. First, we will analyze Hg above and below the
              boiling zone in active geothermal systems at Coso and the Geysers (California)
              and in the paleogeothermal system at the Ivanhoe epithermal district, in order
              to evaluate the importance of boiling to fractionation of mercury isotopes.
              Second, we will evaluate the use of Hg isotope compositions as tracers by
              analysis of Hg from ore deposits and possible source rocks in Coast Range Hg
              belt (California) and Opalite district (Nevada), which represent the full range
              of possible sedimentary and igneous source rocks for Hg. This work is expected
              to provide an interpretive framework for Hg isotope studies of active and
              extinct water-rock systems as well as laying the groundwork for studies seeking
              to distinguish between natural and anthropogenic sources for Hg in modern
              accumulations of environmental interest. 


