Title       : Collaborative Proposal: An Integrated Study Of The Controls On Reactivity Of
               Natural Organic Matter In Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0106763

Award Number: 0106763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Maurice pmaurice@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106763
Maurice

The work to develop molecular-scale understanding of the
              interactions of natural organic matter (NOM) with mineral surfaces would
              quantify how the preferential adsorption of higher molecular-weight and more
              aromatic NOM components to mineral surfaces (sorptive fractionation) affects
              both the transformation of terrestrial organic carbon and the transport of
              pollutants through porous media.  The molecular-scale adsorption studies would
              pursue understanding of NOM adsorption mechanisms characterizing NOM molecular
              weight distributions in soil pore waters and shallow ground waters to determine
              whether the lognormal distribution model also holds in subsurface environments.
               They would quantify how sorptive fractionation of NOM affects the binding and
              mobility of trace metals and NOM photochemical reactivity.
	The three broad
              objectives are:
(1) To expand molecular-scale studies aimed at developing a
              more quantitative and mechanistic understanding of NOM adsorption and
              fractionation processes;
(2) To determine the effect of sorptive fractionation
              on NOM reactivity with respect to trace-metal binding and mobility with respect
              to photoreactions;
(3) To continue to integrate laboratory and field studies,
              with the ultimate long-term goal of better understanding
              adsorption/fractionation phenomena as they actually occur in the field.
     
              The proposed research has broad significance within the hydrologic sciences,
              because NOM is ubiquitous and helps to control mineral soil aggregate
              stability, and photochemical reactions.
	As to practical applications, little
              is known about watershed processes controlling the nature of NOM in water
              supplies.  The drinking water industry must address the problem of
              disinfectant, with chlorine or ozone and both reactivities depend in large part
              on NOM aromaticity.

