Title       : Modeling Bed-Surface Dynamics In Gravel-Bed Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0106561

Award Number: 0106561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Wilcock wilcock@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106561
Wilcock

Bed surface coarsening, broadly termed armoring, is a
              pervasive feature of
gravel rivers. Armoring strongly influences channel
              hydraulics, determines
the population of grains available for transport, and
              defines the habitat
for aquatic invertebrates, salmonid spawning, and juvenile
              fish. A general
and predictive understanding of flow, transport, and benthic
              ecology in
gravel-bed rivers requires an ability to predict the bed
              surface
composition as a function of water and sediment supply. In general,
              the bed
surface is not in equilibrium with contemporary conditions, so cause
              and
effect cannot be deduced from simple correlations of field
              observations.
Instead, we turn to the laboratory for controlled observations
              and to
computational models to capture the varied and transient conditions in
              the
field.

Observations of armoring have been made for decades and
              algorithms capable
of predicting armoring have been developed. Key elements
              are missing in
both data and models, however, and the empirical and the
              theoretical have
not yet merged into a complete model. This work aims to
              bridge that gap by
building from both sides. On the empirical side, we will
              use a laboratory
flume to make coupled observations of flow, transport, and
              bed surface
composition in order to describe the evolution of surface and
              subsurface
grain sizes with unprecedented spatial and temporal detail.  On
              the
theoretical side, we will develop a transport and armoring model
              that
includes size-dependent vertical transfer of grains between surface
              and
subsurface (kinematic sorting). This mechanism can be incorporated
              in
current models, but the necessary transfer functions remain undefined
              and
will be identified using the data from the experimental portion of
              this
project.  Testing of the model will be based on internal
              comparisons
between different sediment supply configurations and a set of runs
              with
progressive bed aggradation and degradation.  The result will be
              a
physically-based, tested model capable of predicting transport and
              armoring
under the complex, transient conditions typical of the field.

