Title       : Adaptive and Scalable Quality of Service Provisioning in Multirate Multicast
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0106984

Award Number: 0106984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saswati Sarkar swati@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leandros Tassiulas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Multicasting has become increasingly important for real-time applications
              since it is the inherent mode of
delivery in several of them, e.g.
              teleconferencing, audio and video broadcasting, etc. The Internet,
              however,
does not provide end-to-end bandwidth or delay guarantees for unicast
              or for multicast data. As a result, a
number of multiple scale encoding
              schemes for real-time voice and video transmission have been developed;
these
              schemes allow adaptation both to the available bandwidth and to the receiver
              capabilities by varying
the number of levels of the information stream and
              therefore the corresponding bit rates. Thus, bandwidth
and receiver adaptation
              of multi-level information streams, in multicast delivery in particular, is an
              issue
of prime importance for the successful, large-scale deployment of those
              real-time applications. We propose
to investigate and develop methods for
              bandwidth sharing and adaptation in the context of multicast-
based real-time
              applications. A set of fairness criteria based on which the performance of
              different schemes
can be quantified and compared is introduced. A methodology
              for finding bandwidth allocations that are
optimal or suboptimal with respect
              to the different criteria is proposed. Scalability with the network
              size,
amenability to distributed implementation in terms of required control
              information and speed of convergence
are adopted as prime criteria, in
              addition to optimality, in the evaluation of the different algorithms.
              We
propose an approach for the design of the algorithms that allows the
              trade-off between optimality with
respect to the performance objective and
              practicality with respect to the other attributes (i.e. scalability
etc.). A
              methodology for network control in multicasting in the case of unknown traffic
              and/or network
conditions is proposed as well. It involves explicit
              back-pressure based congestion notification feedback and
dynamic per ow
              scheduling. Finally we propose a method for the design of congestion control
              policies
with the objective of maximizing an aggregate network utility. A
              relative comparison between the two
approaches (fairness based and aggregate
              utility maximization) is also proposed in order to be able to select
the most
              appropriate one in each case.
