Title       : Mercury Isotope Investigations of Pre-and Post-Industrial Atmospheric Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0106789

Award Number: 0106789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82991              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Leroy Odom odom@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Landing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent J. M. Salters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Reports from widely separated areas of the Earth have revealed a
              hemispherical, if not global, accumulation of mercury in the environment. While
              it is clear that atmospheric deposition plays a major role, and that perhaps as
              much as half of the annual release of mercury into the atmosphere is
              anthropogenic in origin, important details of the mercury  cycle and fluxes are
              uncertain.

There are six naturally occurring isotopes of mercury. Certain
              physical, chemical and biochemical processes produce slight separations
              (fractionation) of these isotopes. As a consequence, the isotopic composition
              of environmental mercury can potentially provide key constraints to models of
              mercury cycling and fluxes. Since the degree of isotope fractionation during a
              process like condensation of atmospheric mercury is temperature dependent, the
              isotopic composition of mercury recorded in well-dated material such as peat
              cores might also provide information on paleoclimate.

Recent developments
              make it possible to make very precise measurement of mercury isotope ratios and
              these measurements have revealed differences in the isotopic composition of
              mercury ores and industrially processed mercury. This project is designed to
              test the feasibility of applying mercury isotope systematics to environmental
              mercury and to develop routine techniques (by improving existing techniques)
              for high-precision, isotope-ratio measurements at environmental levels. In
              order to be able to demonstrate the feasibility, a peat core that archives a
              well-studied record of atmospheric mercury deposition is selected as sample
              material.

