Title       : ROLE: The school as a knowing organization - Knowledge management as a strategy
               for continuous teacher development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0106552

Award Number: 0106552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710232             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Carroll carroll@cs.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Beth Rosson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert McCracken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick S. Morton, IV  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Organizations have knowledge. The knowledge is typically dispersed
throughout
              the organization. Some of it is codified in documents and
policies, some is
              embodied in projects and strategies, and some is tacitly
held by individuals
              and small groups. The problem of knowledge management
is that an
              organization's knowledge is often locally produced, haphazardly
disseminated,
              and ineffectively indexed. It is inaccessible when and where
it is needed.
              Knowledge management techniques take a participatory approach
to identifying,
              codifying, and integrating knowledge resources throughout
the organization.
              Their objective is to help people make sense of their
organizations, to
              develop and maintain trust, to make commitments and take
responsibility, to
              more effectively challenge, negotiate, and learn, and
thereby to improve the
              quality of the contributions people make to their
organizations.

This
              project will adapt knowledge management concepts and techniques, and
the
              information technology they employ, to understand and enhance
              knowledge
management in school organizations. We will work with
              school
administrators, but chiefly with teachers. First, we will investigate
              and
characterize knowledge management practices as they exist today,
              and
identify needs and opportunities to improve knowledge management. We
              will
facilitate teacher-initiated development of organizational
              knowledge
resources, and identify, and accessibly codify the critical
              knowledge of
the school systems.

We will assess the impact of this
              intervention on teachers, on the school
system, and on the perception of the
              school by the community. We will
compare and contrast this analysis and
              intervention to knowledge management
interventions now becoming typical in
              business organizations.

