Title       : Microbial Degradation of Refractory Organic Carbon During Rock Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0106707

Award Number: 0106707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katrina J. Edwards kedwards@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven T. Petsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy I. Eglinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Microbial Degradation of Refractory Organic Carbon during Rock
              Weathering
By
K.J. Edwards, T.I. Eglinton, S.T. Petsch
Department of Marine
              Chemistry and Geochemistry
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Woods Hole,
              MA  02543

An important component of the carbon cycle is transfer of organic
              carbon from ancient sedimentary rocks to the oceans and atmosphere.  Oxidation
              of ancient sedimentary organic matter during rock weathering and soil formation
              consumes O2 and releases CO2, thus providing a strong control on the
              composition of Earth's atmosphere over geologic time scales.  This study
              investigates the role of microbial activity in the degradation and oxidation of
              sedimentary organic matter during rock weathering.  We have determined that
              there are microorganisms living within shallow-subsurface sedimentary rocks.
              Compound-specific 14C analysis of cell membrane lipids was used to establish
              that in culture, these organisms are assimilating refractory, rock-derived
              organic carbon as their carbon source.  Future investigations of this study
              include:
 Compound-specific 13C and 14C analysis of microbial lipids from
              environmental samples to determine carbon pathways in nature environments of
              rock weathering.
 Phylogenetic analysis of microorganisms in field samples and
              lab cultures to establish community structure and comparison with known
              organisms.
 Fluorescent in-situ hybridizations of microbial cells with
              iteratively more specific probes to examine spatial relationships between
              microorganisms, organic matter and minerals in weathering
              environments
Array-detector infrared spectroscopy to provide microscale
              description of organic matter composition within sedimentary rocks and
              correlations with microbial growth patterns.
Analysis of abundance and
              composition of dissolved organic compounds released through microbial activity
              compared with sterile controls to contrast rates of oxidation versus
              dissolution of ancient sedimentary organic matter.
From this study will emerge
              an unprecedented description of the influence microbial activity has on
              oxidation of ancient sedimentary organic matter during rock weathering, with
              direct applicability towards understanding of global scale carbon cycling and
              controls on the composition of Earth's atmosphere. 

