Title       : Virtual Reality Modeling-based Inquiry: The Role of Isomorphic and Behavioral
               Modeling on Knowledge Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0106968

Award Number: 0106968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $724770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Hay   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Scott Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposed research project is designed to analyze the strengths of four
              theoretically grounded model-use conditions.  The investigation focuses on the
              process through which understanding emerges, evolves and diffuses through
              modeling-based inquiry and pedagogy and 3D technologies.  These investigators
              will use a data acquisition system that allows them to record data (video,
              audio, screen shots, and computer log files) in the classroom setting and
              analyze the data through activity "nodes" and  "links" to track the "process"
              by which students engage in the modeling process.  The group then proposes to
              explore the possibility of doing similar analysis through web-base
              resources.

Fundamentally, the project builds on the existing foundation of
              experience, technology, and curriculum materials in Virtual Reality
              modeling-based inquiry.  The basic design of the project is congruent with the
              approach advocated by Stokes labeled "use-oriented basic research."  The
              findings will be used to develop a conceptual model of how learners learn under
              these modeling conditions.  

The proposal is well written, detailed, and
              grounded in extant research on isomorphic and behavioral environments.  The
              researchers, including the proposed subcontractor, have broad knowledge and
              experience in the areas of virtual reality, model building, and assessment. 
              The work will have an influence on content areas beyond astronomy, providing
              insight into how students learn from modeling environments.

The panel
              generally viewed this project as having high potential.  However, several
              issues were raised during the discussion:

1. A significant portion of the
              proposal was devoted to the technology, and this technology-centered focus
              distracted from how the technology would be used to address the research
              questions.

2. The ROLE goals include integrating diversity into NSF
              programs, projects and activities.   This proposal   did not address this
              issue, and the panel felt that this detracted from the proposal.

