Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental Determination of Abiologic and Inorganic
               Iron and Oxygen Isotope Fractionation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0106614

Award Number: 0106614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark M. Johnson clarkj@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Beard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9189,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Johnson and Beard
EAR-0106614

Isotopic variations of transition metals have
              attracted attention in the last year or two, in large part because such
              elements may be isotopically fractionated by biological processes.  So far,
              clear biologically produced isotopic fractionation has been measured in the
              laboratory only for Fe, and this led to the proposal that Fe isotopes may be a
              useful "biosignature" that may be applied to tracing the role of organisms in
              modern and ancient environments, and may help in understanding the origin and
              evolution of life on Earth or other planetary bodies.  However, because
              significant Fe isotope variations (3-4 per mil [/] in 56Fe/54Fe) are found only
              in fluids, rocks, and minerals from low temperature environments, it is
              possible that inorganic or abiologic Fe isotope fractionation may at least in
              part explain the range of Fe isotope compositions measured for natural samples.
               Support for inorganic or abiologic Fe isotope fractionation comes from
              experimental data and theoretical calculations, involving both mineral and
              fluid systems.  Data from the U.W. Madison group on oxide and carbonate
              minerals from sedimentary rocks, as well as initial experimental results from
              mineral-fluid and Fe(II)-Fe(III) aqueous systems, indicate inorganic Fe isotope
              fractionations on the order of 1-3 / for some (but not all) systems, similar to
              those calculated from theory for a few cases, but also pointing to significant
              discrepancies between experiments and theory.
The proposed research involves
              an extensive set of experimental determinations of Fe isotope fractionation
              factors between coexisting aqueous Fe species, between minerals and fluids, and
              between coexisting minerals.  In all of the proposed experiments, distinction
              between kinetic and equilibrium isotope fractionations will be accomplished
              through use of the "three isotope method" or use of enriched isotope tracers. 
              One phase of the proposed research will focus on determining the equilibrium Fe
              isotope fractionation between coexisting Fe(II) and Fe(III) complexes as a
              function of temperature, ionic strength, pH, and ligand chemistry, including
              aquo, chloro, and cyanide complexes, as well as mixed complexes.  Another phase
              of the planned work will involve determining mineral-mineral and mineral-fluid
              isotope fractionation factors over the T-P range 200-600 degrees C and 1-20
              kbar; in many cases, this work will involve determination of both O and Fe
              isotope fractionation factors from the same run products so that the relative
              isotopic exchange rates of these two elements may be compared.  Initially, the
              goal will be to determine isotopic fractionations between siderite, magnetite,
              hematite, and fluid, given the importance of these minerals in the
              low-temperature rock record, but our work may be extended to other minerals
              (such as sulfides) depending upon the results.  Ultimately, combined O and Fe
              isotope analysis of natural minerals may provide important cross-checks of
              attainment of isotopic equilibrium and the sources of fluids from which they
              precipitated.  A number of experimental strategies are outlined in the
              proposal, which are aimed at addressing known experimental issues, but are
              intended to be flexible enough so that different approaches may be tried
              depending upon initial results.  An important component to the viability of the
              planned experimental program is the very high precision that is now attainable
              using new instrumentation at U.W. Madison, where Fe isotope compositions may be
              determined on real samples to an external precision of  plus or minus0.05 / in
              56Fe/54Fe ratios on very small (~ 100-300 ng) quantities of Fe.  Given the
              great potential that Fe isotope geochemistry has for addressing problems that
              cut across several disciplines, the proposed experimental determinations of Fe
              isotope fractionation factors are viewed as essential before the field of Fe
              isotope geochemistry can move forward.



