Title       : Experimental Study of Plagioclase Textures and Amphibole Reaction Rims:
               Implications for Rates of Magmatic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0106658

Award Number: 0106658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessica F. Larsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Larsen and Gardner
EAR-0106658

Mineral phases in crustal magma bodies record
              information about magma mixing, heating, and degassing in the form of reaction
              textures that occur as the mineral responds to the change in state of the
              magma. Two minerals that commonly show these features are plagioclase and
              amphibole, exhibiting sieve, dusty, and patchy zoning (dissolution and growth)
              and reaction rims (degassing and heating) respectively. These textures are
              often used to estimate the rates of magma mixing and magmatic ascent processes.
              We propose to experimentally constrain the rates at which these textures form
              at conditions applicable to shallow-level crustal reservoirs, using natural
              (rhyo)dacite and andesite starting material, and clean, unzoned, euhedral seed
              crystals. Our goal for this proposed study is to provide the vital calibrations
              needed to make observations of these reaction textures quantitatively useful
              for volcanologists when examining the products of crustal magma reservoirs.
              Previous work (refs) investigating the rates and causes of these textures have
              provided a good basis for our proposed study.  However, limitations to this
              work exist, necessitating further study to make constraints useful to a wide
              range of mineral-melt compositions and P-T conditions applicable to crustal
              magma reservoirs. We will accomplish our goals in two tasks that are designed
              to experimentally constrain the rates of dissolution and regrowth textures in
              plagioclase resulting from heating and compositional disequilibrium, and
              amphibole reaction rims produced by melt degassing or heating. The first task
              will focus on plagioclase dissolution and rim growth in Aniakchak rhyodacite
              and andesite, using plagioclase seed phenocrysts of An20, An37, and An80
              composition, at pressures between 0.1 and 300 MPa and temperatures between 825
              and 1100 degrees C. The goal of this task is to constrain rates of plagioclase
              dissolution as a function of heating above the plagioclase solidus, and to
              examine dissolution and re-growth of plagioclase due to chemical disequilibrium
              in melts in which plagioclase of another composition is stable.  The second
              task will investigate pargasite and hornblende amphibole breakdown in Redoubt
              dacite and andesite at P-T conditions appropriate for amphibole stability in
              these compositions. The goal of this task is to extend known calibrations of
              this reaction to different melt compositions and magmatic conditions. In
              addition, the thermal breakdown of amphibole will be investigated in order to
              help petrologists distinguish between decompression and heating rims. The
              results of these studies will be constraints on the rates of formation of
              important plagioclase and amphibole reaction textures in shallow-level crustal
              reservoirs.


