Title       : Deciphering the Complex History of Fluid Flow in Lower Carboniferous Carbonate
               Rocks, Irish Midlands: Geochemistry of Multiple Dolomitizing and Ore-Forming
               Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0106388

Award Number: 0106388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Shelton SheltonKL@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay M. Gregg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Deciphering the Complex History of Fluid Flow in Lower Carboniferous
              Carbonate Rocks, Irish Midlands:  Geochemistry of Multiple Dolomitizing and
              Ore-Forming Events

Kevin L. Shelton & Jay M. Gregg
EAR-0106388

	The
              Irish Midlands comprise a natural laboratory in which to study the physical,
              thermal and geochemical effects of fluid flow on dolomitization and zinc-lead
              ore deposition in an extensional/compressional tectonic setting.  Our research
              addresses the relationships among sedimentary facies, early diagenesis and
              hydrothermal dolomitization, and their relationship to localized and regional
              fluid flow throughout Lower Carboniferous carbonate rocks in Ireland.
              
	Specific questions to be addressed are applicable to the Irish Midlands, as
              well as to similar extensional/compressional basinal settings worldwide:  What
              are the sources of various multiple fluids and the extents of their flow
              systems?; What is the relative timing of each fluid system?; What are the
              critical fluid-fluid and fluid-rock interactions along flow paths that led to
              hydrothermal dolomitization and/or ore deposition?; What is the relative
              importance of regional-scale fluid flow through aquifers versus localized
              fracture-controlled flow for the development of mineral deposits? 
	Our study
              will address these questions through combined application of carbonate
              petrology and a number of geochemical tools, including C, O and Sr isotopes,
              fluid inclusion microthermometry, and fluid inclusion halogen and trace element
              geochemistry, including new laser ablation-ICP-MS techniques. 
	The impact of
              this study is profound and timely. Modelers are now expanding the capability of
              reactive flow hydrogeologic-geochemical models to simulate groundwater
              chemistry, patterns of rock alteration and ore mineralization in fractured
              rock.  Geochemical data from our studies of chemical interactions of basinal
              fluids along stratigraphic and faulted pathways will provide an excellent basis
              for constraining theoretical models of deep fluid flow that are being developed
              for the Irish Midlands.

