Title       : Insect and Vertebrate Faunas of a Unique Late Triassic Freshwater Ecosystem in
               Eastern North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0106309

Award Number: 0106309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Fraser   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Grimaldi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Museum of Natural Hist
	      1001 Douglas Avenue
	      Martinsville, VA  24112    804/329-4028

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INSECT AND VERTEBRATE FAUNAS OF A UNIQUE LATE TRIASSIC FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEM IN
              EASTERN NORTH AMERICA

Nicholas C. Fraser and David A.
              Grimaldi
EAR-0106309

The end of the Triassic period (230 -200 mya) was a
              pivotal time in the evolution of modern terrestrial ecosystems. There is a good
              global record for tetrapods, including the first mammals, crocodiles, turtles,
              lissamphibians (frogs and salamanders), sphenodontians, and, by extension,
              their sister taxon, the lizards. By contrast the record for the most
              significant group of modern day animals, the insects, is considerably poorer.
              Only a handful of rich insect-producing Triassic sequences are known worldwide,
              and the majority of fossils from these localities comprise incomplete specimens
              such as isolated wings and elytra. 

A single site in the Newark Supergroup
              of eastern North America has been found to contain numerous complete Late
              Triassic insects. The Solite Quarry is situated on the Virginia-North Carolina
              state line, and it has produced the oldest global records for water bugs,
              thrips and caddisflies. Other fossils found to date include a unique gliding
              reptile and numerous specimens of a small aquatic reptile that frequently
              preserve details of their soft part anatomy. These have yet to be fully
              described. Only a relatively small portion of the fossiliferous sequences has
              been excavated and PIs will open large-scale excavations in the most productive
              quarry units. The next phase of the work will be to conduct detailed studies of
              all the finds and to compare them with the two major assemblages that share the
              most in common: the Madygen Formation of Kirghizistan and the Molteno Formation
              of South Africa. The exquisite preservation of the Solite insects will permit a
              complete re-evaluation of the extensive Russian and South African insect
              collections and thereby allow for a better understanding of the mode and tempo
              of insect evolution and radiation at this critical time.

For a long time the
              Solite quarry was regarded as being largely unfossiliferous. Certainly the
              microscopic insect fossils can be readily overlooked under normal lighting
              conditions. The search image is critical to the PIs success, and using the same
              methods they have identified other localities nearby that also contain insect
              remains. Together with the diverse plant and vertebrate remains, they shall
              reconstruct a detailed  picture of marginal freshwater ecosystems in the Late
              Triassic.

