Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Complexity and Paleodynamics of Natural Sand Dune Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0106359

Award Number: 0106359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad Werner werner@hayek.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

COMPLEXITY AND PALEODYNAMICS OF NATURAL SAND DUNE FIELDS
Brad
              Werner
EAR-0106359

Fields of sand dunes present some of the most intriguing
              patterns seen on Earth and other planets, such as Mars. The dunes form when
              wind transports sand grains, causing them to pile up into small mounds that
              eventually evolve into the graceful shapes that adorn calendars and postage
              stamps. The characteristics of the wind, such as its direction and the supply
              of sand, are imprinted on the pattern of dunes in such a way that it is
              possible, just by carefully examining the dune pattern, to say something about
              the climatic conditions that lead to its creation. As winds and sand supply
              change through time, the pattern of dunes slowly changes as well in ways that
              are not yet fully delineated. The information about climate over the past
              thousands to tens of thousands of years stored in the great sand dune fields of
              Africa, the Middle East, Asia, Australia and North America might provide
              critical understanding in predicting the reaction of regional climates and
              landscapes to human-induced global climate change. PIs aim is to develop a
              methodology for inferring past climate from dune patterns and to apply it to
              three natural dune fields. To achieve this goal, they have developed numerical
              models that span the range of time periods over which dunes and dune fields can
              react to changes in climate: (1) a model for the overall characteristics of
              dune fields, including spacing between dunes and their orientation (thousands
              of years); (2) a model for the motion of the trace of the tops of dunes, their
              crestlines (hundreds of years); and (3) a model for the changes in shapes of
              dunes (tens of years). These models will be used to investigate the development
              of the Algodones dune field in southeastern California, the dunes of the
              Namibian desert in western Namibia, and the dunes of the deserts of western
              Mauritania. The interpretations PIs derive regarding past climate will be
              tested by attempting to recreate the patterns of these three dune fields using
              their climatic inferences in a wind tunnel filled with sand.


