Title       : Scattered-Wave Imaging Algorithms for Regional and Local Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0106836

Award Number: 0106836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin Revenaugh jsr@es.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0106836 (PH #36x)

Title: Scattered-wave imaging
              algorithms for regional and local arrays

PI's: J. Revenaugh, UC Santa
              Cruz

The scattering of elastic waves by heterogeneities in the Earth is an
              obvious and dominant source of waveform complexity at high frequencies,
              producing slowly decaying trains of energy that are visible in records for
              several minutes following primary (geometrical) arrivals.  Studies attempting
              to characterize the nature of scattering traditionally have treated it either
              as a regionally stationary statistical process, or have restricted attention to
              the coherent portion of the scattered wavefield produced by crustal layering. 
              Both approaches have yielded valuable results and will continue to do so, but
              each makes restrictive assumptions about the nature of scattering that
              ultimately limit their utility.  We have developed an alternative approach,
              utilizing a variant of an algorithm developed by the oil industry to image
              scattering structures in the crust and upper mantle using regional array
              (aperture of order 100 km) recordings of teleseismic earthquakes.  The method
              has been applied to data from the Southern California Seismic Network and the
              Hawaiian Volcano Observatory array.  The results from both arrays reveal an
              intriguing and potentially very important geographic correlation of the
              strength of scattering with the density of background and aftershock
              earthquakes.  More importantly, these results provide an all-important "proof
              of concept"that it is possible to extract reliable structural information at
              scale-lengths less than average station separation.  

In our proposal, we
              document a work plan to improve upon the imaging paradigm employed by our
              current method (referred to as Kirchhoff coda migration, or KCM) through better
              treatment of the physics of elastic scattering, more accurate wavefield
              summation, the incorporation of three-component recordings, and a regularized
              inversion.  In so doing, we will continue to honor the usual exigencies of
              regional and local array recordings of earthquakes: irregular instrument
              deployment, data dropouts, extended source signatures (waveform complexities
              due to the earthquake rupture process and near-source structure), station-site
              effects and limited illumination back azimuths.  Our goal is the production of
              "canned" algorithms of broad-spread application to the imaging of crustal and
              uppermost mantle scattering structures by both the PASSCAL community and to
              users of permanent dense local and regional array data.  We will apply the
              algorithms to data in hand from Southern California and the island of
              Hawaii.



