Title       : ROLE: Social Creativity and Meta-Design in Learning Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0106976

Award Number: 0106976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1446172            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard Fischer gerhard@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hal Eden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernesto Arias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Eisenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Whereas much of teaching in our educational culture presumes an omniscient
              teacher transmitting knowledge to unknowing learners, most learning that takes
              place outside of the classroom is based on breakdowns in the context of
              real-world activities leading to reflection and learning. The traditional
              approach has some validity for situations in which "basic knowledge" needs to
              be communicated, but it is not well suited to the highly situated nature of
              lifelong learning and design problem solving.

Although creative individuals
              are often thought of as working in isolation, the role of interaction and
              collaboration with other individuals is critical. Much of our intelligence and
              creativity results from exploiting the "symmetry of ignorance" (between
              different communities) as a source of power. Social creativity emphasizes that
              the heart of intelligent human performance is not the individual human mind but
              groups of minds in interaction with each other and in interaction with tools
              and artifacts. Meta-design characterizes objectives, techniques, and processes
              for creating new media and environments that allow users to act as designers
              and contribute to and benefit from the creativity of the group. 

The project
              will: (1) develop a theoretical framework and systems to support social
              creativity as a specific form of lifelong learning; (2) investigate principles
              of meta-design and how they support social creativity in the context of
              learning and working; (3) work with specific communities to demonstrate the
              scalability and sustainability of our approach; (4) focus on specific domains
              such as the collaborative design of course information environments; (5)
              explore the role of social creativity and meta-design in practice by changing
              classroom environments and undergraduate education; and (6) assess how our
              theoretical attributes of lifelong learning, social creativity, and meta-design
              map onto practice and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of our approach in
              realistic settings.


  




