Title       : Collaborative Res: Assessing Aquifer Properties from Stress and Strain
               Distributions in Leaky-Confined Aquifers using Insar, GPS and Three-Dimensional
               Deformation and Flow Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0106474

Award Number: 0106474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Burbey tjburbey@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0106474
Burbey

Aquifer tests typically involve collecting time-drawdown data
              in the vicinity of a pumping well for the purpose of producing plots for
              estimating the storage coefficient and transmissivity of the aquifer or aquifer
              system.  Recent advances in GPS technology and INSAR (interferometric synthetic
              aperture radar) satellite imagery, allow for detailed and precise calculation
              of land surface displacements.  Stationary GPS monitoring during an active
              pumping test in conjunction with INSAR interferograms for the same region will
              allow for time-compaction (and time-horizontal strain) data to be collected in
              conjunction with the hydrograph data providing a far more diagnostic test for
              estimating storage coefiricient of confined aquifers.  Furthermore, in leaky
              aquifer systems in which the confining unit is the primary compressible unit,
              the time-compaction data can provide the necessary information to accurately
              calculate the speciric storage and vertical hydraulic conductivity of the
              confining unit, parameters that are typically difficult to evaluate.  A new
              analytical solution has been developed to derive the storage coefficient from
              time-subsidence data and numerical simulation results applied to this semi-log
              (conrined) and semi-log (leaky) methodology indicates that extremely accurate
              estimates for storage of the aquifer and storage and vertical hydraulic
              conductivity of the confining unit can be made.
GPS and INSAR surveys will
              also provide detailed information on horizontal deformation occurring at the
              land surface and can corroborate results from hypothetical modeling of
              three-dimensional deformation and flow, which indicate that more than 50
              percent of pumped water is released from storage associated with horizontal
              strain in confined aquifers.  These results may have tremendous implications
              with regard to measuring subsidence, the quantity of leakage that can actually
              be expected through confining units, and the interpretation of long-term
              aquifer tests.  Furthermore, the strain configuration through the confining
              unit will be much different in the presence of three-dimensional strain, which
              will affect the potential compaction and leakage through the confining unit
              over time.  The potential contribution of water from horizontal strain may
              require us to rethink the current definition of storage coefficient where such
              strains have been neglected.

