Title       : Melt Extraction From the Lowermost Crust: An Experimental Test of a Natural
               Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0106241

Award Number: 0106241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy Rushmer trushmer@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rushmer
EAR-0106241 
Experimental studies on melt generation and extraction in
              crustal rock types are now providing testable models with which to more fully
              examine natural settings. The problem is that few field sites have the exposure
              necessary to study potential mechanisms of melt segregation via fracture and
              subsequent transport mechanisms.  The Early Cretaceous granulite belt of
              Fiordland, New Zealand, however, is an exception. It is a deeply eroded
              continuous belt which exposes all levels of the crust, truly lowermost crustal
              rocks, in addition to middle and upper crust. Field observations of exposed
              lowermost crust have documented the presence of extensive leucosome-lined
              fracture networks which appear to have also been used for melt transport.
              Testing this scenario experimentally will provide an excellent opportunity to
              integrate these field observations with experimental data. We are therefore
              conducting an experimental investigation involving phase equilibria, static
              rock core and deformation studies on the source dioritic rocks to accomplish
              the following tasks: 1) test the hypothesis that partial melting in this
              hydrous-phase rich bulk composition produced the observed fractures lined with
              leucosome material; 2) determine melt compositions and melt-water contents
              produced by partial melting of diorite under granulite facies conditions to be
              used as tracers for melt transport; 3) determine strength behavior of the
              diorite during partial melting at high pressure; and 4) use the above
              experimental results to constrain petrologic and structural models of the
              evolution of the lowermost crust as exposed in the Fiordland granulite belt. 
              Experimental determination of partial melt compositions and possible
              segregation mechanisms will be combined with field relationships, geochemical
              and petrologic studies to constrain sources and transport paths for partial
              melts observed in these locales in the Fiordland lower crustal section. The
              results of these combined studies have significant potential impact for
              furthering our understanding of melt-related processes in the lowermost crust
              and the role of melt during orogenic evolution. This three-year project
              provides direct support for three Masters students. Three undergraduates will
              participate in the project in the summers as part of their senior theses.


