Title       : Active Continental Extension of Eastern Papua New Guinea: Geologic Studies of
               Emerged Coral Reefs and Marine Sedimentary Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0106518

Award Number: 0106518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Mann paulm@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick W. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0106518
Mann

The lateral transition from seafloor spreading at a narrow,
              well defined plate boundary to diffuse rifting of continental crust occurs
              today in three localities worldwide: the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, and eastern
              Papua New Guinea.  These three areas are critical for understanding how
              continents rupture because the spatial progression from seafloor spreading to
              continental rifting provides insights into the temporal and structural
              evolution of an oceanic spreading ridge to a continental rift.  Such insights
              are not readily apparent from the more widespread zones of active
              intracontinental extension like the U.S. Basin and Range province where
              extension has not - and may not - eventually proceed to the point of seafloor
              spreading.  Of these three seafloor spreading to rift transition areas, only
              Papua New Guinea exhibits a close spatial association between the tip of the
              propagating spreading ridge and low-angle normal fault earthquakes, active,
              low-angle normal faults in a submarine setting, and late Neogene metamorphic
              core complexes.  The D'Entrecasteaux Islands and Papuan Peninsula, fringed by
              late Neogene sedimentary rocks and late Quaternary coral reefs, occupy the
              transition area between oceanic spreading and continental rifting.  These
              accessible land areas provide an ideal geologic setting to test several
              contrasting tectonic models for spreading ridge-rift transitions proposed on
              the basis of earthquakes, radiometric and structural studies of core complexes,
              and marine geophysical studies.  The main elements of these previously proposed
              models include oceanic propagating ridge models applied to this region of
              continental crust, localization of metamorphic core complexes and topographic
              uplift adjacent to areas of propagating ridges, and lateral shifts in the
              location of rifting and subsequent spreading.  We are using a combination of
              geologic studies of late Quaternary coral reefs and late Neogene sedimentary
              sections along hundreds of kilometers of eastern PNG coastlines to determine
              the pattern of late Neogene to late Quaternary vertical tectonic history, style
              of deformation, and tectonic mechanisms in order to test the tectonic models
              described above.  Key questions that we are addressing in these studies
              include: 1) Where is the area of maximum late Quaternary coral reef uplift in
              the D'Entrecasteaux Islands and Papuan Peninsula and what structures have
              affected them? 2) Are there detectable spatial migrations in the uplift pattern
              of this region? and 3) Are low angle normal faults present in the late Neogene
              marine rocks and the coral terraces themselves in the area of low angle normal
              fault earthquakes near Sanaroa and Fergusson Islands?  Our results will aid
              interpretations of the tectonic effects of active ridge propagation or jumping
              in other active rift areas including the Red Sea, East African rifts, and Gulf
              of Aden where a detailed reef record such as in Papua New Guinea is not
              available.

