Title       : Exploring the Initial Upper Paleolithic at Üçagizli Cave, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0106433

Award Number: 0106433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70572              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Kuhn skuhn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Steven Kuhn and a
group
              of international researchers will continue archaeological excavations
at
              UUagizli ("three mouths") cave in south-central Turkey.  The team
              includes
professional archaeologists, physical anthropologists, geologists,
              and specialists
in the analysis of ancient plant remains, as well as graduate
              students from
the U.S., Turkey, and western Europe.  The central goal of the
              project is
to examine evidence for marked changes in human behavior within the
              earliest
Upper Paleolithic period, and to place these developments in their
              environmental
context. Archaeological deposits at the site span the period
              between about
30,000 and 43,000 years before present. Although humans with
              essentially
modern skeletal anatomy had appeared much earlier, many
              researchers believe
that it was only after 45,000 years ago that there is
              evidence in Eurasia
for complex technologies, symbolic communication and art,
              and other features
of material, social and intellectual life that distinguish
              fully modern
humans from their ancestors.  Results from excavations at
              UUagizli cave
to date have helped expand our understanding of changes in
              economies and
technology for this crucial interval in human history.  The site
              has also
yielded remains of what are among the earliest ornament-making
              traditions
in Eurasia. These findings are especially important because they
              document
the use of material culture as a medium of symbolic communication,
              long
considered an important rubicon in human cognitive evolution.  One
              issue
guiding the research is whether developments in human behavior after
              45,000
years ago represent local responses to changing ecological and
              demographic
conditions, or whether they reflect the appearance of new human
              populations
with enhanced cognitive abilities. Continuing excavations will
              allow us
to examine in detail the timing of major shifts in behavior, and
              whether
they occurred independently or in concert. Studies of animal bones,
              remains
of shellfish, as well as ancient pollen and phytoliths (durable
              crystalline
components of plant tissues) will allow us to place these
              developments in
their environmental context, helping to distinguish broad
              evolutionary trends
within the human species as a whole from local adaptations
              to changing conditions.
 At the same time, the project is helping to establish
              new links between
academic institutions in Turkey and the United States. 
              Through their participation
in the research, students from Ankara University
              obtain training in field
and lab methods. In exchange, American graduate
              students get valuable
overseas research experience as well as material for
              theses and dissertations.


