Title       : The Evolution of Developmental Potential in Vascular Plant Leaves: Linking
               Biological Process and Paleontological Pattern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0106816

Award Number: 0106816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Knoll aknoll@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Noel M. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Evolution of Developmental Potential in Vascular Plant Leaves:
              Linking Biological Process and Paleontological Pattern

Andrew H. Knoll and
              N. Michelle Holbrook
NSF Grant  NSF 0106816

	Developmental biologists study
              processes that give rise to form in plants and animals.  Paleontologists are
              interested in development, as well, because variations in developmental
              patterning must fuel the changes in form documented by the fossil record. 
              Plant fossils are uniquely well suited for the synthesis of developmental and
              paleontological perspectives on morphology.  Plant cell walls constrain
              developmental pathways, and walls preserved in fossils record patterns of
              growth and development in ancient plants.  Further, the requirements for
              photosynthesis have resulted in the repeated evolution of functionally and
              morphologically similar structures in plants through time. Studies of living
              plants suggest that universal relationships exist between particular leaf forms
              (including leaf shape and venation patterns) and developmental dynamics.  To
              date, however, this relationship has been probed in only a limited number of
              plants. PIs will examine leaf development in all living groups with laminar
              leaves, particularly a variety of fern lineages, to determine the level of
              correlation between basic characteristics of venation patterns (which can be
              recovered from fossils) and growth dynamics.  They will track the growth
              hormone auxin in growing leaves to determine the extent to which its important
              role in vascular patterning is conserved across all plants, and compare
              developmental aberrations in fossil and extant leaves as an independent test of
              the developmental similarity of leaves with similar form.  Their goal is to
              produce a new developmental framework for interpreting the rich fossil record
              of leaf evolution.

