Title       : Petrochemistry of Kimberlites, Lamproites and Diamonds in India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0106187

Award Number: 0106187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Haggerty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haggerty
EAR-0106187

Diamonds were first discovered in India some four
              millinnia ago. Many of the world's most famous diamonds (Great Mogul, Orloff,
              Shah, Darya-i-Noor, Regent, Nizam), as well as many infamous stones (e.g. Hope,
              Koh-i-Noor), were recovered from alluvial deposits on the banks of the Krishna
              River in the southern state of Andra Pradesh. The primary sources of these and
              many other extraordinary diamonds, in terms of size and clarity, have not been
              located. In common with the geological setting of diamond deposits worldwide,
              diamonds in India are also on cratons and in mobile belts. The two prominent
              diamond districts are Majhgawan (known since the 13th C), which is an operating
              mine in the Bundelkand Craton  (Madhya Pradesh), and Wajrakarur in the Dharwar
              Craton of Andra Pradesh. The ages of intrusions in both districts are
              Proterozoic, and at about 1.1 Ga are similar in age to the Premier kimberlite
              (source of the Cullinan, the largest diamond diamond ever reported) in South
              Africa, and the Argyle lamproite (the world's largest producer, over 40 M
              cts/yr) in Australia. These two sites, along with Proterozoic alluvial deposits
              in central Africa and Brazil, lie along major lineaments in the reconstructed
              supercontinent of Rodinia. This is interpreted to be plume related. With over
              50 new intrusives discovered in India over the past decade, these ancient
              cratons are an important new laboratory to study the state of the mantle, and
              its evolutionary relation the crust (TTG). The diamond host rocks in India are
              neither classical kimberlites nor conventional lamproites and are variously
              described as having both kimberlitic (mineralogically), and lamproitic
              (geochemically) affinities. This is a significant new challenge in mantle
              petrochemistry. Many intrusions have abundant mantle xenoliths, some are
              intensely eclogitic, and others are dominantly peridotitic, and both will
              provide new insights to compositions and thermal states of subcratonic
              lithospheric keels. India is well mapped geophysically and the mantle data base
              will provide an independent set of constraints to model the deep mantle. Mantle
              samples from 32 intrusions will be studied microscopically and analysed using
              electron microbeam and x-ray fluoresence techniques to obtain mineral and bulk
              rock compositions, respectively. Diamond morphologies will be examined by
              stereo- and scanning electron microscopy, and by Raman and infrared
              spectroscopy. These data will provide the first comprehensive study of
              Proterozoic mantle intrusives in India. Significant new insights are predicted
              and important new interpretations are anticipated, not only in India but in the
              broader context of diamond deposits in Rodinia.    

