Title       : A Proposal for 3D Basin Structure Reconstruction in Central Taiwan and 3D
               Simulation of Ground Motion and Deformation Related to the 1999 Chi-Chi
               (Mw=7.6) Earthquake, Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0106802

Award Number: 0106802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Yuen Wang chiyuen@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Dreger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR 0106802 (PH #56x)

Title: A Proposal for 3D Basin
              Structure Reconstruction in Central Taiwan and 3D Simulation of Ground Motion
              and Deformation Related to the 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6) Earthquake,
              Taiwan

PI's: Chi-Yuen Wang and Douglas S.Dreger, University of California,
              Berkeley

Created by oblique collision between the Philippine Sea plate and
              the Eurasian plate since ~5 Ma, the island of Taiwan is one of the most rapidly
              rising mountain belts in the world. The 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6) earthquake, the
              biggest to hit the island in the last century, has created an unprecedented
              amount of accurate data and hence a watershed of research opportunity towards a
              better understanding of earthquake hazards, with a potential to significantly
              advance the state of knowledge. A timely interpretation of this great amount of
              data may benefit ongoing programs of earthquake research both in Taiwan and in
              the US and the other part of the world. Numerical simulation has been widely
              used for understanding of earthquake hazards. It provides an effective means
              for testing different models; it may also be used to generate information at
              locations where data are not available, allowing interpolation between the
              recording stations. However, recent investigations have shown that the results
              of such simulation are particularly sensitive to the subsurface structures of
              the sedimentary basins in the vicinity of the earthquake. Hence, as the first
              step to a meaningful simulation, the proposed research will focus on defining
              the 3D structure of the sedimentary basin adjacent to the ruptured Chelungpu
              fault, using the existing data. The structure so reconstructed will be a
              pre-requisite for reliable simulations of ground motion and for the detailed
              study of earthquake source complexity. Finally, the reconstructed basin
              structure will be useful for other proposed projects and will be made available
              to the research community. The data required for reconstructing the basin
              structure in central Taiwan include 3D crustal velocity structure,
              multi-channel seismic reflection profiles, drilling data and gravity anomalies.
              The 3D crustal velocity structure has been recently published. Other data have
              been collected by the Chinese Petroleum Corporation (CPC) as part of its
              intensive hydrocarbon exploration in this area. The PI visited CPC in December
              of 1999 and succeeded in getting the collaborative support of Dr. Kuo-An Lin,
              director of the Exploration and Development Research Institute of CPC, to
              provide the needed data for the proposed research.


