Title       : Geochemical Studies of Primitive Melt Inclusions from Mt. Shasta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0106578

Award Number: 0106578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nobumichi Shimizu nshimizu@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shimizu
EAR-0106578

This project is an investigation of melting and melt
              migration processes operating for the Cascadia subduction zone using the
              geochemical analyses of primitive melt inclusion hosted in high-Mg olivine
              phenocrysts from Mt. Shasta, northern California. The Cascadia system
              represents one of the hottest subduction systems where contributions of
              slab-derived melt components could be tested  quantitatively. A detailed
              geochemical study of primitive melt inclusions as proposed here has never been
              carried out for a subduction zone system. The emphasis of the proposed work is:
              (1) to focus on primitive melts so that new insights into processes of melt
              generation could be gained; (2) to focus on melt inclusions so that a
              representative spectrum of melt composition can be captured, and pre-eruptive
              volatile contents can be determined; and (3) to characterize an endmember case
              for hot young subduction system. 

The primary objective of the proposed work
              is to establish a geochemical characterization
of melts involved in all major
              eruptive stages that created edifices of Mt. Shasta. The proposed work will be
              carried out in the following steps: (1) documentation of geochemical
              variabilities among melt inclusions in each sample; (2) clarification of the
              relationships between melt inclusions and host rock; (3) evaluation of
              geochemical variabilities among separate eruptive units within each eruptive
              stage; (4) assessment of temporal geochemical trends for the major eruptive
              stages. Melt inclusions in olivines will be homogenized using a Sobolev-type
              heating stage, and will be analyzed for major elements with an electron probe.
              Ion probe analyses will be made in a sequence beginning with B and Pb isotope
              compositions, followed by trace element analysis for light elements (Li, Be, B,
              H2O ), REE (La, Ce, Nd, Sm, Dy, Er, Yb), HFSE (Ti, Zr, Nb), alkaline earths
              (Ba, Sr) and Y.


