Title       : The Timing and Nature of Volcanological Processes as Captured by Bimodal
               Composition Eruptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0106463

Award Number: 0106463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Rubin krubin@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Rubin
EAR-0106463

One critical yet still incompletely resolved volcanic
              parameter is the time period involved in crustal processes leading to both
              magmatic evolution and eruption.  These likely vary greatly amongst magmatic
              systems of differing style, tectonic setting and composition. There are a
              number of ways to potentially get at the time scales of crustal magmatic
              process.  This proposal suggests a novel approach based upon U-series
              disequilibrium age contrasts between primitive and evolved magmas that erupted
              simultaneously.  Evidence for such " bimodal" composition eruptions has become
              commonplace in the volcanological literature. The magmas involved may have
              formed through a variety of processes and over a range of time scales, which is
              an important aspect of this investigation. Three inter-related issues are: (a)
              petrological: mechanism of formation of evolved magmas; (b) volcanological:
              eruption triggering of relatively cool, viscous, chemically evolved magmas
              (dacite and rhyolite); and c) time scales: how long do these processes take in
              different settings. 
This study would examine both magmatic evolution and one
              of several proposed mechanisms for initiating silicic eruptions (i.e. the
              basalt injection trigger) using bimodal composition eruptions.  Such eruptions
              provide a unique snapshot of processes in complex and evolving magmatic systems
              because the two end members magmas were erupted simultaneously and therefore
              are closely-related in space and time.  Three working hypotheses would be
              tested regarding time scales and processes captured in 4 historical (or
              geologically very recent) bimodal-composition eruptions that are believed to
              represent various scenarios for petrological evolution and the role of mafic
              magma in causing or aiding in eruption of chemically evolved magmas.  The
              eruptions to be studies are: 1875 Askja; 1724 Krafla; 1902 Santa Maria; and
              1943-1952 Paricutin. Although there are numerous others examples (e.g.,
              historical or recent eruptions of Vesuvius, Hekla, Popocatepetl, Colima,
              Novarupta, Mt. St. Helens, Nevado del Ruiz, Montserrat, Pinatubo), the
              eruptions proposed here were picked because they have been previously
              well-studied volcanologically and petrologically, have excellent temporal
              control on the eruptions themselves, have something close to compositional end
              members physically separable from pumices or lavas, and have available sample
              types suited for dating with U-series disequilibrium by internal mineral
              isochrons.  Eruption deposits will be examined volcanologically, and samples
              will be examined petrographically and geochemically to arrive at as complete a
              picture as possible for the volcanic/magmatic processes involved.   Time
              permitting a 5th eruption (the circa 1305 Mt Tarawera "Kaharoa" eruption in New
              Zealand) would also be examined.


