Title       : Collaborative Research: Active Tectonics of Northeast Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0106002

Award Number: 0106002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99053              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Burgmann burgmann@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0106999 - Scholz
0106002 - Burgmann
0105587 - King

Northeast Asia, where
              the Pacific, North American, and Eurasian plates come together, is one of the
              last frontiers of plate tectonics. The location of the North America - Eurasia
              plate boundary is not well established. The problem is further complicated by a
              number of smaller microplates in the region, including the Okhotsk, Arctic,
              Bering, and Amurian plates, whose existence, rates of motion, and boundaries
              are still uncertain. This project relies on space geodesy to study the broad
              zone of deformation encompassing the boundary of the Eurasian and North
              American plates, intervening microplates, and their interaction with the
              Pacific plate. This investigation is motivated by the recent initiation of
              high-precision GPS measurements in eastern Siberia, Korea, and Japan, which
              provide the opportunity for a significant advance in understanding of this
              enigmatic region. New GPS measurements provide constraints for tectonic models,
              which take into account plate tectonic angular velocities and deformation
              associated with strain accumulation and release at the plate boundaries.

The
              geodetic analysis helps constrain the kinematics of deformation from central
              Asia to western North America through careful integration of regional and
              global GPS data. New measurements focus on three areas not well constrained by
              current data: Sakhalin, the Cherskiy Range in eastern Siberia, and the
              Kamchatka cusp. Expected results will include an improved location (in northern
              Siberia) of the pole of rotation between Eurasia and North America; more
              precise delineation of plate boundaries in northeast Asia; and constraints on
              the existence, location and present-day motion of the Okhotsk microplate and
              other regional blocks.

The major problem preventing a straightforward
              inversion of GPS velocities for rigid plate motions is that displacements of
              many GPS stations are affected by inter-seismic strain accumulation along plate
              boundary faults, especially along the Pacific subduction margin. Where large
              earthquakes (such as the 1995 Mw = 7.0 and 2000 Mw = 6.8 Sakhalin, and the 1997
              Mw = 7.7 Kamchatka events) occurred within our study region, the deformation
              field is further disturbed by co-seismic and post-seismic motions. Thus, the
              investigation addresses the inextricably linked regional plate kinematics and
              subduction zone dynamics. Elastic and visco-elastic models are used to evaluate
              the inter-seismic strain accumulation process and to estimate the amount of
              seismic coupling on major plate boundary faults. The modeling allows for
              separation of the contributions of plate boundary strain and plate tectonic
              angular velocities to the measured GPS velocity field.

