Title       : Computational Methods for Equilibrium Problems with Micro-Level Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0106880

Award Number: 0106880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239131             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Gabriel sgabriel@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to examine systems with micro-level data for which
              an equilibrium of some sort is to be reached.  One important example is the Gas
              Systems Analysis Model (GSAM), a modular, reservoir-based model of the North
              American natural gas system developed for the U. S. Department of Energy.  In
              its current form, GSAM is a large-scale nonlinear program that computes
              estimates of market equilibrium prices, quantities, flows, and other values
              based on the notion of maximizing total surplus less transportation costs. 
              Unlike the classical approach in which supply curves are known in closed form,
              GSAM builds supply curves from the "bottom up" using a data base of over 17,000
              natural gas reservoirs taking into account both the interregional as well as
              intertemporal interdependence of these curves.  While this "bottom up" feature
              provides a good deal of realism, it renders the equilibrium computations much
              more difficult due to the lack of closed form supply curves.  The proposed work
              has two main objectives.  First, analyze the GSAM market equilibrium problem
              more generally by noting the functional relationships between seasonal market
              prices (Lagrange multipliers) and demand for gas, storage activity levels,
              investment decisions, etc. using the variational inequality problem (VIP) and
              nonlinear complementarity problem (NCP) formats.  The second main task is to
              develop efficient methods to reach a solution to GSAM-type problems exploiting
              the particular problem structure.  Iterative methods from optimization and
              equation solving is used to develop appropriate algorithms for this
              task.

Due to recent advances in information technology, it is now possible
              to model the activities of individual agents in rather complicated systems. 
              Examples of applications in scientific and engineering settings using
              micro-level data abound.  While simulations of these systems can be rather
              elaborate using for example, complicated "if-then" type rules, determining
              equilibrium behavior of the system in a rigorous manner can be challenging. 
              Part of the difficulty is due to a lack of closed form expressions for
              describing the system.  The proposed work will examine one such system in its
              general form and develop both a theory for equilibrium as well as efficient
              mathematical algorithms to compute such a solution.  The anticipated impact of
              this work is to greatly advance the state of the art in solving large-scale
              equilibrium problems that use micro-level data for modeling the economic
              behavior of individual agents.  This is significant since many similar systems
              are now modeled that contain no closed form expressions for key elements but
              for which an equilibrium solution is desirable.  
