Title       : Household, Community, and Power in Precolumbian Puerto Rico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0106520

Award Number: 0106520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Curet acuret@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee A. Newsom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Antonio Curet and Lee Newsom will
              conduct preliminary archaeological survey at the site of Tibes, located
              adjacent to the southern coast of Puerto Rico near the city of Ponce.
              Discovered in 1975 the site is composed of a variety of highly distinctive
              archaeological features including discrete cultural deposits from two periods,
              middens and twelve stone structures (ball courts, plazas and causeways).
              Original excavations uncovered two cemeteries and other burials dispersed
              across the site. Likely Tibes also contains a full range of domestic deposits
              with the potential to reveal a complex history of space use and community
              pattern. This civic-ceremonial center is of significant scientific interest
              because it is the oldest in the Caribbean and may document the rise of a
              complex chiefdom level of society. The Taino native inhabitants of much of this
              region formed some of the most complex "pre-state" societies in the New World
              and Spanish chroniclers, attempting to apply European categories described
              their organization as "feudal kingdoms."The highly developed social-political
              organization of these groups was accompanied by an intricate religious system
              controlled by chiefs who were able to gather labor for communal work or war,
              and who accumulated wealth and staple products.

While much archaeological
              effort has been devoted to understanding the rise of social complexity in
              regions of North, Middle and South America the Caribbean has been relatively
              unstudied. Because islands constitute delimited areas where social boundaries
              can be clearly defined, they provide an excellent venue for study of individual
              group development. With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Curet and
              Newsom will conduct a geophysical survey of Tibes and test the utility of three
              techniques - resistivity, magnetometry and ground penetrating radar - to
              determine their ability to locate and determine the nature of buried
              archaeological features, including hard to locate domestic areas. They will
              then conduct test excavations to match remotely sensed anomalies with buried
              counterparts. The information gathered will be used to develop a methodology
              and set the stage for a longer term project which examines the rise and nature
              of Tanio social complexity.

