Title       : Characterizing the Importance of Mafic Sources for Mantle-Derived Magmatism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0106475

Award Number: 0106475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Carlson carlson@dtm.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0106475
Carlson

This study is examining the importance of mafic
              (pyroxene/garnet/mica dominated rock types) as opposed to peridotitic
              (olivine-dominated rock types) sources for mantle-derived magmas.  Though
              generally present only in volumetrically small amounts compared to peridotite,
              mafic material in the mantle potentially can contain a large fraction of the
              mantle's incompatible elements, including major elements such as sodium, iron,
              calcium and aluminum.  Consequently, mafic components in the mantle can
              influence the composition of melts produced in the mantle to a degree
              disproportionate to their volume.  Given that the incompatible element
              abundances in melts are used to infer mantle properties such as temperature,
              bulk-composition, and geodynamic history, the participation of mafic material
              in the melting process may lead to erroneous conclusions regarding mantle
              properties in models where only peridotitic sources are
              considered.

Detecting the contribution of mafic source components is
              difficult because many of the properties of mantle melts will be influenced by
              the predominance of peridotitic wall rock.  Commonly used radiogenic isotope
              systems such as rubidium-strontium, samarium-neodymium and uranium-lead are not
              sensitive indicators of a mafic source since both mafic and peridotitic
              materials can have similar parent daughter ratios for these systems.  In
              contrast, the ratio of rhenium to osmium is dramatically different between
              mafic and peridotitic materials, which makes this radiometric system very
              sensitive to reflecting the abundance of mafic material in the source of a
              mantle derived melt.  In addition, when a mafic source contribution is
              detected, the lutetium-hafnium isotopic system potentially is capable of
              discriminating between a mafic source produced by shallow (spinel stability)
              melting as opposed to deep (garnet stability) melting.

In order to determine
              whether or not mafic source materials contribute significantly to mantle
              derived magmas, this study is examining the osmium and hafnium isotopic
              composition of mafic-alkalic magmas erupted in a variety of tectonic settings
              in the western US, Italy, Brazil, and Siberia. These compositions represent
              small volume melts of the mantle that may preferentially sample a mantle mafic
              component.  Defining the chemical characteristics in these small volume melts
              that can be attributed to mafic sources will allow these signatures to be more
              unambiguously identified in larger volume magmas (ocean ridge, ocean island,
              and continental flood basalts) where the percentage of melt from a mafic source
              may be small in comparison to melt from surrounding peridotite.  The study will
              also produce radiogenic isotope data for mafic xenoliths from the mantle
              beneath southern Africa and the western US to better define the expected range
              of isotopic compositions of mafic material in the mantle.  Understanding the
              compositional characteristics of the source materials of mantle-derived magmas
              is critical to their use as tracers of mantle temperature variations,
              compositional heterogeneity in the mantle, and the geodynamics of mantle
              convection and mixing.


