Title       : Developing Auto Tutor for Computer Literacy and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0106965

Award Number: 0106965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1274075            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Graesser a-graesser@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Max H. Garzon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiangen Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip M. Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natalie Person  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Tutoring Research Group at the University of Memphis has developed a
              computer tutor (called AutoTutor) that simulates the discourse patterns and
              pedagogical strategies of unaccomplished human tutors. The typical tutor in a
              school system is unaccomplished in the sense that the tutor has had no training
              in tutoring strategies and has only introductory-to-intermediate knowledge
              about the topic. The development of AutoTutor was funded by an NSF grant (SBR
              9720314, in the Learning and Intelligent Systems program). The discourse
              patterns and pedagogical strategies in AutoTutor were based on a previous
              project that dissected 100 hours of naturalistic tutoring
              sessions.

AutoTutor is currently targeted for college students in
              introductory computer literacy courses, who learn the fundamentals of hardware,
              operating systems, and the Internet. Instead of merely being an information
              delivery system, AutoTutor serves as a discourse prosthesis or collaborative
              scaffold that assists the student in actively constructing knowledge. AutoTutor
              presents questions and problems from a curriculum script, attempts to
              comprehend learner contributions that are entered by keyboard, answers student
              questions, formulates dialog moves that are sensitive to the learner's
              contributions (such as short feedback, pumps, prompts, assertions, corrections,
              and hints), and delivers the dialog moves with a talking head. The talking head
              displays emotions, produces synthesized speech with discourse-sensitive
              intonation, and points to entities on graphical displays. AutoTutor has seven
              modules: a curriculum 
script, language extraction, speech act classification,
              latent semantic analysis (a statistical representation of domain knowledge),
              topic selection, dialog management, and a talking head. Evaluations of
              AutoTutor have shown that the tutoring system improves learning with an effect
              size that is comparable to typical human tutors in school systems, but not as
              high as accomplished human tutors and intelligent tutoring systems. The dialog
              moves of AutoTutor blend in the discourse context very smoothly because
              students cannot distinguish whether a speech act was generated by AutoTutor or
              a human tutor.

The proposed research will substantially expand the
              capabilities of AutoTutor by designing the discourse to handle more
              sophisticated tutoring mechanisms. These mechanisms should further enhance the
              active construction of knowledge. One enhancement is to get the student to
              articulate more knowledge, with more formal, symbolic, and precise
              specification; if the student doesn't say it, it is not considered covered by
              AutoTutor. Another enhancement is to set up the dialog so that it guides the
              user in manipulating a 3-dimensional microworld of a physical system; the
              student attempts to simulate a new state in the physical system by manipulating
              parameters, inputs, and formulae. The proposed research will develop AutoTutor
              in the domains of both computer literacy and Newtonian physics, so we will have
              some foundation for evaluating the generality of AutoTutor's mechanisms.
              AutoTutor has been designed to be generic, rather than domain-specific; an
              authoring tool will be developed that makes it easy for instructors to prepare
              new material on new topics. After the new versions of AutoTutor are completed,
              we will evaluate its effectiveness on learning gains, conversational
              smoothness, and pedagogical quality. During the course of achieving these
              engineering and educational objectives, the proposed project will
conduct
              basic research in cognitive psychology, discourse processes, computer science,
              and
computational linguistics. This research cuts across quadrant 2
              (behavioral, cognitive, affective, and social aspects of human learning) and
              quadrant 3 (SMET learning in formal and informal educational settings).

