Title       : Coseismic and Postseismic Deformation from the 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0106695

Award Number: 0106695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Segall segall@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1322,1576,5924,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Segall 
0106695 

The Mw = 7.5, September 21, 1999 Chi-Chi, Taiwan earthquake
              occurred in the center of a dense GPS network operated by the Taiwanese. 
              Coseismic displacements were measured at 128 stations, with magnitudes of up to
              12 meters.  A remarkable set of transient postseismic deformation signals were
              also recorded.  Several continuously recording GPS stations measured transient
              signals with amplitudes of more than 10 cm in both the vertical and horizontal
              components. The dense spatial coverage and extraordinary signal to noise ratio
              make the coseismic and postseismic deformation fields of the Chichi earthquake
              arguably the best ever recorded.  

Preliminary analysis of the coseismic
              displacements demonstrate that the earthquake was caused by an east-dipping
              thrust, consistent with field and seismological observations.  However, the GPS
              data can not be fit with slip on a single fault surface.  The surface rupture
              undergoes a 90 degree bend at its northern end, with a ~15 km long east-west
              trending break.   Aftershock focal mechanisms suggest strike slip motion on
              this E-W striking branch. The GPS data, however, are best fit with a curved
              dipping fault with oblique slip on both the N-S trending and E-W trending
              segments.  The preferred model explains 98% of the variance in the data. The
              residuals, however, are far too large, and spatially coherent to be explained
              by measurement error.  The Chelungpu fault, is part of a fold thrust system,
              which emplaced older and stiffer rocks over sediments and the corresponding
              spatial variations in elastic properties may bias the modeling.  The
              investigators and their Taiwanese collaborators propose an exhaustive analysis
              of the coseismic deformation accounting for vertical and lateral variations in
              elastic properties, non-planar fault geometry, spatial variations in slip, and
              possibly effects of irregular surface topography.  

As exciting as the
              coseismic displacements are, the postseismic deformations are even more
              significant.  Accelerated post earthquake deformation has been known for
              decades, however the physics of the phenomenon are poorly understood. 
              Afterslip, viscous flow of the lower crust and upper mantle, and poroelastic
              relaxation have all been proposed to explain transient postseismic deformation.
               Theoretical studies abound; the problem has been a lack of defining data sets.
               The data from the Chichi earthquake is of such high signal to noise ratio that
              we hope to finally answer these long standing problems.  Specifically, the
              investigators propose an intensive modeling effort to compare predictions from
              viscoelastic, poroelastic, and afterslip models to the data. Preliminary
              results suggest that afterslip provides a reasonable fit to the data from the
              first 100 days after the mainshock, although much more analysis is needed. 
              Inversion of the GPS data will reveal the spatiotemporal evolution of
              postseismic slip.  

These results will have important implications for the
              tectonics of collision zones.  Numerous models of fold thrust belts show faults
              merging into a master decollement beneath Taiwan.  By determining the geometry
              of the Chelungpu fault at seismogenic and subseismogenic depths the
              investigators will provide important insights into the structure of this
              classic collisional orogen.  The investigators plan to develop models that both
              fit interseismic geodetic data and yield geologically reasonable displacements
              when integrated over multiple earthquake cycles.  The proposed research will
              support tow Ph.D projects in an extensive collaboration with Taiwanese
              colleagues at the Institute of Earth Sciences, Academica Sinica Taiwan.

