Title       : A Workshop on Earth Systems Engineering: A Civil, Environmental, and
               Architectural Engineering Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2001      
File        : a0106516

Award Number: 0106516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard P. Amadei amadei@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vijay K. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              With a current population of 6 billion, there is growing recognition that humans
              are altering the Earth's natural systems at all scales from local to global at
              an unprecedented rate in the human history. In general, most human-made
              projects involve the interactions of non-natural systems (such as machines or
              infrastructures) with natural systems (biosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere).
              Engineering, being a central element of human society, needs to understand and
              take into account the relationships between natural and non-natural systems
              when creating structures needed to sustain the quality of life of current and
              future generations. 

Traditionally, engineering practice and engineering
              education have been based on the paradigm of control of nature rather than
              cooperation with nature. In this paradigm, humans and the natural world are
              divided. As a result, past engineering achievements have often been developed
              without considering their social, economic and environmental impacts on natural
              systems. A worldwide transition to a more holistic approach to engineering
              requires a major paradigm shift from control of nature to participation with
              nature. For example, the question of what represents a sustainable engineering
              structure or system is still an open-ended question that needs to be addressed
              and clarified by engineers.

Engineers need to be given a much broader and
              integrated education than what is traditionally taught in engineering curricula
              today. For example, an ability to understand how engineering structures adapt
              and adjust to natural systems is critical. It is clear that engineers of the
              21st century will be called to make decisions in a professional environment
              where they will have to interact with others from many technical and
              non-technical disciplines. 

In response to the global nature of the problems
              that Earth is facing today and is likely to face in the near future and in view
              of the complexity of the interaction between natural and natural systems, we
              are developing a new initiative called Earth Systems Engineering (ESE) in the
              Department of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering at the
              University of Colorado at Boulder. 

As a first step in this initiative, we
              are planning to conduct an international workshop on ESE on October 4-6, 2001
              on the CU Boulder campus. The workshop will be three days in length and will
              bring together industry, government and university participants from
              engineering, physical sciences, biological sciences, and social sciences. The
              overall purpose of the workshop is three-fold: (1) provide an intellectual
              framework for interdisciplinary exchange, (2) provide recommendations on the
              future course of engineering education, research, and practice in the
              understanding of the interaction between natural and non-natural systems at
              multiple scales from local to regional and global, and (3) recommend new
              engineering concepts in water resources, geomechanical, environmental, and
              other sub-fields in Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering. More
              specifically, the workshop will consider the interaction of natural systems
              with non-natural systems such as civil, environmental and architectural
              infrastructures (e.g. the built environment). All three components of ESE
              research, education and outreach will be addressed throughout the
              workshop.




