Title       : Feedforward Control of Data Rate in Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0106716

Award Number: 0106716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Semyon M. Meerkov smm@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre T. Kabamba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Modern wireless networks use feedback control of transmit power to
              accommodate changing channel conditions, such as propagation loss, shadowing,
              multi-user interference, etc. This proposal suggests the utilization of
              feedforward control of data rate, in addition to the existing power control
              schemes, in order to more effectively combat these disturbances and, in
              addition, accommodate channel model uncertainties. These controllers use the
              bit error frequency, observed in the previous packet, in order to calculate the
              data rate of the packet to be transmitted next. Our preliminary results
              indicate that ideally this approach leads to a minimum of 20% throughput
              improvement, without additional power expenditures, or to a minimum of 30%
              decrease of transmit power, without decreasing the throughput. In some
              scenarios, this approach may lead to as much as 300% of throughput improvement
              or to 600% of power saving. Moreover, the efficacy of this
approach is
              independent of whether a single or multi-user environment is considered, and no
              data rate wars take place.
     The efficacy of feedforward data rate control
              is mainly due to the following two reasons:
(a) Unlike feedback power control,
              which adapts relatively slowly due to a finite step of power increase/decrease,
              feedforward data rate control adapts in the span of one packet transmission
              time. This leads to a more effective rejection of fast disturbances, such as
              the level of shadowing. The above-mentioned minima of throughput increase and
              power decrease are due to this fast adaptation capability.
(b) Unlike feedback
              power control, which does not adapt to channel uncertainties (e.g., whether the
              channel is AWGN or Rayleigh), feedforward data rate control does accommodate
              these effects. The above-mentioned three-fold in-crease of the throughput and
              six-fold decrease of power are exactly due to this fact.
The approach to the
              development of feedforward data rate controllers, considered in this proposal,
              is based on the following three steps:                                         
                                                                                             
                        (i) First, a non-causal and non-realistic but optimal feedforward
              data rate controller is designed. It is non-causal because it calculates the
              optimal data rate as a function of bit error probability in the packet yet to
              be transmitted.  It is non-realistic, because it uses the probability of bit
              error rather than the frequency of this event. It is designed solely in order
              to derive the least upper bound of the achievable throughput.
(ii) Next, this
              controller is causified and made realistic. The causification is achieved by
              making the data rate of each packet a function of bit error probability in the
              previous packet. It is made realistic by using the frequency of bit error
              rather than its probability. Thus, an implementable controller is obtained and
              its performance is evaluated. It is shown that causification leads to a
              relatively small decrease of performance for all practical speeds of mobiles.
              However, using frequencies instead of probabilities may lead to a substantial
              performance loss. Thus, a certain level of filtering of bit error frequency is
              necessary.
(iii) Finally, a filtered version of the above implementable
              controller is introduced and it is shown that a right level of filtering leads
              to an efficient performance. At this point, this level of filtering is
              investigated only experimen-tally (i.e., numerically), and a rigorous method
              for designing right filters is, along with others, a problem to be addressed in
              the proposed research.
     Based on the results to-date briefly mentioned
              above, the main tasks of the proposed research are as follows:
1. Develop
              methods for design of implementable feedforward data rate controllers for
              wireless networks.
2. Quantify the level of throughput increase and/or
              transmit power decrease when this technology is used.
3. Develop an
              architecture in which feedforward data rate control can be used in both
              cellular and ad-hoc environ-ments.
     The impact of the proposed research is
              in providing wireless network designers with a new method for combating channel
              disturbances and uncertainties.
