Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A Sequence-, Chemo-, and Biostratigraphic Study of Late
               Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin, Mackenzie Mountains, N.W.T.,
               Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0106885

Award Number: 0106885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Lieberman blieber@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
Collaborative Research: A Sequence-, Chemo-, Biostratigraphic Study
              of Late Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin, Mackenzie Mountains,
              Canada

	This project investigates how early episodes of animal evolution,
              which occurred roughly 520 million years ago during the so-called Cambrian
              radiation, were influenced by environmental changes.  To investigate these
              issues we will study the sedimentology, paleontology, and geochemistry of the
              Early Cambrian rocks of the Mackenzie Mountains, Northwest Territories, Canada.
               This is a remote location, but it has a remarkably complete geological record
              for the Early Cambrian interval.  This gives us a window into the life forms
              and environments of both shallow and deep water settings, a situation found
              nowhere else for this time period.
	The types of environmental changes we will
              study include both changes in the relative level of the seas as well as
              temperature changes: the two are partly linked.  During the Cambrian radiation
              there may have been rapid oscillations between relatively warm and cold
              climates.  To determine the nature of these environmental changes, it is
              necessary to understand the variations in the rock types, which we will study
              in detail.  It is also necessary to study when these variations occurred; this
              we will accomplish by documenting the sequence of fossil species and through
              use of chemical isotopes.  Evolutionary changes and extinction events in this
              region, and elsewhere, and their relationship to the environmental changes,
              will also be documented.  In this manner, we will not only come to better
              understand the nature of the environmental changes that occurred during this
              critical interval in earth history, but we will also determine how one of the
              key episodes in the history of life may have been fundamentally driven by
              climatic changes.

