Title       : Fe-Mg Interdiffusion in Olivine and Magnesiowüstite Under Hydrous Conditions:
               Implications for Mantle Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0106981

Award Number: 0106981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222700             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kohlstedt dlkohl@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kohlstedt
EAR-0106981

Support is requested to complete our experimental
              investigation designed to quantify the dependence of the kinetics of Fe-Mg
              interdiffusion in olivine and magnesiowustite on water/hydroxyl concentration
              is proposed.  For many nominally anhydrous minerals, a small amount of 'water'
              significantly enhances many, if not all, diffusion-dependent properties
              including creep rate, dislocation recovery kinetics, electrical conductivity
              and ionic diffusion.  In most cases, however, these observations are only
              qualitative.  Does the presence of water enhance diffusivity or rate of creep
              ... yes or no?  We have just recently determined a quantitative relationship
              between diffusivity and water/hydroxyl content (water fugacity) for olivine;
              none exists for magnesiowustite.  To utilize observations determined from
              laboratory experiments to develop models of the geochemical evolution and
              geodynamical behavior of the mantle, it is critical to quantify the dependence
              of kinetic properties on water content.
	Therefore, a laboratory study is
              proposed to extend our investigation of the dependence of Fe-Mg
              interdiffusivity on water concentration in olivine and to include
              magnesiowustite.  High-temperature, high-pressure diffusion experiments are
              being carried out on single crystals at controlled water fugacities at
              pressures in the range 0.05 to 15 GPa.  Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy
              (RBS) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) are employed to measure the
              resulting diffusion profiles.  Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses are
              used to determine the hydroxyl concentration.  In addition, transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM) and x-ray diffraction analyses are employed to check
              for the presence of humite-like layers.  For olivine, experiments are needed to
              determine the dependence of diffusivity on temperature and pressure as well as
              to verify our initial measurement of the dependence of diffusivity on water
              fugacity.   For magnesiowustite, all of these experiments are needed.
	An
              important goal of our experiments is to determine quantitative relationships
              between cation (Fe-Mg) diffusivity and water/hydroxyl concentration for two
              important mantle minerals under well-defined thermochemical conditions.  The
              proposed research is designed to use these results in the context of point
              defect thermodynamics to gain a fundamental understanding of the mechanism(s)
              by which water influences transport properties such as ionic diffusion and
              electrical conductivity.  The resulting theoretical framework is essential for
              reliably extrapolating laboratory results to mantle environments and for
              utilizing experimental observations to develop models of the dynamic behavior
              of the Earth's interior.

