Title       : Seismic Daylight Imaging: A New Passive-Seismic Method to Image Basin and
               Crustal Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0106693

Award Number: 0106693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon L. Klemperer sklemp@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Claerbout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0106693 (PH # 21x)

Title: "Seismic Daylight Imaging:
              A new passive-seismic method to image 
basin and crustal structure" 

PI's:
              Klemperer and Claerbout, Stanford Univ.

We are developing a new
              passive-seismic imaging technique that we call "Seismic Daylight Imaging"
              (SDI), and will test its ability to image basin and crustal structure beneath
              the San Clara Valley in the San Francisco Bay area, California.  We hope SDI
              can supplement more costly active-source (i.e., typically small dynamite
              explosions) seismic imaging, and even possibly supplant active-source shooting
              in cases where extreme building density and cultural noise precludes the
              traditional active-source methodology.  We will produce a seismic image of the
              crustal structure beneath the Santa Clara Valley, similar to one produced by an
              active-source seismic survey, but with less resolution.  Thus we will add to
              existing knowledge of central California tectonics by delineating important
              crustal structures such as midcrustal detachments and sedimentary basin depths.
               We will also improve microzonation of earthquake hazards in Santa Clara Valley
              by constraining basin depths and velocity profiles.

SDI is a relatively
              simple, but time consuming process.  Using existing data recently acquired in
              the Santa Clara Valley Seismic Experiment (SCVSE), seismic traces from the
              entire data set will be cross-correlated, one hour at a time, beginning with
              the vertical channel, and stacked.  The cross-correlations will result in a
              cube of virtual seismic shot records, which will then be migrated to produce a
              3-D seismic image of crustal structure beneath the Santa Clara Valley.  Our SDI
              image will be compared with a linear high-resolution active-source seismic
              survey that has recently been conducted by the USGS in the same area.


