Title       : The Origin of Geographic Diversity in the Bahamian Land Snail Cerion: The Fossil
               History of Modern Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0106936

Award Number: 0106936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Goodfriend glenng@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myroslav G. Harasewych  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The origin of geographic diversity in the Bahamian land snail
              Cerion: the fossil history of modern patterns

Glenn A.Goodfriend, Stephen J.
              Gould, and M. G. Harasewych
EAR-0106936

	The land snail Cerion is noteable
              for its extreme geographic diversity in shell morphology: very different forms
              occur adjacent to each other, with steep character gradients between them. 
              This study is aimed at revealing the history and possible causes of the
              geographic diversity along a stretch of ca. 12 km of the east coast of Long
              Island, Bahamas, where 5 distinctive forms occur.  Starting with the geographic
              patterns of the modern (living) forms, we will follow these patterns back in
              time through excavation and analysis of the Holocene fossil record of the
              snails present in the eolian sand deposits along the coast.  Ca. 20-35 shells
              from each of ca. 25-30 sites will be dated by amino acid racemization
              (calibrated against a series of radiocarbon ages) and analyzed morphmetrically
              to obtain temporal and geographic series.  PIs will evaluate several
              alternative scenarios concerning the origin of geographic diversity in these
              snails:
1. The patterns are relatively stable and old, resulting from in situ
              differentiation of geographically continuous populations of snails.  Selection
              would be the primary cause of geographic diversity.
2. Geographic patterns are
              relatively dynamic and result from population dynamic processes such as
              dispersal and extirpation.  These patterns could have various origins:
a.
              Destriuction of Cerion populations across a broad region by, e.g., a hurricane,
              opens up a broad region for recolonization by snails originating from nearly
              sources or long-distance dispersal; the populations expand and meet.  Broad
              scale environmental events would be the primary control of geographic
              diversity.
b. Cerion populations are typically in a state of flux, with local
              extirpations and re-establishment of populations, sometimes from long-distance
              dispersal.  Stochastic population processes and smaller scale environmental
              events (e.g., washover fans from storms) would be the primary control.
Based
              on preliminary results, we can expect to have a detailed record of Cerion back
              to ca. 5000-6000 yr BP.  A parallel study will look at the relationships of
              living forms using mDNA sequences.  These studies will contribute to
              understanding the origin and maintenance of geographic diversity of
              organisms.

