Title       : Problems in Probabilistic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0106589

Award Number: 0106589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85533              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Sudakov bsudakov@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              1. The proposed project covers several topics in Probabilistic
Combinatorics. 
              The first group of questions is about graph colorings.
It mainly deals with
              the study of chromatic and choice numbers of
graphs satisfying certain local
              conditions. One of the open problem
which investigators will study is bounding
              the chromatic number of a
graph G with maximum degree d, which contains no
              copy of a fixed graph
H. A variant of this problem was posed already twenty
              years ago by
Komlos and Szemeredi and so far it was solved only for some
              special
cases. Investigator also plans to work on a few related
              questions
about vertex list coloring and acyclic edge coloring of
              graphs.
Another set of questions is about asymptotic properties of random
              graphs
and random regular graphs. Here investigators goal is to
              understand
the distribution of independent sets of nearly optimal size in
              sparse
random graphs, and use this to determine the asymptotic behavior
              of
its choice number. It is sometimes the case that an existence
              proof,
supplied by the probabilistic method, is not sufficient and it
              is
better to have an explicit construction. One of the major open
problems in
              this field is to construct exponentially large graphs,
without a clique or an
              independent set of size k. In this project
investigator intends to consider
              this problem together with its
bipartite version. He also plans to study the
              properties of
pseudo-random graphs and their applications.

2. Leave nothing
              to chance. This cliche embodies the common belief
that randomness has no place
              in carefully planned methodologies.
In modern Combinatorics at least, nothing
              can be further from the
truth. Here the Probabilistic Method has been
              developed intensively
and become one of the most powerful and widely used
              tools.
Use of probability proved to be helpful in tackling many long
standing
              open problems. Another major reason for the development of
this method is the
              important role of randomness in Theoretical
Computer Science. Here algorithm
              which make random choices during its
execution proved to be simplest and
              fastest for many applications.

