Title       : ROLE: Biomedical Engineering Thinking and Learning: The Challenge of Integrating
               Systems and Analytical Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0106773

Award Number: 0106773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $542313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Nersessian nancyn@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy Newstetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biomedical engineering (BME) could be called an exemplar interdiscipline. An
              evolving field which applies engineering methods to biomedical problems, BME
              has broken down historical disciplinary barriers traditionally existing between
              the life sciences and engineering.  While BME research activities frequently
              result in clinical therapies and medical treatments for the public, the field
              remains intimately tied to the engineering disciplines.  It comes as no
              surprise, therefore, that as a novel field, biomedical engineering learning
              poses special challenges.  Bioengineers must integrate a broad base of
              knowledge from several disciplines including engineering, computer technology,
              and cell and molecular biology.  They must apply quantitative, analytical
              methods and representations to systems understanding. The challenge for
              cognitive science, if it is to play a significant role in 21st century science
              and engineering education, is to understand the nature of thinking and practice
              in interdisciplines such as BME, to investigate the developmental trajectory of
              expertise building, and to discover the ways that learning in such communities
              of practice can best be supported.  To begin this foundational work, we seek
              NSF funding from the ROLE Program to conduct an in-depth, proof-of-concept case
              study of BME research and pedagogical practices in two related contexts. The
              study objective is to discover the salient questions related to BME learning
              and practice that can guided future work in other interdisciplines while
              setting a framework for more general thinking about the extremely important
              issue of cognitive development across disciplinary and epistemological
              boundaries.

This is a three-year project aimed at both providing a base-line
              understanding of the cognitive practices employed within this interdiscipline
              and developing Biomedial Education (BME) learning environments enriched through
              this understanding of expert practices. The study will use a mixed method
              approach of cognitive-historical analysis and observational/interview studies.
              The study will examine the development of cognitive practices employed in the
              creation and use of representation in the domain of biomedical engineering.  
              The goal is to investigate how the design and use of representational systems
              or external forms of cognitive mediation support the development of this
              community and advance the understanding of BME scientists doing work in
              laboratories. Further, the study will chronicle and describe the work conducted
              in two cardiovascular laboratories associated with the NSF-funded Georgia
              Tech/Emory Center for Tissue Engineering (GTEC). The goal is to understand how
              scientists create representations in the context of their lab work, their
              meetings and their private musings, and how these coordinate between the
              material substances of their work and the underlying concepts, structures and
              processes. The study will also investigate how students/novices in the labs are
              apprenticed to the representational and methodological practices of the BME
              community. Implications from this study will be used to make recommendations
              for the two ERC-based educational programs, for the undergraduate BME program
              slated for fall 2001 at Georgia Tech and for the inaugural Georgia-Tech Emory
              joint Ph.D. program in biomedical engineering. These implications will inform
              the design and refinement of problems to be used in a year long introductory
              undergraduate BME course titled Problems in BME that uses a PBL approach. These
              problems and findings from the lab focused activities will be distributed to
              the cognitive science, engineering education and BME communities for others to
              use and build upon.

