Title       : Numerical Modeling of Strong Heterogeneity in the Deep Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0106000

Award Number: 0106000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Romanowicz barbara@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0106000 (PH #38x)

Title: Numerical Modeling of
              Strong Heterogeneity in the Deep Mantle

PI's: B. Romanowicz, University of
              California, Berkeley

This project addresses the issue of how to model
              teleseismic S waveforms to accurately account for strong 3D heterogeneity, such
              as recently found in D", that cannot be handled using standard approaches, in
              view of recent developments in numerical modeling, and with the goal of
              improving our understanding of deep mantle dynamics.

In the last few years,
              much progress has been made in the development of numerical methods adapted to
              spherical geometry and able to compute waves emanating from a realistic seismic
              source, reaching, within reasonable computational time, periods of interest for
              teleseismic studies, making no assumptions on the strength of velocity
              contrasts, and able to handle interface waves and interface topography. The
              most promising new method is the spectral element method. It combines the
              advantages of the flexibility of a finite element method with the precision of
              a pseudo-spectral method. Nevertheless this method has an excessive numerical
              cost for realistic frequencies (i.e. at least 15-25 sec). Further progress has
              been made recently by Capdeville (2000), who developed a hybrid method that
              couples spectral element computations with a normal mode solution, so that the
              spectral elements are used only in the target strongly heterogeneous regions.
              This allows one to focus on the target region and extend computations to much
              higher frequencies than if spectral elements are used for the whole
              earth.

In collaboration with Dr. Capdeville, we will apply this method to
              waveform modeling of S-type waves (S, Sdiff, SKS, ScS) interacting with the
              base of the mantle and the core-mantle boundary. We will particularly be
              interested in modeling waveform distortion due to heterogeneity, such as that
              observed in SPdKS, and SVdiff waveforms. In the process, we will also address
              issues of crust and uppermost mantle effects on teleseismic body and mantle
              waves. This work will involve adapting Capdeville's hybrid method to the 
              specific case of D", collecting an appropriate global dataset of S waveforms
              and forward modeling D" structure to match these waveforms.



