Title       : Scalable Performance Models for Large Scale Networks with Correlated Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0106640

Award Number: 0106640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor L. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Appie van de Liefvoort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   It  is well established that long-range autocorrelation and heavy-tailed
              inter-packet time distributions are dominant characteristics of modern
              multimedia high speed network traffic, determining limits to performance and
              radically influencing policies for management.  Incorporating such
              characteristics in parametric performance models has so far been difficult.    
                                                                                             
                   This project will center about the development of powerful and efficient
              models to capture network behavior for varying levels of abstraction while
              incorporating approximations to long-range dependence and heavy tails.  The
              model does not solely rely on steady state results, but rather on a finite
              horizon that can be used for online monitoring and early detection of rare
              events.  In particular, this means that time dependent threads can be modeled
              which are the root cause of such dependency related problems.  Decomposability
              techniques will be used to decrease the granularity if possible and to scale
              the model to time scales suitable for online analysis and control.             
                                                                                             
                                                    The approach will be to extend the
              successful and innovative model developed for a high-speed network.  Highly
              correlated arrival processes can be viewed as nearly-completely decomposable
              processes, which in turn impose a nearly-completely decomposable structure on
              the system as a whole.  Each of these nearly decomposed systems can be solved
              separately and in parallel and their solutions combined to accurately evaluate
              the performance of the system.                                                 
                                                                                  
              Theoretical work must be done to determine error bounds and robust algorithms
              for solutions in a wide range of applications, to allow flexible approximation
              of measured correlations, and to broaden the classes of results that can be
              computed.  Additionally, experimental work must be done to exercise models and
              compare them with published and other artifactual data.  Finally, a prototype
              software package will be developed that demonstrates the viability of placing
              this tool in the hands of practicing network engineers and equipment designers.
