Title       : Rates of Thermal and Structural Processes in an Oblique Orogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0106667

Award Number: 0106667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna L. Whitney dwhitney@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Teyssier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0106667
Whitney

Crustal thickening and exhumation in highly oblique (wrench)
              tectonic settings typify large regions of the Himalayas, Alps, North American
              Cordillera, and other mountain systems, but the thermal and structural effects
              of oblique motion on mid- to deep crustal levels of orogens are poorly known.
              Simple thermal models predict that oblique zones will experience prolonged
              heating and delayed unroofing relative to more head-on convergent zones. 
              Unresolved questions related to this model and its application to orogens
              include: What are the rates and styles of thermal and structural processes
              during oblique deformation at different crustal levels?  How does the style and
              timing of deformation change from the mid- to upper crust in zones of oblique
              deformation?

The Anatolian segment of the Alpine-Himalayan orogen contains
              both obliquely deformed and head-on deformed zones that record the interplay
              between crustal deformation and metamorphism.  In central Anatolia, mid-crustal
              rocks were unroofed by extension during transpression and transtension in a
              broad zone of shearing, with the upper crustal lid preserved in an adjacent
              sedimentary basin.  The Nigde core complex in central Anatolia provides a
              window into the mid-crust of a highly oblique orogenic system and permits
              reconstruction of the tectonic and thermal history of the upper 20 km of
              continental crust during oblique motion. 

As part of the overall study of
              the thermal and structural evolution of oblique orogens, ideas about wrench
              tectonic zones are tested using the following methods:

 Fieldwork to
              determine the distribution of rock types and structures in the context of
              metamorphic facies,  and to collect samples for kinematic and isotopic
              analyses;

 Structural and kinematic studies to reconstruct the deformation
              history of different levels of the mid- to  upper crust;

 High-temperature
              geochronology (U-Pb) and thermochronology (40Ar-39Ar; fission track) to
              determine  the timing of peak metamorphism and cooling histories of various
              crustal levels. These data are used to  determine the duration of metamorphism,
              timing of magmatic, metamorphic, and tectonic events, and to infer  exhumation
              rates/mechanisms.

