Title       : Development of Numerical Methods for Semiconductor Device Simulation and
               Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0106743

Award Number: 0106743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sigal Gottlieb sgottlieb@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will focus on two numerical techniques for discontinuous problems and
              their physical applications. Particular attention will be paid to the
              development of a numerical method and its impact on refining the mathematical
              model of the physical system. Sharp gradients and discontinuities are
              characteristic of semiconductor device simulations. While numerical methods
              have been developed to handle these characteristics, these methods need to be
              refined and tailored to capture the features exhibited by carrier flow in
              semiconductor device simulations.  On the other hand, the mathematical models
              that are used to describe carrier transport in semiconductors are constantly
              evaluated and changed.   Steady-state weighted essentially non oscillatory
              methods will be refined and used to determine the validity of macroscopic
              models of current transport and deposition in semiconductor devices.
              Discontinuities are also a problem in the determination of protein structure by
              electron microscopy. The inherently discontinuous nature of physical
              structures, and the assumption that repetition of the structure in a gridlike
              formation is a periodic function leads to slow decay of the Fourier
              coefficients. Fourier coefficient extrapolation and Gegenbauer polynomial
              methods will be further developed and applied to the field of electron
              microscopy to achieve better resolution protein structures. This has the
              potential to be added to any electron microscopy software as a postprocessing
              step, and provide better resolution structures.

Numerical methods for
              semiconductor device simulation models allow efficient and inexpensive
              simulation of the processes involved in semiconductor device production.
              However, these processes have many discontinuities that require sensitive
              numerical methods to capture the sharp changes in density and pressure without
              smearing them. Such methods, known as Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory
              methods, have been developed for use in similar problems, but are not efficient
              for the long time scales necessary for semiconductor simulations. The aim of
              this project is to further develop these numerical methods, and make them
              efficient for semiconductor device simulation on computers. Efficient numerical
              methods will also serve to compare different models, which attempt to describe
              the physical problem, and to evaluate which models best compare to reality.
              Another aspect of this project deals with the effects of discontinuities in
              protein structures studied by electron microscopy. Mathematical methods have
              been recently developed to solve the underlying problem by adding a smoothing
              step, which smoothes away numerical artifacts while keeping the real
              discontinuities. These methods have never been used on protein structures, and
              need to be tailored to it. These methods may improve the resolution of protein
              structures determined by electron microscopy.  

