Title       : CAREER: Social Bases of Politics in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9702735

Award Number: 9702735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Gibson egibson@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This Faculty Early Career Development  (CAREER) Program award integrates
              research with an enhanced teaching curriculum that stresses early exposure of
              students to filed and primary research activities.  The overall plan has two
              basic components: 1) a five year research plan involving the production of a
              single-authored book and an edited volume; and, 2) a teaching plan which
              stresses interaction between field experience, research training, and classroom
              work.  The research plan sheds theoretical light on the links between
              large-scale social changes and recent institutional changes and political
              realignments in Latin America.  It also promotes and empirically-grounded
              agenda of research on the links between social change and political change. 
              The research involves work on the recasting of populist parties in Latin
              America, as well as research exploring the broader dimensions of social change
              and democratic politics in past decades.  The education plan is based on the
              notion that students' learning experience can be greatly enhanced by first-hand
              and practical exposure to the contexts and issues they are studying, and that
              early opportunities for field research are vital to training for future
              scholarship.  Through the investigator's own research activities and teaching
              curriculum innovations, research and field experience opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate students will be expanded, and students will gain
              greater exposure to the practical contexts they are studying.  The main types
              of exposure under this plan are field research experience through the linking
              of study abroad with field research opportunities, as well as integration of
              support for primary research into regular undergraduate seminars and
              independent projects.  Student contact with activists and practitioners in the
              classroom, and student participation in individual and collaborative research
              activities, are included in this research-education activity.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
