Title       : CAREER: Dynamics of Gas-Phase Persistent Organic Chemicals: An Investigation of
               the Effect of Climate Using a Controlled Chamber
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9702532

Award Number: 9702532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keri C. Hornbuckle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9120,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9702532  Hornbuckle  Deposition of persistent organic chemicals (POPS) from the 
              atmosphere to plant surfaces may control their fate and residence  time.  POPS,
              which include polychlorinated biphenyls, polycyclic  aromatic hydrocarbons, and
              organochlorine pesticides have an  affinity for plants due to the lipophilic
              nature of the compounds  and the waxy, lipid-like surfaces of leaves and
              needles.  Because  of this affinity, plants may act as sinks for atmospheric
              POPS.  Plants may also act a temporary 'resting points' for long-range 
              transport of the compounds from warmer regions to cooler regions  of the globe.
               Whether vapor-phase POPs are taken up or released  by plants is expected to
              depend on characteristics of the  compound, the plant, and the local climate.  
               Theoretically, it has been predicted that temperature and POP  hydrophobicity
              should dominate vapor exchange.  In addition,  field data for ambient levels of
              POPs has indicated that relative  humidity and plant stomatal behavior may also
              play a role.  Research objectives in this study are to quantify the effect of 
              local temperature on POP vapor-plant surface exchange;  to  quantify the
              importance of relative humidity on POP vapor-plant  surface exchange; to
              determine to effect of UV radiation on  sorption of POPs to plant surfaces.    
               Experiments will be performed under controlled environmental  conditions in an
              environmental chamber populated with Ficus  benjamina, a common tree-like house
              plant.  Because of the size  of the chamber and its ability to reproduce
              environmental  conditions, the study provides a link between traditional 
              laboratory concentrations as a function of the three climate  surrogates.  The
              test chamber provides a unique facility for  atmospheric simulation, air
              pollution, cloud physics, and aerosol  research studies. The effect of climate
              surrogates on exchange of  gas-phase persistent organic chemicals with plant
              surfaces will  be examined in this chamber.  Climate surrogates include 
              temperature, relative  humidity, and ultra violet radiation.  Gas  phase POPs
              will be introduced from ambient air, in order to  measure, model and predict
              the dynamics at low concentrations,  and introduced via a gas-stream generation
              column.  ***
