Title       : CAREER: Structure of and Transport in Microporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a9702403

Award Number: 9702403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Deem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9231,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9702403    This is a four-year Career project. The field of
              materials science and chemistry has benefited tremendously from recent advances
              in synthesis, characterization, and processing.  Novel mocroporous materials,
              including zeolites clays, and porous carbons, are discovered and their
              properties examined at an increasing pace.  Stochastic "diversity synthesis"
              provide a new route to a tremendously increased number of solid-state, organic,
              and biological compounds, and associated selection schemes allow sorting of
              these libraries based upon physical, chemical, or biological properties of
              interest.  Simultaneously, among the most exciting developments in statistical
              mechanics over the past decade have been powerful methods for the computer
              simulation of materials.  To date these methods have been developed and tested
              mainly on model systems.  In many cases, however, formulations appear possible
              that allow investigation of the properties of novel materials of current
              interest.  Moreover,  new field-theoretic techniques in  statistical mechanics
              allow computation of  meso- and macroscopic material properties from such
              atomistic simulations.  This project relates to the Deem group's research and
              teaching interests in the area of structure and transport in disordered
              microcrystalline materials.    Diffusion is of great importance in catalytic
              sorptive, ion-exchange, and conducting materials.  The diffusing entity may be
              structural defects in the nearly-crystalline solid, catalyst particles,
              occluding molecules, reactants, or products.  The chemical and transport
              properties of the material depend crucially on the diffusion coefficients of
              the constituent species.  The influence of disorder on the diffusing species
              can be difficult or impossible to capture in a fantasize simulation.  Field
              theory is discussed as a possible means to mitigate finite-size effects and to
              account for, the effect of macroscopic disorder on transport properties.  This
              approach complements microscopic molecular  dynamics calculations to provide a
              comprehensive theory for transport.    Zeolites continue to be svnthesized at a
              furious pace.  Perhaps soon the techniques of diversity synthesis will be
              introduced to the field, with a tremendous explosion in the number of synthetic
              zeolites.  The derivation of  an  atomic-scale model of the framework crystal
              structure of a newly-synthesiz              d  zeolite is a non-trivial task:
              roughly one-hundred framework structures have been solved out of  the thousands
              of existing synthetic zeolites.  A direct method making use of ideas from
              importance-sampled Monte Carlo is proposed for determining the structure of 
              microcrocrystalline materials from powder diffraction data.
