Title       : CAREER: A Systematic Study of Miscible and Immiscible Polymer Blends Containing
               a Liquid Crystalline Polymer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9702313

Award Number: 9702313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Dadmun Dad@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              - - ~    9702313  Dadmun    In this CAREER award the effect of varying the
              amount of hydrogen  bonding present in a polymer blend containing a liquid 
              crystalline polymer and an amorphous polymer on its phase  behavior and
              engineering properties will be explored.  The  amorphous polymer will be a
              copolymer where one monomer (vinyl  phenol) can participate in hydrogen bonding
              while the other  monomer can not (styrene).  The amount of hydrogen bonding 
              present between the two polymers will be systematically varied by  altering the
              composition of the amorphous copolymer.   The effect  of this variation on the
              phase `ehavior and, consequently the  engineering properties (i.e. storage and
              loss modulus, tensile  strength, viscosity) of the blend will be determined. It
              is  expected that the change in the amount of hydrogen bonding  present will
              produce systems which exhibit wide range  miscibility, primarily immiscibility,
              and systems where the  miscible/immiscible window is accessible.  This last
              system will  be utilized to examine the influence of the polymer chain 
              anisotropy of the liquid crystalline polymer on the phase  decomposition
              kinetics. The results will provide a fundamental  understanding of the physical
              chemistry of blends containing a  liquid crystalline polymer which can be
              utilized in the  development of novel materials with tunable properties.    The
              preparation of undergraduate and graduate students for  careers demands
              different emphases from an instructor/advisor.  Faculty primarily interact with
              undergraduate students via the  classroom while the maturation of graduate
              students involve  learning in both the classroom and the laboratory. 
              Therefore, a  description of a teaching philosophy which is followed is 
              presented.  A summary of the proposed teaching philosophy is to  utilize
              effective teacher-student interaction to insure that  students learn and
              understand the desired curriculum; to make  chemistry accessible  through more
              everyday examples; to inspire students to think  a nalytically by detailing
              complex  relationships in lecture and in workshops; and to prepare  students
              for a vocation by introducing  them to the methods by which chemical concepts
              are utilized in  industry via industrial visitors and  trips to local chemical
              plants, by attacking and solving problems  as groups, and by introducing  them
              to common engineering principles.  %%%  The proposed research program will
              examine how manipulation of  the microscopic  structure of high performance,
              liquid crystalline polymers can be  utilized to create new materials  with
              target properties.  It is hoped that the results will  provide fundamental
              information which can  be used to guide product development such that the
              desirable  characteristics of liquid crystalline  polymers can be efficiently
              exploited commercially.  ***
