Title       : CAREER: Laser Spectroscopy for Real World Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9702087

Award Number: 9702087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Chen pchen@spelman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spelman College
	      350 Spelman Lane S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303144346    404/681-3643

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  development of laser
              based single wavelength detection  spectroscopy as a highly sensitive and
              selective detection  scheme.  Professor Chen and his undergraduate students at 
              Spellman College will experimentally determine the capabilities  of this
              detection scheme as applied to Raman and resonance Raman  spectroscopy.  The
              objective is to characterize the extent to  which unwanted spectral
              interferences caused by fluorescence and  absorption effects can be eliminated
              from the analytical signals  being measured.  This CAREER research project will
              expose African  American women students to a newly developed laser laboratory 
              experience through hands-on experiments.  As one of the nation's  two
              Historically Black Colleges and Universities for women, this  underrepresented
              minority student population at Spellman College  will have the opportunity to
              use this new laser laboratory and be  stimulated to consider the opportunities
              for them in science and  engineering as career options.  The development and
              characterization of laser based methods for  quantitative analysis in a broad
              range of scientific areas is the  focus of this CAREER research project. 
              Single wavelength  detection spectroscopy will be studied by Professor Chen and
              his  students at Spellman College in the new laser based laboratory  that has
              already been developed.  Undergraduate students in this  women's Historically
              Black College and University institution  will gain hands-on experience in the
              operation and use of lasers  in state-of-the-art analytical measurements.  An
              innovative  course integrating lasers, optics, and spectroscopy is being 
              taught using this laboratory facility through a cooperative  effort by
              chemistry, physics, and mathematics faculty.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
