Title       : CAREER: Evolution of Dislocation Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9702234

Award Number: 9702234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Selinger selinger@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702234  Selinger  This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member which 
              combines a research program of computational/theoretical  materials science
              with a teaching program affecting both  undergraduate and graduate students.   
              The educational component of this award includes working on  a
              multidisciplinary team to revise the science curriculum  for non-science majors
              (with a particular emphasis on  elementary education majors); participating in
              a project to  bring advanced computing into the high school classroom;  and,
              developing original computer-based exercises and active  group learning into
              the standard undergraduate and graduate  curriculum.     The research component
              invmlves the study of a previously  unknown morphological instability through
              which dislocations  in ductile materials can spontaneously develop disordered 
              structure under the influence of a stress gradient.  Molecular dynamics
              simulations of dislocations in three-  dimensional fcc metal crystals will be
              used as an ideal  means of finding quantitative estimates of the parameters in 
              the theoretical analysis, particularly the magnitude of the  minimum unstable
              wavelength under a physically realizable  stress gradient.  Also to be studied
              is the role of  temperature in the inhomogeneous nucleation of dislocation 
              loops, e.g., at a Frank-Read source, under an externally  applied stress.  %%% 
              This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member which  combines a research
              program of computational/theoretical  materials science with a teaching program
              affecting both  undergraduate and graduate students.    The educational
              component of this award includes working on  a multidisciplinary team to revise
              the science curriculum  for non-science majors (with a particular emphasis on 
              elementary education majors); participating in a project to  bring advanced
              computing into the high school classroom;  and, developing original
              computer-based exercises and active  group learning into the standard
              undergraduate and graduate  curriculum.    The  research component involves
              both theoretical and  computational research on the formation and structure of 
              defects in metals which affect their mechanical properties.  These studies will
              not only produce a fundamental  understanding of these important effects, but
              will also  practical applications to failure processes in structural  metals. 
              ***
