Title       : CAREER: Strain Effects in Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9702725

Award Number: 9702725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Zaslavsky Alexander_Zaslavsky@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702725  Zaslavsky    Technical CAREER Abstract  The  focus of the proposed
              research is the effect of  strain  on  electronic  properties of semiconductor 
              nanostructures.  Strain-induced  effects  in  1D  wires  and  0D   dots   are 
              relatively  unexplored,  because  the  strain  is   strongly  inhomogeneous and
              lacks the in-plane symmetry  of  the  much  studied  2D  heterostructures.  We
              will study  two  distinct  classes  of structures:  silicon-germanium (SiGe)
              wires  and  dots,  and  strained  III-V wires and  rings  fabricated  by 
              regrowth.   The  SiGe  research will  build  on  our  recent  measurements   of
                strain  relaxation  and   strain-induced  quantization  in  submicron SiGe
              Quantum  dots.   The  III-V  structures will be fabricated by modulation-doping
               regrowth  of   in-situ   patterned   surfaces   etched   in   strained 
              heterostructures in a chamber attached directly  to  an  MBE  system.   This 
              research is relevant not  only  to  strained  nanostructure  physics, but also
              to  a  number  of  proposed  nanodevices that incorporate strained regions.  In
               addition  to  graduate student training, this research will provide an  ample
              number of semester and year-long projects for students  interested in
              laboratory experience.  %%%  Nontechnical CAREER Abstract:  As  technology
              advances, semiconductor devices that underpin  modern computers and lasers are
              becoming ever smaller. These  ultrasmall  structures are affected in complex
              ways  by  the  mechanical strains that arise during their manufacture.   We 
              will  experimentally investigate strain effects in two types  of  
              semiconductors:   silicon,  which  is  used  for   most  electronic circuits,
              and gallium arsenide, which is  crucial  for  applications that require very
              high speed operation  or  optical  signals.  In shedding light on strain in
              ultrasmall  structures  and gauging the promise of novel  devices,  this 
              research  will  couple  to  the education  of  graduate  and  undergraduate  
              students   in  semiconductor    physics   and  technology at Brown.  The
              education plan includes an  update  of  semiconductor  device courses and  the 
              revamping  of  a  semester-long   transistor  fabrication   laboratory,   upon 
              completing which students will have the background  to  take  on  semester  and
               year-long  supervised  projects  on  sub-  sections of the proposed research. 
              ***
