Title       : CAREER: "Universally Robust Communication over Unknown Channels"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9702015

Award Number: 9702015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amos Lapidoth lapidoth@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                An in-depth study of reliable communication over unknown channels with  memory
              is proposed. Channels with memory are important in mobile wireless 
              communication where they model random disturbances and distortions that  vary
              in time due to the relative motion between the end-users and the  dominant
              scatterers. In many applications the fast variations in the  channel law are
              impossible to track, so that the encoding at the  transmitter and the decoding
              at the receiver must be performed under  channel law uncertainty.    For this
              scenario Feder and Lapidoth have recently demonstrated the  existence of a
              universal decoder. A universal decoder can be designed  without knowing the
              channel in use, and yet it performs asymptotically as  well as the optimal
              maximum-likelihood receiver tuned to the channel in  use. The implementation of
              the universal decoder proposed by Feder and  Lapidoth is, however, too complex,
              and in the proposed study a more  efficient universal decoder will be sought.  
               The issue of the transmitter design will be also addressed, and  particularly
              the problem of designing error correcting codes that perform  well on any
              channel in some family. Such codes should perform uniformly  well and should
              lend themselves to universal decoding. The above problems  relate to an
              additional problem that will be studied, namely the  calculation of the
              compound channel capacity of a family of channels with  memory. This capacity
              is the highest rate at which reliable communication  can be guaranteed
              irrespective of which channel in the family is in use.  This capacity is thus
              the ultimate bound on reliable communication when  both transmitter and
              receiver are ignorant of the channel in use.  Extension to the multiple-access
              channel, which models many-to-one  communication (as in the reverse link from
              mobile subscribers to the base  station in cellular telephony and in personal
              communications (PCS)), will  be also considered.    While the above problems
              are asymptotic in nature, a non-asymptotic   analysis of the bit-error-rate
              that results when a convolutional code is  decoded using a Viterbi decoder
              tuned to the wrong channel law is also  proposed.    This research is part of a
              five year career plan encompassing both teaching  and research in information
              theory. The proposed research aims at bridging  the gap between information
              theory and practical wireless communications  and at simplifying some of the
              key ideas of information theory. Such  simplifications will be used in order to
              supplement the electrical  engineering and computer science undergraduate
              curriculum by introducing  the notions of entropy, source coding, and channel
              coding early in a  student's program.    World Wide Web Link: 
              http://lids.mit.edu/~lapidoth/amos.html
