Title       : CAREER: Power Electronics and Motor Drives Technology Enhancement Through
               Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9702370

Award Number: 9702370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iqbal Husain ihusain@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9702370  Husain  The objective of the proposed career plan is to develop a
              strong power electronics and motor drives program linking undergraduate
              education with graduate research at The University of Akron.  The outline of
              the proposed project is as follows.   A research project and an undergraduate
              special program will proceed concurrently.   Fundamental problems in switched
              reluctance motor (SRM) drives will be addressed in the research portion of the
              plan.   A converter topology for SRM will be developed through undergraduate
              research guided by the principal investigator and a Ph.D. graduate student.  
              The proposed research project will generate one Ph.D., two MS, and a group of
              specialized BS graduates.   The education portion of the plan proposes to form
              an NSF Power Electronics Group through selection from junior level EE students.
                The applicant (principal investigatmr) and the Ph.D. student will supervise
              the group.   The group will be guided through a comprehensive power electronics
              and motor drives program.   The career plan will initiate a continuing program
              in the area of power electronics and motor drives.  In the future, a group of
              undergraduate students and a Ph.D. student will be selected every year along
              with a suitable research topic.   The plan is expected to be continued through
              industrial sponsorship after the completion of the NSF project.   In addition,
              the PI will assemble a group of faculties from electrical, mechanical and
              chemical engineering to supervise undergraduate projects on electric/hybrid
              vehicles.  The unique contribution of the proposed research is torque ripple
              minimization simultaneous with indirect position sensing control in SRM drives,
              and a novel, efficient, regenerative SRM converter topology for low-voltage
              applications.  The indirect position sensing scheme to be developed will be
              suitable for all types of applications and will cover a wide speed range
              including zero speed.  The scheme is based on sliding mode observer theory
              where the rotor po sition will be estimated as a state variable from terminal
              measurements of voltage and current only.  The sliding mode observer has the
              advantage of insensitivity to parameter variation.  The torque ripple
              minimization scheme proposed is based on optimal current profiling of the motor
              phase currents.  The developed SRM model will consider the effects of magnetic
              saturation.  The working schedule of the proposed research has been divided
              into four phases; (1) converter topology development,(II) indirect position
              sensor development, (III) torque ripple minimization, and (IV) integration of
              the drive.  The proposed career plan will generate a group of specialized
              students from bachelors through doctoral level in power electronics and motor
              drives.  The training period for these students in industries will be reduced
              significantly.  Significant exposure of undergraduates to the research
              environment will attract more US students towards the graduate program. 
              Fundamental research, not linked to any industrial development project, is
              possible through this proposed plan.  The research will benedit the automotive,
              aerospace and consumer product industries.
