Title       : CAREER: On the Design of Randomized Algorithms for Robust Control Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9702963

Award Number: 9702963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok A. Tikku tikku@ee.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ECS-9702963  Tikku    Robust multivariable control analysis and design have
              been central problems in control theory over the last   fifteen years.  Most of
              the robust control research has been dominated by worst-(!a-,;e deterministic  
              formulations of the control analysis and design problems.  Despite the
              considerable successes of the worst-case   deterministic approach such as Hoo 
              16  and     12,13 control theory, most of the robust control analysis and  
              design problems involving real parametric and/or structured uncertainty remain
              open.  Analytical results, such   as the celebrated Kharitonov theorem  45 ,
              apply to rather specialized problems.  For general and   comprehensive
              formulations such as the structured singular value theory --- u theory ----
              analysis and design   problems have turned out to be. very difficult, and the
              focus of research has been on obtaining upper and lower   bounds on the
              quantities of interest.  Recent research on the computational complexity of
              robust control analysis and design problems indicates that   these difficulties
              are, most likely, inherent to the worst-case deterministic problem formulations
              rather than a lack   of ingenuity.  In view of these results, it appears we
              must abandon attempts to design deterministic algorithms that   perform well on
              every problem instance, and/or change the worst-case robust control paradigm 
              The focus of this proposal is on the design and analysis of randomized
              algorithms for certain very general   robust control problems.  A randomized
              algorithm is an algorithm that makes random choices during its   execution. 
              Randomized algorithms have received considerable attention in the last twenty
              years  33, 55    Surprisingly efficient randomized algorithms have been
              designed for problems in diverse areas such as number   theory  65, 73 ,
              computational geometry  57, 9 , parallel and distributed computing  39 ,
              pattern matching  37 ,   approximate counting problems  34, 35, 36, 74  etc..
              We contend the successes of randomized algor ithms in   solving difficult
              computational tasks in such diverse areas, and the apparent shortcomings of our
              current   approaches to robust control are compelling reasons to focus research
              efforts on the design of randomized   algorithms.  Our research will take two
              directions.  The first will focus on the design of (Las Vegas type) randomized 
               algorithms which deliver the worst-case guarantees we seek in the traditional
              robust control paradigm, and, at the   same time, perform well (e.g. have short
              execution times) with high probability for every possible problem   instance. 
              The second will focus on the design of (Monte Carlo type) randomized algorithm
              that deliver   probabilistic statements of the form that a "certain
              (stability/performance) property holds for most of the systems   in a
              prescribed set (given by uncertain parameters in compact sets, unmodeled
              dynamics given by balls in function   spaces, etc.) with a high degree of
              confidence."    We intend to investigate the application of randomized
              algorithms to a host of heretofore intractable robust   multivaxiable control
              problems including: 1) m analysis problem; 2) m synthesis problem; 3) fixed
              order m   synthesis problem; 4) reduced order Hoo. design problem; 4) Hoo model
               reduction problem.    The focus of our education activities over the next four
              years will be on the design/development of four new   courses: an introductory
              course on randomized algorithms; a class on the application of randomized
              algorithms to   robust control problems; a class on linear matrix inequalities
              in control theory; a course on modeling and system   identification.  The
              introductory course on randomized algorithms will establish necessary
              background in the area   and will present randomized algorithms from various
              application areas.  It will play a vital role in preparing   students to
              implement such algorithms.  The follow up course on randomized algorithms will
              stress the application   of randomized algorithms in robust control and will
              present the la test developments in the area.  The course will   target
              graduate students who want to conduct research in this area.
