Title       : AMP: North Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation (NCAMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9702237

Award Number: 9702237
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn W. Meyers cmeyers@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold L. Martin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lonnie Sharpe  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth L. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9702237  Martin    Despite efforts aimed at amelioration, the nation's cadre
              of scientists and engineers continues to reflect  an inadequate level of
              participation of underrepresented minorities.  To some extent, this is a
              natural and  inevitable consequence of individual choice, but several of the
              reasons for the lack of minority science,  mathematics, engineering, and
              technology (SMET) majors are largely reversible.  These include:  (1)  negative
              attitudes toward science and mathematics; (2) few or no role models; (3) lack
              of motivation; (4)  little or no knowledge of scientific engineering career
              options open to them; (5) engineering's unexciting  public image, and (6) a
              number of academic and cultural barriers that are particularly discouraging to 
              minorities.    Development of quality educational programs to attract and
              retain underrepresented minorities in SMET  careers is a well-established
              national priority.  This proposal describes a program designed to improve  the
              educational framework for emerging minority scientists and engineers.  The
              proposal focuses on  undergraduate education as its core component as well as
              the essential elements required to increase the  percentage of students in
              post-graduate SMET programs.    The partners in the prmposed Alliance represent
              diverse programs, yet have remarkably common  objectives.  The unifying goal is
              to build on the existing knowledge base relative to minority participation  in
              SMET fields and to expand the available opinions to enrich programs at partner
              institutions and  beyond.    North Carolina A&T State University (lead campus),
              Fayetteville Sate University, North Carolina Central  University, North
              Carolina State University, the University of North Carolina-Pembroke, the
              University  of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, the University of North
              Carolina-Charlotte, and the University of North  Carolina-Greensboro join in
              this project to increase access and opportunities for minority students in 
              SMET.  The goals of the Alliance are:  1) to  improve the quality of the
              learning environment for  minority SMET students at all schools, 2) to
              substantially increase the numbers of minority students  graduating with
              degrees in SMET disciplines, and 3) to develop and implement effective methods
              of  attracting talented minority students who would not otherwise choose
              careers in SMET.    The project emphasizes collaborative learning approaches,
              positive and sustained interaction with faculty,  intensive interaction with
              other support persons, and hands-on research and internship experience.  Using 
              this philosophy, three project areas have been chosen as crucial focal points
              for achieving that qualitative  and quantitative goals of the project.  These
              project areas utilize strategies with demonstrable effectiveness  in the
              retention of minority students in SMET.  They also focus on innovative methods
              interesting  community college students in SMET careers and concentrate on the
              transition point to graduate school.   All project areas involve faculty and
              industry members in the design and implementation of  improvements.    In this
              program, assessment is built into each project areas as a result of the
              formulation of specific,  measurable quantitative and qualitative objectives. 
              These objectives are reviewed and revised on an  ongoing basis.  Advisory
              committees composed of administrative personnel from the eight universities 
              oversee all aspects of the program.    Communication and ongoing exchange of
              ideas among partner institutions and beyond the Alliance are  primary
              objectives contributing towards the creation of permanent, positive changes in
              the infrastructure  of education for minority students in SMET disciplines.
