Title       : CAREER: Design and Simulation Tools for Networked Control of Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9702717

Award Number: 9702717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory C. Walsh gwalsh@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9702717  Walsh    The objective of the research project is to create both
              simulation and design tools for the control of nonlinear systems.  The
              educational objective is complementary, as it seeks to integrate the use of
              such tools, in the form of design and laboratory experiences, into the
              undergraduate and graduate curriculum where appropriate.  The research will
              focus on two areas which lack unified procedures, The first area centers on
              controllable nonlinear systems with uncontrollable linearizations.  Problems to
              be solved include path planning, tracking, and regulation.  The second area is
              aimed at an emerging control system architecture in which the feedback loop is
              passed through a network.  Such systems contain both asynchronous discrete
              events as well as a continuous nonlinear plant, and are best described as
              hybrid.  Tools required include accurate simulation environments and design
              methodologies for tracking and regulation.  Space-based robots, wheeled
              vehicles, underwater vehicles, and underactuated satellites (satellites with a
              reduced number of thrusters) are examples of controllable nonlinear systems
              with uncontrollable linearizations. Established techniques fail to stabilize
              such systems due to their underlying nonholonomic velocity constraints.  A
              systematic procedure for solving the, path planning, tracking, and regulation
              problems is presented.  Such procedures depend on the identification of a
              system with a normal form, where the problems are solved generically. 
              Solutions involve optimal control for path planning, time-varying linear
              control about trajectories for tracking, and periodic forcing for regulation. 
              While the author's previous work solves many example systems like the wheeled
              vehicles and some space-based robots, many important examples, for example the
              underactuated satellite and robots reorienting objects by rolling them between
              their finger tips, do not fit into the existing framework.  The project
              concentrates on expanding the framework so that systems s uch as those
              mentioned above may be included in the generic theory.  The second part of the
              research proposal focuses on networked control, which has emerged as a
              cost-effective architecture for large multiple-input, multiple-output control
              systems.  Networked control technology has been applied with great economic
              benefit to automated manufacturing plants, process control, automotive control,
              and building environmental control systems.  The author is currently studying
              the networked control of a blast furnace control system and a novel three-DOF
              translational platform.  These control systems are inherently hybrid,
              consequently basic design and simulation tools are lacking.  The project's
              objective is to develop a simulation environment and design tools,
              experimentally verified, which address this emerging industrial need.
