Title       : CPMSA: Achieving Systemic Change in Math and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9702011

Award Number: 9702011
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1951862            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Chaconas chaconas@ousd.k12.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland Unified Sch Dist
	      1025 Second Avenue
	      Oakland, CA  946062212    415/836-8203

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Getridge, Carolyn      Demographics:  The Oakland Unified School District is
              a minority  majority system with 93% of its 52,269 students ethnic  minorities,
              46% of whom are AFDC eligible, while 60% qualify for  free/reduced lunch. 26%
              are Limited English Proficient.  This  proposal targets African American and
              Hispanic students, who make  up 73% of the school population, score
              significantly below  District averages, have lower enrollment and success rates
              in  gateway math and science courses, and have the lowest college  enrollment
              rates.  All 1200 elementary and the 435 secondary math  and science teachers
              will participate directly, but systemic  reform will impact all students and
              teachers.    Background:  The District and the six federal laboratory, 
              university and community partners in this proposal have invested  approximately
              $13.5 million over three years piloting best  practices to develop a systemic
              strategy of reform.  Math/science  reform has been the District's primary
              vehicle to create a  culture of inquiry at all grade levels and to implement a 
              thinking-centered, student-centered curriculum that will lead  underrepresented
              minorities to succeed in math and science.  The  District has:      adopted
              core curricula that is aligned with state frameworks    and national standards.
                 aligned the elementary instructional program with that    curricula.   
              adopted hands-on, inquiry-based math and science texts and kits    in 1992.   
              implemented the staff development program in math and science    for elementary
              teachers.    initiated Efficacy Training, a 3 year program to train all   
              employees in processes that maximize student learning potential    and success.
                 implemented a technology plan to support professional  collaborations and
              inquiry-based    learning.  Through this effort the Distriat has gained the
              depth of  understanding of the tremendous effort required to take reform to 
              scale in a large, high poverty urban district.    Goal/Objectives: The
              District's objectives fo r this five year  proposal are to:     Double the
              number of minority students who enroll in Algebra     in grade 9 by year 5.    
              Double the number of minority students who successfully     complete the
              college preparatory a.-f. course sequence and are     prepared to enter college
              by year 5.     Increase by 1 0% the number of students who take the SAT;    
              improve math scores by 1 0%.     Increase average performance on the new
              standardized tests by     5 percentile points.     Increase participation of
              minority students in AP math and     science classes by 100%.  The District
              believes that these ambitious objectives can only be  achieved through
              sustained systemic reform.  The District has the  requisite leadership and
              political will.  System-wide  transformation now requires a bridge of new
              resources and the  concentration of all existing District resources on a set of
              well-  defined, sustained strategies that will actually impact the  learning of
              children.    Proposed Activities: The District will continue to refine 
              science, engineering and math (SEM) standards, align policy with  reform goals
              and complete a K-12 SEM pipeline for all students.  The District is
              establishing more rigorous graduation  requirements and re-writing policies for
              attendance, grading,  retention and promotion of students, and accountability. 
              Building on the successful work at elementary grades funded in  part by NSF,
              the District will continue to implement an inquiry-  based SEM curricula at the
              middle and senior high school levels,  a process tied to 1997-98 grade
              reconfiguration.  To sustain  reform on a District wide basis, the District
              will build its  internal capabilities to deliver services now provided to a 
              limited number of schools by the six partners in this proposal.  With its
              partners the District proposes (a) to create the  infrastructure to ensure that
              classroom teachers gain in-depth  experience in inquiry based instruction
              through meaningful in  service activities coupled with in-classroom support 
              and timely  access to the appropriate materials (b) build in-house expertise 
              in SEM content, pedagogy, mentoring and change management and (c)  through
              these efforts train a critical mass of classroom teachers  able to implement
              the SEM curriculum which the District then will  be able to sustain through
              existing re-aligned staff development  funds and people resources.  A new Math
              and Science Resource  Center will manage this change process, coordinate
              partners'  support services, and implement a cost effective materials 
              distribution system.  The District will establish a continuum of  student
              support and family involvement activities to address  academic, attitudinal and
              socioeconomic barriers to learning.  The District's new comprehensive School
              Improvement Systems  assessment program will ensure accountability at all
              levels and  monitor student achievement of well defined SEM benchmarks.
