Title       : CAREER: Development of Physical Programming for Robust Computational Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9702248

Award Number: 9702248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Achille Messac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a new computational
              optimization method for engineering design called `physical programming`.  This
              method is intended to make it possible to optimize physical systems in a
              computational environment that  does not require the use of numerical weights
              on system attributes.  The correct numerical values of these weights, which are
              typically difficult to identify, reflect the degree of conflict between the
              different design objectives.  Rather than using weights, physical programming
              allows the designer to express his/her preferences by specifying several ranges
              of differing degrees of desirability for each design objective.  This new
              approach is intended to bring simplicity, and reduced computational burden to
              the optimization process.  The theoretical foundation of physical programming
              and related computational algorithms will be developed, together with
              optimization visualization methods that exploit the physical programming
              formalism.  This grant also calls for the development of a practice-oriented
              course in design optimization for seniors and first-year graduate students. 
              The objective of this course is to equip students to effectively use
              optimization in industrial settings, using physical programming.    If
              successful, the outcome of this research will result in the development of
              physical programming to the point of commercial and industrial applicability. 
              In recent years, industry has significantly increased its use of optimization
              to improve product designs.  Presently, the effective and reliable use of
              optimization is not within the reach of most industry engineers on a day-to-day
              basis.  Two main reasons are: (1) the required level of expertize in
              optimization, and (2) the difficulty of expressing the designer's preferences
              using weight-based methods.  The proposed research will address the
              above-stated difficulties; and will also provide a new and more flexible
              framework to address linear and nonlinear programming problems.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
