Title       : CAREER: Biomechanical Analyses of Balance Recovery During Falls in Young and Old
               Adults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a9702275

Award Number: 9702275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl G. Thelen thelen@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9228,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702275  Thelen  The issue addressed in this research is to determine why 
              elderly adults are not capable of arresting a fall that they  likely would have
              arrested when they were young.  It is  estimated that approximately one-third
              of persons over 65  fall each year and one-quarter of elderly fallers sustain 
              serious injuries such as wrist and hip fractures.  While all  humans are bound
              to encounter disturbances such as trips  while walking, avoiding a fall
              requires one to sense a loss  of balance, process, plan and implement a
              reaction using the  central nervous system, and then execute the movements by 
              the muscular system.  This study will use both experiments  and computer
              simulations to investigate how age-related  changes in these systems (sensory,
              central nervous or  muscular) contribute to balance difficulties in elderly 
              adults.    In the experiments, young and elderly adults will be  released from
              a leaning posture and will have to step  rapidly to regain balance.  Forces,
              muscle electrical  activities and movement will be recorded on a computer 
              during these tasks.  These data will be used to compare  reaction times, muscle
              coordination and muscle strength  development of old adults with young adults. 
              These  comparisons will provide a better understanding of the  underlying
              physiological differences that put older adults  at risks for falls.  In
              addition to the experiments,  computer simulations will be conducted to further
              estimate  how changes in physiological factors affect balance  abilities.  The
              simulations consist of a mathematical  representation of the human body in
              which muscle electrical  signals are inputted and the resulting human movement
              is  predicted.  Physiologic factors, such as muscle strength and  reaction
              time, can be easily adjusted in the computer  simulations and the effects on
              the stepping movement  determined.  The computer simulations can thus be used
              to  predict how reductions in strength and slowing of movement  speed (traits
              often observed in elderly) a ffect balance  recovery abilities.    The primary
              objective of the education plan is to enhance  the continuing development of a
              quality engineering program,  at a science strong liberal arts college, which
              prepares  students for direct entry into engineering graduate school.  A
              combination of innovative instruction techniques and  research projects will be
              used to accomplish this objective.  One important component of the education
              plan is the use of  collaborative learning in the classroom.  Collaborative 
              learning involves instituting extensive efforts to actively  engage students in
              classroom discussion and problem solving,  thus making the classroom a
              stimulating learning  environment.  Another important component is the
              educating  and challenging of undergraduate students by involving them  in
              summer research projects.  The ultimate goal of the  education plan is to
              create an atmosphere in which students  experience the excitement of
              intellectual challenge, gain a  thorough understanding of engineering concepts
              and have a  wording ability to solve real engineering problems  creatively. 
              ***
