Title       : Japan STA Program: Optimization of High Altitude Long Range Observational
               Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9702689

Award Number: 9702689
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Ford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9702689  Ford    This award supports a six month Science and Technology 
              Agency Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Mark Ford at the  Mechanical Engineering
              Laboratory (MEL), Agency for  Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba,
              Japan.  Dr. Ford  will work with Dr. Masahiko Onda, Director of the 
              Instrumentation and Control Division at the Mechanical  Engineering Laboratory
              on a research project entitled,  "Study of High Altitude, Long Range
              Observational Platform."    The proposed research will focus on a variety of
              topics,  including system optimization, propulsor development,  computational
              fluid dynamic modelling, and alternative  energy source creation, all of which
              are connected to the  development of an advanced, highly maneuverable, lighter 
              than air vehicle -- hereafter called HALROP (High Altitude  Long Range
              Observational Platform).  As a multi-role  platform, HALROP will accommodate
              different payloads,  specific examples being: 1) land, sea, and air mobile 
              communications, environmental and remote sensing; 2)  observation and repair of
              the ozone layer; 3) space  observation, and; 4) cargo delivery.  The
              fundamental  requirement shared by these various applications is the long- 
              duration maintenance of a high-altitude, stationkeeping  position.  Solar
              power, active boundary layer control, and a  novel hull shape are three of the
              key technologies that will  enable this next generation airship to fulfill the
              stated  research requirements.    The proposed research addresses both applied
              and fundamental  engineering science issues, with the Mechanical Engineering 
              Laboratory being unique in that it is currently exploring  all the research
              agendas associated with the proposal.  Mark  Ford and Masahiko Onda are among
              the leading researchers in  the world in this project, and the collaborative
              effort will  likely yield positive and mutually beneficial results for  the
              United States and Japan.  ***
