Title       : CAREER: Mesoscopic Physics of Disordered Superconductors: An Arena for Research
               and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2000  
File        : a9702661

Award Number: 9702661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ying Liu liu@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702661  Liu    This  experimental  CAREER  grant  project  focuses  on  the 
              effects  of  disorder  on  meso-scale  superconductors.    A  central research
              goal is to determine experimentally whether  a negative local superfluid
              density exists.  The experiments  will  make  use  of  e-beam lithography and 
              ultrathin  film  fabrication  techniques and a well equipped low  temperature 
              measurement  laboratory.  Some specific aims are measurement  of
              magnetoresistance and electric field effect in single and  arrays   of  
              mesoscopic  superconducting   bismuth   rings;  measurement of mesoscopic
              fluctuations in magnetic fields in  Auln   alloy  and  Bi  samples.   The 
              completion  of  these  experiments  will have a strong bearing on the  question
               of  the negative superfluid density.  The proposed research will  be
              integrated into an education plan to help enhance student  learning and to
              train future scientists.  The education plan  is  designed  in  part to promote
              women's  participation  in  science,  which will be beneficial for science and
              its  well  being as a profession.  the fundamental knowledge which will  be 
              gained in this work will deepen our understanding of the  fundamental   nature 
              of  Cooper  pairing   correlation   in  disordered superconductors and may have
              significant  impacts  on several related fields.  The behavior of mesoscopic
              scale  superconductors  is also relevant in potential  applications  including
              sensitive sensors of electromagnetic radiation and  high performance low
              dissipation logic circuits.  %%%  This   experimental   CAREER  grant   project
                probes   the  fundamental  changes in the phenomenon of  superconductivity 
              as  the  samples become very small or very thin, and as  the  superconducting 
              material itself  becomes  disordered.   The  questions   being  studied  are 
              made  more  important   and  interesting by the essentially quantum mechanical
              nature  of  superconductivity.  A focus of the work is to search  for  a 
              particular theoretically possible eff ect, called a  negative  superfluid 
              density.  The existence of such  as  effect,  if  proven  by work such as is
              proposed, would have implications  for related areas of science.  The long term
              outcome of such  research   could   include  the  development   of   improved 
              electronic  devices for detecting electromagnetic  radiation  and/or  for 
              making rapid calculations.  The education  plan  included  in this project
              integrates research and  education  and aims to promote women's participation
              in science.  ***
