Title       : CAREER: Set Theortic Methods for Reconstructing PET Images From Denoised Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9702856

Award Number: 9702856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Anderson jmma@alpha.ee.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              For about the last forty years, Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been used
               to assess biochemical processes in the human body.  Using data obtained from
              PET  scanners, reconstruction algorithms generate images that contain important
               information about the functionality of an organ or region of interest.  This 
              research involves the development of fast, robust reconstruction algorithms
              that  provide accurate PET images.  With more accurate images, physicians and 
              researchers will be able to better understand the functionality of vital
              organs;  and subtle differences between healthy and unhealthy tissue would
              become more  distinguishable.  The knowledge gained through the research will
              be shared with  both undergraduate and graduate students.  In particular,
              undergraduate students  from under-represented groups will be mentored through
              summer research programs  and senior projects.    To reconstruct PET images,
              the investigator is undertaking a two part strategy.   First, Poisson noise in
              the data is reduced using a modified wavelet denoising  method.  Specifically,
              a variance stabilizing transformation, known as Anscombe's  transformation, is
              applied to the data to convert the Poisson noise to Gaussian  noise with mean
              zero and variance one.  The transformed data is then further  processed using a
              well-known wavelet denoising method due to Donoho and  Johnstone.  Once the
              Poisson noise has been reduced, the desired images are  reconstructed using set
              theoretic estimation methods.  An advantage of using a  set theoretic
              formulation is that it is flexible enough to incorporate all  available a
              priori information and to address the uncertainty in the transmission  data
              used to correct errors due to attenuation.  The resulting algorithms will  be
              tested using real phantom and subject data from PET centers at the 
              Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, MA and Emory Hospital in Atlanta, GA.
