Title       : CAREER: Host-Endosymbiont Co-evolution and Host Speciation: Wolbachia pipientis
               and Drosophila simulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a9702824

Award Number: 9702824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. William O. Ballard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9702824  Ballard  The aim of this innovative CAREER proposal is to integrate
              Dr. Ballard's research with a three-phase education, curation and study program
              that targets young women and minority groups from Chicago's inner city.  The
              research is aimed at testing a central prediction of co-evolutionary theory
              that the interaction of a host and an endosymbiont should evolve from disease
              toward symbiosis.  Specifically, the research will investigate ways in which
              naturally occurring Wolbachia pipientis, an alpha proteobacteria, influences
              genetic divergence in common Drosophila simulans fruit flies.  Wolbachia
              typically causes a reduction in gene flow between uninfected females and
              infected males and among individuals infected with different strains of
              Wolbachia.   The education program will build students' knowledge and interest
              in environmental biology and will culminate in students and teachers conducting
              a small project directly related to Dr. Ballard's research.  In phase I, 7th
              and 8th grade students will be introduced--through a series of lectures,
              exhibit tours and a "behind-the-scenes" excursion--to The Field Museum.  In
              phase II, teachers and students will be involved in discussions where they will
              learn about biodiversity and the role of museum collections.  They will also
              participate in the construction of a species-level insect database, a priority
              of the research staff in The Field Museum's Division of Insects.  In phase III,
              a subset of students/teachers will conduct a supervised study that investigates
              a specific aspect of co-evolution that directly contributes to Ballard's
              research.  The three phase program will build self-confidence and will foster
              interest in science careers by providing direct and frequent interaction with
              research scientists.
