Title       : CAREER: Electronic Packaging - Process Development and Microelectronics
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9702108

Award Number: 9702108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet K. Lumpp jklumpp@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9102,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:                ECS-9702108  Principal Investigator:        
              Janet K. Lumpp    The metalization of ceramics is investigated, which is an
              important problem area in electronics packing.   The specific research
              activities will focus on development of improved adhesion of copper films on
              aluminum nitride by investigating brazing alloys and copper electroless
              plating. Aluminum nitride is a very promising high thermal conductivity
              material and investigation into this area represents the current state of the
              art.  In order to get the heat generated in the conduction lines (almost always
              copper) from source to sink, good thermal contact  (referred to as
              metallization)) is essential.  In the plating process to be developed in this
              research, an excimer laser is used to define fine pitch interconnect patterns
              without the need for masks or photoresist patterning. The metallization
              procedures will be developed with industry collaboration and incorporated into
              microelectronics courses at the University of Kentucky (UK).    The educational
              plan involves an extremely wide spectrum of participation by local industry,
              state government, local school systems and multidisciplinary activities within
              University of Kentucky.  Specific elements of the educational plan include:
              improvement in graduate and undergraduate courses in microelectronics;
              participation in the Kentucky Electronics Education Project (KEEP) which is
              aimed at education and retention of middle school and high school students in
              technical careers; industrial input on the development of the above projects;
              and an electronic assembly project field trip for young students sponsored by
              the Center for Manufacturing systems at the University of Kentucky.  This was
              truly an integrated research and education proposal.  The goal of the plan is
              "informed students, prepared teachers, and electronic assembly curriculum
              materials generated by a partnership between the University of Kentucky College
              of Engineering, the UK Center for Manufacturing Sy stems, industrial members of
              the Microelectronics Society (ISHM) and industry sponsors such as Lexan
              International. University of Kentucky students will gain experience in
              microelectronics course, electronic packing research and introducing young
              students to the electronic packaging industry.
