Title       : CAREER: Understanding Stellar Overflows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9702484

Award Number: 9702484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Frank afrank@pas.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1215,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9702484  Abstract - A Frank    Bipolar outflows and highly collimated jets
              are nearly ubiquitous  features associated with stellar mass loss. From Young
              Stellar Objects  (YSOs) to Luminous Blue Variables (LBVs) and Planetary Nebulae
              (PNe) -  the stellar cradle to the grave - there exists clear evidence for 
              collimated gaseous flows in the form of narrow high velocity streams or 
              extended bipolar lobes. In YSOs, LBVs and PNe collimated highly  supersonic
              outflows are observed to be transporting prodigious amounts  of energy and
              momentum from a central star .  Outflows and jets must  play a significant
              dynamical role in the evolution of the parent stars.    The similarity of jets
              and bipolar outflows across the Hertzsprung-  Russell (H-R) diagram must tell
              us something fundamental and quite  general about the nature of stellar
              evolution, as well as the  interaction of stars with their environments. A
              large database of high  resolution observations , including observations from
              the Hubble Space  Telescope (HST)) are available.  A general, well tested suite
              of theory  for explaining outflow collimation and propagation  could serve as a
               powerful diagnostic tool linking the outflows to their often obscured 
              sources.  This could  initiate substantial progress in two of the most 
              fundamental issues facing modern astronomy: the need to understand  stellar
              birth and stellar death.    The research goals of this project are ambitious
              but attainable. First,  to develop and refine such a general theory of
              collimated stellar  outflows by detailing the basic physics which drives the
              collimation  process. Second, to extend our understanding of the collimation
              and  propagation of the outflows to include more realistic physics such as  the
              effect of microphysical processes and magnetic fields.  The  research focuses
              on two major investigations. One goal of this study is  to use PNe and PPNe
              morphologies to determine the route which stars  like the sun follow as they
              evolve from the Giant to the Dwarf stage.   The second project is a long range
              study of radiation-gasdynamic and  magneto-gasdynamic collimation of jets from
              Young Stellar Objects.    The final products of the research will be a suite of
              well tested tools  which can bridge the gap between the theory and reality,
              allowing the  histories of individual objects and classes of objects to be
              recovered.    The educational and outreach goals of the project are equally 
              ambitious: to use the accessibility inherent to numerical simulations  (i.e.
              graphics and animations) along with the visual power of real and  "synthetic"
              bipolar outflow observations as the core of a series of  innovative programs in
              curriculum development, interactive planetarium  displays and middle school
              outreach efforts.  The  efforts as a  "popular" science writer and as a regular
              contributer  to both DISCOVER  and ASTRONOMY magazines have provided
              experiences in effective  strategies for bringing science to wider audiences. 
              These skills, and  the fruits of the research, will be integrated into
              education  initiatives which will introduce Planetarium visitors, college and 
              middle school students to stellar astronomy as well as to wider issues  in the
              workings of science as a whole.
