Title       : CAREER: Linking Processing Practice to the Performance of Materials in Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9702017

Award Number: 9702017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew P. Miller mpm4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9702017  Miller  The   overall   objective  of  this  project  in   materials 
              processing / mechanics of materials is to establish tangible  links  between 
              the  processing of a material  and  its  in-  service  performance.  In
              general, the method which will  be  employed in both the educational and
              research components  of  the  project  is  to  use experiments to understand 
              various  aspects  of material behavior and microstructural evolution.  Guided  
              by   these  observations,  models  for   in-service  performance  which
              incorporate processing  effects  will  be  developed and implemented.    The
              research component of this project, An Investigation  of  the  Effects of Metal
              Forming Practice on In-Service  Cyclic  Performance,  is  motivated  by  the 
              need  for  a  unifying  constitutive   model  framework  for  small  strain  
              cyclic  plasticity   which  explicitly  incorporates  large   strain 
              processing-induced  effects.  It is  well  known  that  flat  rolling produces
              strong internal structure gradients through  the  thickness  of rolled plate
              material.  In this  project,  the  dependence of small strain inelastic cyclic
              deformation  on  processing  induced initial structure (in  the  form  of 
              crystallographic   texture  and  large  strain   dislocation  structures)  will
               be  investigated by taking  uniaxial  and  planar  biaxial test specimens at
              various locations  through  the thickness of rolled aluminum plate.  Both the
              mechanical  response  as well as the microstructural evolution  will  be 
              monitored in these experiments and a determination  made  as  to  which of the
              large strain effects have the most profound  influence  on  the subsequent
              small strain cyclic  behavior.  This  information  will then be incorporated 
              into  unifying  small  strain  cyclic  models which explicitly  account  for 
              prior  large  strain  metal forming  episodes.   While  both  involve 
              inelastic strains, the large deformations  incurred  during a metal forming
              episode differ sharply from the small   strain cyclic history which a component
              may encounter during  its service life.  These differences produce a
              discontinuity  with  respect to model structure.  Large strain models place 
              more  of  an  emphasis  on  the characterization  of  slowly  evolving 
              material  behavior  due  to  processes   such   as  crystallographic texture
              evolution while models  for  cyclic  plasticity must capture quickly evolving
              phenomena  such  as  that  related to the nucleation and evolution of
              dislocation  cells  and  lattice  structures.  Even though  the  internal 
              structure  produced  during forming is distinct  from  small  strain  cyclic 
              structure,  the evolution  of  structure  is  continuous across the
              forming/service interface.  It is this  continuity  of  state  evolution  which
               offers   hope   for  developing  a  unifying model framework.  The initial 
              model  will   build  on  a  currently-existing  crystal  plasticity  framework 
              while the final modeling effort proposes  an  new  micromechanical formulation.
                 The  educational  plan, Designing with processed  materials,  shares  the 
              overall goal of bridging the processing  /  in-  service   design   interface 
              and   focuses   primarily   on  undergraduate and graduate curriculum
              development as well as  laboratory  development  and  implementation.   A  
              stronger  emphasis  on  the effects of processing on  design  will  be 
              interjected into existing materials processing courses.   On  the  
              undergraduate   level,   students   will   investigate  experimentally  what
              effects forming and thermal  processing  practice  have  on the properties of
              the processed  material  and  how the microstructure evolves during processing
              On the  graduate  level,  a  new experimental  course  in  materials 
              processing  is being developed taking the general  theme  of  incorporating
              processing effects into design  to  a  greater  depth by investigating issues
              such as effects of deformation-  induced   anisotropy,   rate  and  temperature
                dependence,  instabiliti es,  and  superplasticity.   Development  of  the 
              instructional   laboratory  which   serves   the   materials  processing 
              curriculum in Mechanical Engineering at  Cornell  consistent  with  the
              proposed curriculum  changes  is  also  proposed.
