Title       : CAREER: In-situ Determination of Pesticides and Other Environmental Pollutants
               with a Fiber Optic, Surface Resonance Based Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a9702476

Award Number: 9702476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol A. Haney                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Booksh booksh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9197,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  development and
              characterization of novel fiber-optic sensors for  the determination of
              part-per-billion concentrations of  pesticides in real environmental samples. 
              Professor Booksh and  his students at Arizona State University will develop a
              variety  of such sensors including antibody immobilized devices that  utilize
              attenuated total reflectance of their surface plasmon  resonance signals in
              order to achieve selectivity and  sensitivity.  The probe geometry will be
              optimized for this  application and multivariate calibration algorithms will be
              used  to improve data quality when system parameters vary.  This CAREER 
              research project will also expose students at the undergraduate  and graduate
              levels to the power of multivariate methods when  analytical measurements
              involve complex real world samples.   Professor Booksh will also mentor
              disabled students interested in  scientific careers.  The determination of the
              concentrations of pesticides in the  environment is an important health problem
              that is highly complex  due to the variability of real world sample
              composition.   Professor Booksh and his students at Arizona State University 
              will develop fiber-optic sensors based on antibody/antigen  reactions that
              produce analytical signals that can be reliably  interpreted over time.  This
              CAREER project will provide students  with a stimulating research experience in
              an area of immense  societal importance.  The extreme sensitivity and
              selectivity of  antibody/antigen reactions coupled with fiber-optic sensor
              probes  will be exploited using attenuated total reflectance of surface 
              plasmon resonance signals that follow these reactions.  In  addition to the
              pedagogical value of teaching students useful  applications of this chemistry
              Professor Booksh will mentor  disabled students interested in scientific
              careers.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
