Title       : "CAREER: Astrophysics, Computers, and Education"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9702908

Award Number: 9702908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235574             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Blondin john blondin@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1215,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                  AST-9702908 
              Abstract - J. Blondin    Computers have made an important impact on both
              astrophysics  research and education over the last several years. Numerical 
              simulations on modern supercomputers have made great strides in  our ability to
              do research in virtually every subfield of  astrophysics, from computing
              chaotic planetary orbits to the  models of the formation of large-scale
              structure in the Universe.  At the same time, computers have become an
              ever-growing presence  in our nation's classrooms. Now, with the increasing
              popularity  of the World Wide Web, those computers are opening up the 
              classroom to the world.  This is a project to exploit this  natural link
              between computational astrophysics and computer-  based education.    The
              educational aspect of this project will draw on a variety of  different
              avenues, including the development of a new, computer-  based astronomy lab at
              NCSU for non-science undergraduates, the  creation of web sites intended to
              convey the excitement of  current astrophysics research to the general public
              by drawing on  the visually striking results of numerical simulations, the 
              teaching on numerical methods in upper-level physics courses, and  the
              involvement of undergraduates in computational astrophysics  research.    The
              research aspect of this project will focus on the  hydrodynamics of mass and
              angular momentum transfer in X-ray  binary stars. However, this work will have
              far reaching impact,  for the phenomenon of mass transfer is an important
              process in a  wide range of binary star systems. By studying X-ray pulsars, 
              where one has a quantitative measure of both the mass and angular  momentum
              accretion rate, one can learn about the physics of Roche  lobe overflow, tidal
              stream impact, accretion disk formation,  disk winds, and much more.
              Furthermore, the current wealth of  observational data from satellites such as
              ASCA, BATSE, and XTE  will greatly accelerate the progress in this fi eld over
              the next  few years, and the numerical models generated in the proposed 
              research will provide an important key to interpreting this new  data.
