Title       : Career: From Strongly Correlated Insulator to Metal: Transport and Magnetic
               Properties of Carrier Doped Insulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9702690

Award Number: 9702690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. DiTusa ditusa@rouge.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9702690 
              DiTusa    This  experimental  CAREER grant, supported by  the  Division  of 
              Materials  Research  and the Experimental  Program  to  Stimulate  Competitive
              Research (EPSCoR) will advance the state of knowledge  of the properties of
              lightly doped semiconductors and insulators,  with  emphasis on magnetic oxides
              such as those which  have  been  transformed  into  high temperature
              superconductors  by  suitable  doping. The proposed work will explore the
              magnetic and transport  properties  of such carrier-doped strongly-correlated
              insulators.  The  low  temperature  properties of  doped  insulators  will  be 
              measured  to  determine if the ground states  are  ordinary  band  insulators 
              in  the insulating state, and Fermi  liquids  in  the  metallic  state. Thin
              films of the materials will be produced  to  explore the potential of making
              electronic devices based  on  the  small  band  gaps  and  the
              doping-controllable  magnetic  ground  states  of these materials. The research
              will be integrated  into  an  education plan to help enhance student learning
              and to  train  future  scientists,  including  minority  scientists.  The  
              PI's  education  plan  involves  a physics laboratory  course  open  to 
              students  from his own institution and also to students from  the  nearby HBCU
              Southern University.  %%%  This  CAREER  program  project,  supported  by  the 
              Division  of  Materials  Research  and the Experimental  Program  to  Stimulate
               Competitive  Research (EPSCoR), involves fundamental experimental  research 
              on  the classes of semiconductors and insulators  which  have  in  the  past 
              decade been found to yield high  temperature  superconductivity  when  the
              materials are  suitably  doped  with  additional  chemical elements which have
              the effect of  producing  electrical  conductivity. The materials to be 
              studied  here  are  magnetic  in  the undoped state, but lose this property  as
               they  gain  electrical conductivity . One aspect of the work will be  to 
              assess  more  generally  the  opportunities  to  make  electronic  devices 
              based  on thin films of such materials.  The  long  term  results  of  this 
              project may include improved magnetic  sensing  devices,  such as are used in
              computer magnetic disk  drives.  On  the educational side the PI plans to
              enhance student learning and  to   train   future  scientists,  including 
              those  from   under-  represented  minority groups. A joint physics  laboratory
               course  will   be  featured  which  is  open  to  students  of  the  PI's 
              institution   and  also  to  students from  the  nearby  Southern  University, 
              which  is  in  the HBCU  class  (Historically  Black  College or University). 
              ***
