Title       : CAREER: Modeling The Failure of Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9702399

Award Number: 9702399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon M. Spearing spearing@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Spearing  9702399  Structures  made  from  composite  materials  and  laminates 
              generally fail by a combination of interacting damage  modes  operating over a
              continuum of length scales.  Design against  failure  is  complicated  because,
              unlike  monolithic  metal  alloys, no single failure mode dominates.  It is,
              therefore,  critical to develop models with a predictive capability that 
              include the effects of such damage for the efficient  design  of   structures, 
              using  polymer,  metal  and  ceramic-based  advanced  materials.  Dr.
              Spearing's core research  activity  is  the  development  of  physically-based 
              models  for  the  failure  of  advanced  materials.   These  models  will   be 
              presented  and actively communicated in a form suitable  for  use  as 
              structural design tools, in aerospace  applications  and  elsewhere.  Dr.
              Spearing has a strong grounding in this  activity  through his involvement in
              previous  projects,  in  industry  and  academia,  on  polymer  and  ceramic  
              matrix  composites  and  layered ceramic materials.   Research  will  include 
              modeling,  using closed-form and  numerical,  solid  mechanics  and  fracture 
              mechanics solutions  supported  by  appropriate mechanical testing and
              observational techniques.  The   emphasis   will   be   on   conducting  
              research   on  technologically   important  topics  in   conjunction   with 
              partners in industry, academia and government agencies.    Dr.  Spearing's 
              educational goal is to excel  at  classroom  teaching, student supervision and
              mentoring activities.   He  will  continue  to  develop a new graduate  course 
              to  give  students  a  solid  grounding in the  failure  mechanics  of 
              composite  materials, particularly focusing on  the  use  of  mechanics   of  
              materials  models  to  predict   structural  performance.  This course links
              directly to the  established  departmental curriculum, through an existing
              course  on  the  "Mechanics  of  Filamentary  Composites,"  taught   by   Dr. 
              Spearing  in  1995.  In additi on the new course  complements  the  research 
              plan outlined above.  A longer term  goal  of  this  curriculum and research
              integration is to  refine  the  teaching of this important subject to the point
              where it can  be written as textbook or as a computer-based teaching tool.  Dr.
               Spearing co-teaches an undergraduate laboratory  course  on  the  manufacture 
              and mechanical  testing  of  composite  materials,   which  provides  a  strong
               link  between   the  department's   research  activities  and  the 
              undergraduate  curriculum.  Dr. Spearing will continue to act as an advisor 
              for undergraduate and graduate students, on academic, career  and  other 
              concerns,  He  will  also  continue  to  educate  graduate  and undergraduate
              students through the supervision  of research activities.    The award of this
              grant under the CAREER Faculty Early  Career Development Program will support
              the educational and  research activities described in this proposal.  In 
              particular it will allow the investigator and a graduate  student to devote
              time to the integration of these  activities.  In addition it will enable
              increased  collaboration with colleagues, in universities, government  agencies
              and industry.  The overall aim is to achieve the  synthesis of more generalized
              models for the failure of  advanced materials, and to communicate them in such
              a way as  to inform and educate current and future generations of  engineers.
