Title       : CAREER: Faculty Early Career Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9702884

Award Number: 9702884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Arruda arruda@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Arruda  9702884       The  research  component of this proposal is  concerned 
              with experimental testing, characterization and constitutive  modeling  of 
              polymers.   The strain  rate  and  temperature  dependent behavior of
              semicrystalline polymers is  not  well  characterized  nor completely
              understood.   Existing  models  for  semicrystalline  polymers have not  been 
              developed  in  conjunction  with  a  reasonable range  of  experiments  for 
              verification of actual material performance.  There are many  technologically
              important applications for  this  work,  the  relationship between polymer
              properties and part performance  is  one of today's major engineering
              challenges.  The PI  of  this  proposal  is experienced in the design,
              implementation  and   analysis  of  mechanical  tests  and  in   traditional 
              materials  science  characterization methods  for  polymers.  The  PI  has 
              also successfully developed internal  variable  based  constitutive models of
              amorphous (glassy and rubbery)  polymers  that  accurately predict their  three
               dimensional  response.   The proposed work involves extensive  mechanical 
              testing  and  material characterization  of  semicrystalline  polypropylene  to
              relate the physical mechanisms  associated  with  deformation to experimentally
              observed results.  Also,  this   research   will  involve  internal   variable 
               based  constitutive  modeling of the strain  rate  and  temperature  dependent
               behavior of semi-crystalline polypropylene.   The  goal  of  this work is a
              model that accurately predicts  the  experimental data.      The  specific
              objectives of the proposed study are:  (i)  to  gain  an  understanding of the
              important  and  prominent  deformation  mechanisms in polypropylene  over  a 
              range  of  strain rates and temperatures through mechanical testing and 
              characterization, (ii) to determine the state of deformation  dependence  of 
              polypropylene  through  tests  on  isotropic  specimens  in uniaxial
              compression, plane strain compression  and  tens ion, (iii) to study the
              evolution of structure with  straining and quantifying structural state, (iv)
              to  develop  an  internal  variable based, three dimensional constitutive 
              model  of the deformation response and (v) to implement  the  model  into a
              commercially available finite element  package  via a user defined material
              option for verification.    The  teaching  component is outreach to middle
              school  girls  designed  to  foster continued interest in math and  science 
              based  careers.   The planned activity targets  girls  at  a  critical time in
              their education process when they begin  to  start believing they no longer are
              good at math and science.  In  middle school they are surrounded by influences 
              against  math and ;science careers for women.  Girls fail to continue  to 
              elect  math  and  science courses in  adolescence  which  quickly  steers  them
              towards non-technical academic  paths.  To emerge from adolescence with
              confidence in their math and  science abilities, girls need more encouragement
              to continue  to  elect advanced math and science courses.  They  need  to 
              understand the many varied career opportunities that rely on  a solid math and
              science education.  To become women with an  interest  in  engineering careers,
              girls need to  see  women  succeeding in their engineering careers.  They need
              to  hear  from  women engineers about the aspects of engineering  they  found 
              appealing  when the women made their career  choices.  And they need to learn
              engineering principles from women who  are  enthusiastic  about  the  subject. 
               The  PI  plans  to  develop, implement and evaluate an engineering career
              module  that  engages women faculty and undergraduates  in  teaching  middle 
              school girls about engineering.  The module involves  the  PI going to middle
              schools in Washtenaw County,  MI  to  highlight   the  research  work  of 
              women  at  universities  nationwide.  It will provide opportunities for girls
              in  the  program  to  interact with these women through the  internet   and 
              email.   The girls in the program will also  engage  in  design projects
              utilizing hands-on, team learning strategies  that  are  attractive to girls. 
              The importance  of  problem  solving  in  society and the usefulness of math
              and  science  classes  for  future career opportunities will be  stressed. 
              Dissemination  plans  for  this  outreach  activity  include  enlisting  
              undergraduate  women   from   the   College   of  Engineering  at  Michigan  to
               develop  similar  modules  in  various  engineering disciplines, and sending 
              the  packaged  modules  to  women  engineering  faculty  at  colleges   and 
              universities nationwide.
