Title       : CAREER: A Research and Teaching Plan for Computer Integrated Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9702913

Award Number: 9702913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay E. Sarma sesarma@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9702913  Sarma   This grant provides funding for the development of a new
              language and control strategy for programming computer-controlled machine
              tools. The goal is to modularize the important functions of machine control
              into convenient building blocks from which composite systems can be assembled
              rapidly. The language developed in this research will enable users to specify
              complex behaviors and coordinate them with external sensors and robotic devices
              over factory networks. Communication between devices will be standardized
              through open interfaces, which can be accessed by the user at a high level
              without a need to deal with implementation details. A prototype control system
              that interprets the new language will be implemented on an commercial
              high-performance machine tool called a Hexapod.  The system will be tested by
              conducting experiments in process inspection with measuring probes, and process
              control using force and vibration sensors. The system will also be used as a
              "glue" to integrate other technologies under development by the researcher,
              including new tool-path generation algorithms and an automatic workholding
              system.      If successful, this research will lead to improvements in machine
              and factory automation. The new language is proposed as an update to the
              machine programming paradigm that exists today, which provides few facilities
              for interaction and integration with external devices. With the new system,
              users will be able to harness new sensor technologies, or control external
              devices, by plugging them directly into the standardized interfaces. Machine
              programs can then be designed to be self-correcting by monitoring sensors to
              detect faults. This will enable a level of autonomy that not only reduces
              operating costs, but also improves quality. Multiple machines can be controlled
              over a central network to create automatic factory systems. Today such
              automation can only be achieved through expensive "customized" integration. 
              ***
