Title       : An Institutional Ecology of Law Firms in Silicon Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9702605

Award Number: 9702605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Suchman suchman@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of law firms in California's Silicon Valley, supported under
              the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program. It links organizational
              sociology with the sociology of law to explore the role of law firms, as
              organizational and legal actors, in local development.      The project
              integrates three objectives -- theoretical, empirical, and educational.
              Theoretically, the project will address ongoing debates over the
              characteristics of emerging organizational communities, over the
              interorganizational impact of the modern law firm, and over the role of formal
              contracts as economic governance mechanisms. Empirically, the project will
              construct and analyze two related data sets, one on the origins and effects of
              a key Silicon Valley legal device (the standardized venture capital financing
              contract, or "VCFC"), and the other on the structure and dynamics of the larger
              Silicon Valley legal community. The VCFC Study will allow multivariate
              statistical analysis of the emergence and diffusion of a novel contractual
              device within a new organizational field.  The Legal Community Study will
              explore the dynamics of the heretofore largely unstudied population of
              professional organizations that promulgated this legal innovation.
              Educationally, the project will introduce a sequence of innovative,
              experiential courses in legal and organizational sociology, whereby
              undergraduate and graduate students will gain new insights into the socio-legal
              environment of entrepreneurship and into the structure of professional careers.
                   The design incorporates three components -- two empirical and one
              instructional. To examine the emergence, diffusion and impact of the
              standardized VCFC, the project will compile data on approximately 300
              first-round high-technology financings, occurring from 1975 to 1990. Data
              collection will link content-analytic information on the terms of each VCFC
              with (a) contextual data on the economic and institutional conditions
              surrounding the transaction and (b) outcome data on  the subsequent fate of the
              start-up company. Data analyses will seek to identify distinct "financing
              archetypes," and to uncover the determinants and effects of choosing one such
              archetype over another. To examine the structure and dynamics of the Silicon
              Valley legal community, the project will compile longitudinal data on the
              population of law firms operating in the region -- and on the population of
              attorneys practicing within those firms -- from 1960 to 1990. Data analyses
              will examine whether the fates of these legal actors were shaped by the
              development of the surrounding organizational community and by the actors' own
              adoption or rejection of specific interorganizational roles. Finally, to
              integrate these empirical efforts into an ongoing program of teaching and
              research, the project will develop two new seminars, emphasizing experiential
              and collaborative learning techniques. The first seminar will focus on Law,
              Innovation and Entrepreneurship; the second, on the Sociology of the Legal
              Profession. The project will also enhance preexisting courses and launch a
              number of extramural outreach efforts.      Silicon Valley offers a rare
              opportunity to examine the mechanics of entrepreneurship and community
              development, and to link these crucial organizational phenomena to the
              activities of concrete inter-organizational pollinators. Previous research
              suggests that Silicon Valley law firms often play this pollinator role,
              transmitting basic operating know-how between otherwise isolated start-ups.
              Over time, it is likely that such activities have transformed the local
              business community, giving rise to institutionalized practices that today's
              community members largely take for granted. At the same time, however, local
              law firms have, themselves, experienced numerous pressures emanating from the
              turbulent environment around them. Thus, these firms must be seen as both
              creations and creators of the shifting community order, simultaneously shaping
              and reflecting surrounding flows of resources and i nformation in an ongoing
              coevolutionary interchange. A fuller understanding of this complex process
              promises to shed light on critical issues regarding organizational innovation,
              regional development, and the role of the legal profession in economic change.
