Title       : CAREER: Bioaerosols in Environmental Engineeing: A Career Development Plan to
               Expand Teaching and Research into Microbial Air Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9702165

Award Number: 9702165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Hernandez mark.hernandez@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9120,9197,9251,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9702165  Hernandez  While  much research effort is already directed at
              characterizing  aquatic  and  terrestrial microbial processes, relatively 
              little  work has approached microbiological aspects of air pollution from  an 
              engineering  perspective.  Rapid,  quantitative,  microscopic  aerosol  assays 
              will  be  used  to characterize  the  viability,  identity  and  distribution
              of bacteria and  fungi  suspended  in  indoor air.  Using direct
              epi-fluorescent microscopy, the goal of  this   work   is   to   accurately 
              characterize   the   airborne  concentrations of cellular and sub-cellular
              microbial  components  prevalent in commercial and residential aerosols.  The
              work  will  focus  on  both laboratory chamber studies and field measurements 
              to determine the biostability of airborne microorganisms commonly  encountered
              indoors.  Biostability is defined here as the ability  of  microorganisms  to 
              retain their metabolic  capabilities  and  their  physical integrity; it does
              not constitute the ability  to  be isolated or quantified by culture.    The 
              overall  goal of this project is to expand and  improve  the  research and
              teaching of microbiology germane to modern civil and  environmental 
              engineering practice.  As an educational  goal,  a  new  coursework  series on
              applied environmental microbiology  is  being    developed   for   permanent  
              integration    into    the  civil/environmental engineering curricula at  the 
              University  of  Colorado.   This  series  will  consist  of  a  total   of  
              four  undergraduate  and  graduate level courses, including  associated 
              laboratories.   The  courses will be structured  according  to  a  novel,
              problem-based cooperative learning format and taught in  a  brand  new, 
              state-of-the-art engineering  facility  specifically  designed to combine
              computer aided, multi-media presentation with  classroom   instruction  
              (Integrated   Teaching   and   Learning  Laboratory (ITLL)).  The undergraduate
              level courses will provide  fundamentals needed to und erstand microbial
              processes and ecology  in  engineered systems.  The graduate level courses will
               analyze  environmental microbiology applications emphasizing the interface 
              between    modem   molecular   biology   and   civil,   sanitary, 
              geotechnical,  and  atmospheric  engineering.   The  applications  courses 
              will  intensively examine the microbiology  of  domestic  water  supply,
              wastewater treatment, aquifer/soil bioremediation,  biofouling, industrial
              corrosion, and air pollution.  The courses  have  a  dual  purpose: they are
              designed to  prepare  practicing  civil engineers and other environmental
              scientists with a working  knowledge   of  applied  microbiology,  as  well  as
               provide   a  coursework,  laboratory  and literature foundation  for  research
               oriented students.    Results  from  this work may have several important 
              implications  for understanding human exposure to airborne microorganisms while
               expanding  environmental  engineering curricula  to  include  the  atmospheric
               environment as a biosphere.  The projected  benefits  of  this  work stem from
              the development of a robust  microscopic  technique  capable  of stringent
              microbial characterization  with  relatively  minor  modifications to  commonly
               used,  inexpensive  sampling  equipment.  Direct microscopic measurements 
              have  been  widely adopted in water treatment engineering and health sciences 
              as  they  provide  a superior basis for process  evaluations  and 
              epidemiological   studies.   These  visual   techniques   provide  absolute 
              measurements  that offer a  more  accurate  picture  of  bioaerosols   than  
              their  enrichment  based   counterparts   as  nutritional  selection and
              culturabihty do not bias the  results.  Applications  of  direct aerosol
              microscopy  include  a  reliable  means  to  evaluate  the effectiveness of
              engineered  rnitigation  methods  to  help  control  common  microorganisms 
              and/or  their  fragments  present  in  indoor aerosols.  Using  widely 
              accepted  fluorescent biological s tains and fluorescent genetic probes, the 
              technique  will  also  be  applied to  determine  the  ecological  structure of
              bioaerosols and the presence and activity of a  wide  range   of   pathogens.  
              The  project  will  directly  integrate  bioaerosol    research   into   new  
              environmental   engineering  microbiology  courses  as  well  as  into  courses
                offered   in  mechanical  engineering  and public health.   This  project 
              will  serve  to  pilot  the new arm in its service as  a  "building  as 
              laboratory"   function   for   teaching   applied   environmental  microbiology
              in a civil and environmental engineering context.  ***
