Title       : Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9702823

Award Number: 9702823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maitland Jones mjjr@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Maitland Jones, Jr. is supported by the Organic Dynamics   Program for
              his studies of reactive intermediates.  Professor Jones, of   the Department of
              Chemistry at Princeton University, uses   hydrocarbon-based precursors to
              carbenes in order to avoid interference   in subsequent chemistry by the
              more-commonly used nitrogen-based carbene   precursors and to assess the
              importance of such precursor chemistry in   previously studied reactions. 
              Formation of sterically-stabilized   bridgehead alkenes through the ring
              expansion of 1-norbornylcarbenes and   carbene interconversions via `zipper`
              mechanisms are also under   investigation.  Analogous zipper reactions of
              carboranylcarbenes will be   explored as a rational route for the synthesis of
              silicon-containing   carboranes, and mechanistic and synthetic studies will be
              carried out for   1,2-dehydro-o-carborane.  Professor Maitland Jones, Jr., of
              the Department of Chemistry at   Princeton University, with the support of the
              Organic Dynamics Program,   studies the formation and chemistry of highly
              reactive compounds known as   carbenes.  These compounds contain a central
              carbon atom to which only   two bonds to other atoms are present, in contrast
              to the more commonly   found four bonds.  Although carbenes have been studied
              for some time, it   has recently been determined that many of the reactions
              claimed to lead   to their formation in fact do not give rise to simple
              carbenes but rather   to materials still incorporating portions of their
              precursor molecules.    Professor Jones has developed a synthetic route which
              provides for the   unambiguous formation of carbenes and allows the exploration
              of their   reaction chemistry unencumbered by the complications of precursor  
              chemistry.  Given their instability, carbenes often form relatively  
              high-energy products, including molecules displaying patterns of chemical  
              bonds often assumed to be impossible to obtain.  These studies advance   our
              fundamental understanding of carbenes as reactive intermediates,   adding to
              our understanding and potential control of a wide variety of   significant
              chemical transformations.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
