Title       : CAREER: 2-Alkylidene Oxetanes: A Versatile Molecular Scaffold for New Molecules
               and Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9702106

Award Number: 9702106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy R. Howell amy.howell@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Howell's research focuses on the synthesis of   2-alkylideneoxetanes
              and their use as potential inhibitors of serine and   cysteine proteases as
              well as precursors for the synthesis of medium-ring   carbocyclic compounds and
              spiroketals.  Compounds bearing structural   analogy to simple insect
              pheromones will be prepared using the latter   methodology, which is designed
              to be simple and chemoselective, without   extensive use of protecting groups,
              while proceeding under mild   conditions.  Approaches to other functionalities
              through the intermediacy   of 2-alkylideneoxetanes will also be explored, as
              will the polymerization   of 2-alkylideneoxetanes, expected to yield
              polyketones.  Professor Howell   will seek to facilitate student and faculty
              interactions with industry in   order to achieve three goals:  (1) to increase
              student appreciation of   industrial career opportunities,  (2) to improve
              faculty understanding of   how to assist students with their job searches, and
              (3) to foster   academic-industrial and industrial-academic collaborations.  
              With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the   research
              and educational activities of Dr. Amy Howell of the Department   of Chemistry
              at the University of Connecticut.  Professor Howell examines   the chemistry of
              a class of versatile precursor molecules that, to this   point, have received
              little attention from the synthetic community.    These compounds,
              comparatively small in size but containing a number of   reactive groupings of
              atoms, permit synthetic access to a wide range of   important compounds,
              including molecules anticipated to display unusual   biological activity, as
              well as polymeric materials.  Professor Howell's   educational activities
              target the enhancement of student awareness of   career opportunities in
              industry and the development of faculty-industry   collaborations through
              workshops, in-house courses taught by industrial   chemists, and internships in
              academic and industrial laboratories.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
