Title       : CAREER: Multi-Variable Optimality-Guided Robust Adaptive Control Design - A Game
               Theoretic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9702702

Award Number: 9702702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zigang Pan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9702702  Pan  One of the most important current research directions in
              control theory is the study of robust controller and filter designs for
              uncertain dynamical systems.  It is a challenge to obtain controllers for
              systems with significant uncertainties, that would lead to achievement of good
              tracking and disturbance attenuation.  A realistic attempt to resolve this
              challenge calls for an adaptive control design that would learn from the system
              output to identify the underlying system and improve the control accuracy as
              learning progresses.    A prominent topic in adaptive control today is robust
              adaptive control, which deals with the design of controllers that are robust to
              model uncertainties, and insensitive to exogenous disturbances.  There are
              three general approaches to address the design and analysis of robust adaptive
              control systems: certainty-equivalence based adaptive control design, nonlinear
              design based adaptive control design, and worst-case adaptive control design. 
              The third approach was introduced very recently.  The main motivation for this
              approach has been the need to address the transient performance and system
              robustness of adaptive control systems simultaneously in a unified framework. 
              Identifying the correspondence between the objectives of H( optimal control
              with those of robust adaptive control, and the close relationship between
              H(optimal control and zero-sum dynamic games, this approach poses the adaptive
              control problem as a disturbance attenuation problem for nonlinear systems with
              imperfect state measurements.  A game-theoretic solution methodology of
              cost-to-come function has been developed to cope with this general problem.   
              In this proposal, we propose to broaden the third approach identified above to
              a more general setting, which we call "optimality-guided robust adaptive
              control design." It is motivated by the established relationships between
              nonlinear H( optimal control, zero-sum dynamic game, risk-sensitive optimal
              control, risk-neutral optimal co ntrol, and stochastic dynamic game problems,
              and the similarity between their respective solutions.  These relationships
              suggest that the two most general problems, are the risk-sensitive optimal
              control problem, and the stochastic dynamic game problem.  If we can develop a
              general theory of existence, uniqueness, and characterization of a solution to
              the risk-sensitive optimal control problem, then we can reconstruct the
              solution to the zero-sum dynamic game problem with the large deviation limit,
              which in turn constitutes the solution to the nonlinear H( optimal control
              problem.  Also, we can reconstruct the solution to the risk-neutral problem by
              taking the limit as the risk-sensitivity parameter goes to zero.  On the other
              hand, a general theory of existence, uniqueness, and characterization of a
              solution to the stochastic dynamic game will offer a design solution to the
              nonlinear H( optimal control problem, as well as a design solution to the
              risk-neutral problem, as special cases.  The significance and relevance of
              these problems can be best illustrated by the immensely popular active noise
              cancellation applications, where the underlying system may be deterministic,
              stochastic, or mixed.    These research effort will yield fundamental
              advancement on the theoretical front for stochastic dynamic games with
              imperfect state measurement.  At the same time, they will yield novel robust
              adaptive control designs that are capable of handling both deterministic
              (worst-case) and stochastic disturbances.  The direct impact of this research
              on the practical applications lies in the immensely popular field of active
              noise cancellation, by offering robust adaptive control laws that have superb
              transient performance, and asymptotical tracking of any number of unmeasured
              sinusoidal exogenous disturbance inputs of unknown frequency.  On the education
              side, the research development and course innovation will contribute to the
              graduate curriculum, in terms of providing simple but comprehensive solutions
              to si gnificant engineering problems ill control systems.
