Title       : CAREER: The Physical Chemistry of Disordered Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9702520

Award Number: 9702520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Colvin colvin@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,9179,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Vicki L. Colvin at Rice University is supported by   the
              Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division. The main focus   of the
              research will be the behavior and properties of nanomaterials from   two
              different aspects. The first project will address the nature of the   interface
              between nanoparticles such as zinc selenide, titania and   zirconia and
              polymers such as polyacrylates and polymethacrylates. By   exploiting the
              recent advances in the size and and surface control of   inorganic
              nanoparticles, model interfaces will be chemically created. The   effect of the
              interfaces on the bulk polymer structure will be explored   by NMR and
              thermomechanical analysis. Atomic force microscopy will be   used as a
              nanomechanical probe of the interfacial region.  The second project will
              exploit the ability to create clusters of   different sizes to probe the
              origins of disorder in glass.  The stability   of disordered silica clusters
              will be measured by monitoring the   temperature and/or pressure at which the
              systems undergo structural   changes.  The size dependence of cluster stability
              over the 1 to 100 nm   range will provide an important test for models of glass
              formation. Size   transformations will be probed by vibrational spectroscopy. 
              These projects will help bridge the gap between the laboratory synthesis   of
              nanoscale solids  and their ultimate use in real world technologies.  The
              teaching  aspect of this CAREER award will focus on the synergy   between basic
              and applied science in the area of materials. A graduate   level course will be
              developed that provides students with an   appreciation of technological
              issues. The curriculum will focus on the   technical assessment of three to
              four emerging technologies which rely on   complex materials such as
              read-writeable CD disks or electroluminescent   flat panel displays. Students
              will combine technical data from the   literature and analysis of potential
              markets to evaluate the potential   for these new applications. This approach
              will also benefit undergraduate   level courses, especially physical chemistry.
              Examples suggested by the   graduate course, such as the photophysics of a
              laser printer will be used   in lectures to illustrate the wide-ranging
              applications of physical   chemical principles.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
