Title       : CAREER: Scalable Software and Hardware for Image and Video Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9702707

Award Number: 9702707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Evans bevans@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves improving quality, reducing cost, and shortening the
              time-  to-market for image and video processing systems, such as video
              telephones,  multimedia systems, and confocal microscopes.  Image and video
              processing systems  are difficult to design because they consist of a variety
              of algorithms  implemented by a variety of electronic devices and software
              programs.  In  industry, it is common practice to divide the design of an image
              or video  processing system into simpler parts and design the parts separately.
               Until all  of the individual parts are designed and built, it is difficult to
              guarantee that  the parts will work together, and know how the decisions in the
              design of an  individual part will affect the cost and quality of the entire
              system.  As an  alternative, this research explores design techniques and
              computer tools that  allow all the parts of an image and video processing
              system to be designed at the  same time.    The principal investigator is
              establishing a research and education program in  the design and implementation
              of image and video processing systems.  The  research focuses on automating the
              design of scalable software and hardware for  image and video processing
              systems.  The performance of a scalable implementation  improves as more
              processors are allocated to the task, until the number of  processors reaches
              upper limit.  Scalable hardware can expand to a variable  number of processors,
              whereas scalable software adapts to the processors that are  available. 
              Scalable software is available on desktop computers, and scalable  hardware is
              commonly used in high-performance computing.  The education program  trains
              undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art design methods and 
              technologies.  As part of this training, the investigator is introducing new 
              courses in communication system design, image and video processing, and
              embedded  software systems.  By forging research partnerships with industry,
              the  investigator is developing new stude nt design projects to solve system
              design  bottlenecks in industry.
