Title       : CAREER: Measurement and Analysis of Particle/Turbulence Interaction within
               Two-Phase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9702723

Award Number: 9702723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth T. Kiger kkiger@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9702723  Kenneth T. Kiger  University of Maryland    The research
              objective is to advance the state of knowledge concerning particle-turbulence
              interaction in dilute, disperse, two-phase flows, through progress in
              understanding how mass, momentum and energy is exchanged in dispersed systems
              by detail experimentation, analysis, and simulation.  New instrumentation which
              will enable the simultaneous measurement of particle concentration, particle
              velocity and fluid velocity within a three-dimensional volume will be
              developed.  A scanning particle image velocimeter will be constructed using a
              high-speed copper-vapor laser, scanning optics, and a drum camera to measure
              two velocity components of both phases and the particulate concentration on
              multiple planes within the measurement volume.  The measurements will provide
              detailed information about the organization of particulates in relation to the
              turbulent fluid structure, as characterized by cross-correlations of the
              particle and fluid velocity and particle concentration.  Experiments will be
              conducted to study the coupling influence of heavy particulates within
              homogeneous turbulence to provide experimental validation currently unavailable
              in the literature that details the nature of the particle/fluid coupling within
              an unorganized turbulent flow.  The experiments will be conducted under
              conditions that will allow direct comparison with previous numerical
              simulations and the conditions will be extended to those regimes currently
              inaccessible to computational solution.  Results from this research will have
              impact upon many engineering fields which utilize two-phase dispersed systems
              such as spray combustion, particulate precipitators, spray drying, sediment
              transport, and cloud physics.    The educational objective is to develop an
              integrated approach to engineering instruction that will provide connectivity
              to elements of design processes in conjunction with fundamental instruction. As
              an example of a commitment toward this goal, i t is proposed that a design
              component be added to the current undergraduate fluid and thermal sciences
              curriculum, to enhance the students' exposure to open-ended problem-solving and
              increase their understanding and interest in the topic through connection with
              relevant applications.
