Title       : CPMSA: Mae Jemison Project: Aiming for Achievement in Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a9702012

Award Number: 9702012
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1732057            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvester Small  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian G. Williams bwilliam@akron.k12.oh.us  (Principal Investigator former)
              Cheryl Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Kathleen G. Sparrow  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Akron Public Schools
	      70 N. Broadway
	      Akron, OH  44308    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Williams, Brian    The Akron Public Qchools CPMSA project is intended to
              improve the  achievement  of  all students in mathematics and science  and  to 
              significantly  increase the number of African  American  students  who  are 
              prepared for university studies in mathematics, science  and related fields.   
              Recognizing  that the key to student achievement is an  excellent  teaching 
              force,  the project will concentrate on  improving  the  instructional
              strategies of all teachers with emphases on content  training  for  elementary
              teachers and secondary mathematics  and  science  teachers.  This initiative is
              based on the understanding  that   systemic  reform-  in  a  large  urban 
              setting  must   be  accomplished building by building and cannot be
              superimposed on a  staff.    A  leadership  team  from  each  school, 
              including  parents  and  administrators, will be trained to conduct action
              research  aimed  at improving student achievement in mathematics and science. 
              The  plan  takes  advantage  of  extensive state  and  locally  funded 
              initiatives to 1  enhance the use of technology to improve teaching and
              learning.    This  project will attempt to overcome the barriers  to  minority 
              achievement  and obstacles presented by poverty  by  providing  a  system  of
              student support including summer institutes and career  exploration,  Saturday 
              enrichment  programs,  facilitated   peer  support, individual tutoring,
              exposure to real-world applications  of math and science and increased parental
              involvement.
