Title       : CAREER: Aqueous Conformations of Organic Molecules, Functional by Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2000  
File        : a9702287

Award Number: 9702287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur W. Cammers-Goodwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Cammers-Goodwin's research focuses on three different   manifestations
              of molecular structure: molecular recognition, pi stacking   and secondary
              solution structure.  Phosphate and pyrophosphate   recognition is examined
              through interactions with guanidinoindole   derivatives synthesized in accord
              with computer-aided molecular design   parameters to maximize host-guest
              hydrogen bonding and electrostatic   interactions.  A systematic variation of
              substituents designed to achieve   both electron-rich and electron-poor aryl
              moieties in a series of benzyl   biphenyls is utilized to determine overall
              stability achieved through pi   stacking in fluid solution.  The
              decarboxylation of a   carboxybenzisoxazole is exploited to determine the role
              of hydrogen   bonding in the stabilization of helical protein structures by  
              trifluoroethanol.  Educational activities include developing an  
              interdisciplinary biological chemistry course and a course that targets   drug
              design through molecular modeling based on available protein crystal  
              structure data, and through a community outreach program, tutoring and  
              mentoring disadvantaged teenagers.  With this CAREER award, the Organic
              Dynamics Program supports the   research of Professor Arthur Cammers-Goodwin of
              the Department of   Chemistry at the University of Kentucky.   Professor
              Cammers-Goodwin's   research addresses, through study of model systems, the
              nature of the   interaction between biological molecules and ions and the
              factors   dictating the three-dimensional structure of biological molecules in 
               solution.  By focusing on comparatively small model compounds in place of  
              the often complex biological molecules, hypotheses regarding specific   factors
              governing the form of the natural molecules are tested.    Professor
              Cammers-Goodwin's educational activities include developing an  
              interdisciplinary course on biological chemistry course and a course on  
              pharmaceutical synthesis, and through a community center, mentoring   minority
              high school students.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
