Title       : CAREER: Principles and Practices of Program Instumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9702188

Award Number: 9702188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Reiss spr@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Netzer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The instrumentation and measurement of systems is  vital for them to be
              understood, debugged, tuned,  refined, tested, validated, or made reliable. 
              This project will investigate the principles and  practice of program
              instrumentation. Principles  include a theoretical understanding of the 
              dynamic measurement and observation of various  structures in parallel,
              distributed, and  sequential systems, such as acyclic or cyclic  graphs for
              representing parallel executions and  families of finite automata for tracking 
              information about variable accesses. The  complexity of computing and analyzing
              such  structures will be explored, including tradeoffs  between time, space,
              accuracy, and completeness.  The practice of instrumentation implements 
              measurement techniques at a cost acceptable to  users, using on-line algorithms
              to dynamically  decide what to do and when it is best done and by  fully
              exploiting the semantics of the problem at  hand. Techniques will be developed,
              especially  for debugging and programming tools, for problems  whose best-known
              solutions are currently  prohibitive because of instrumentation costs. An 
              arsenal of practical techniques usable in many  areas, all of which are based
              on theoretical  underpinnings, will also be developed. This  research will
              result in a deeper understanding of  the cost of solving various types of 
              instrumentation problems and an array  of techniques for their solution.  This
              project  will introduce undergraduates to research by  involving  them  in
              independent study seminars together with  "project sets" partially specified
              mini-research  problems which require as much work in problem  formulation as
              solution. This project will  escalate the undergraduate-outreach effort  at 
              Brown. The tools  this  project will produce  will be suitable for use by
              students in their  research projects.***
