Title       : CAREER: Parameter Estimation for Ill-Conditioned Systems with Application to
               Electric Drives and Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9702860

Award Number: 9702860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel Velez-Reyes m.velez@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9702860  Velez-Reyes    The research plan is focused in the area of
              parameter estimation for ill-conditioned dynamical systems and its application
              to electric drives and power systems.  Physical restrictions in electric drives
              and power systems limit the quality of the data available for parameter
              estimation.  Therefore, making the associate parameter estimation an
              ill-conditioned one. 111-conditioning prevents uniformly good estimates of all
              system parameters from being obtained.  This research proposes to develop sound
              methodologies to deal with ill-conditioned parameter estimation problems in
              electric drives and power systems.  We first, propose to develop methodologies
              to quantify the severity of the ill-conditioning.  Second, we propose the
              development of parameter estimation algorithms that can be applied to
              ill-conditioned problems producing physically meaningful parameter estimates,
              The importance of developing robust parameter estimation algorithms that can
              deal with low quality data is evident from the need of accurate power system
              parameters for system simulation, stability analysis, optimization, state
              estimation, and control.  This is becoming even more important with
              deregulation and the need of operating power systems near their full capacity
              with lower safety/reserve margins.  In the area of electric drives, the strong
              growth of sensorless control have prompted the need to develop robust parameter
              estimation algorithms since most approaches to determine mechanical position or
              speed depend heavily on accurate machine parameters.  An important focus of
              this work is the computational efficiency of algorithms to be developed for
              condition assessment and for parameter estimation because of the large scale of
              power systems and the constraints in real-time implementation in electric drive
              applications.  Efficient algorithm development for large scale problems has
              been a focus of the High Performance Computing (HPC) initiative under the
              Puerto Rico NSF-EPSCOR program in the past and  HPC is still a main trust area
              of scientific development in the island.  The addition of this research program
              to the HPC effort will strengthen the applications component of this area
              contributing to the attainment of PR-EPSCOR program goals.    The activities
              proposed in the educational plan will impact undergraduate, graduate, and high
              school students. Four major activities will be undertaken as part of the
              educational plan:      Revision and creation of courses at the graduate and
              advanced senior level in the areas of modeling and control of electric drives
              and power systems,      Revision of the Undergraduate Power Systems Laboratory
              and its integration into undergraduate courses in power systems.      Mentoring
              of graduate and undergraduate students and their engagement in graduate and
              undergraduate level research projects.      Enhancement to the Introduction to
              Power Systems Workshop offered by the PI to high school students participating
              at the pre-engineering summer program at UPRM.    The curriculum development
              component of the education plan builds on activities in skill-based and
              practice-based education including the use of the cooperative learning and
              teaching methodologies and novel assessment techniques in which the researcher
              has been involved as part of the NSF-funded Manufacturing Engineering Education
              Partnership.  The courses will be revised to integrate the research work into
              the classroom.  The pre-engineering workshop will be revised in format and
              content and the materials developed will be disseminated to other institutions
              and high school teachers.  The workshop and high-school teacher activities will
              be done in collaboration with the UPR Resource Center for Science and
              Engineering partly funded by NSF.
