Title       : CAREER: Nanoscale Controlled Supramolecular Light Emitting Devices by Novel
               Self-Assembly Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9702220

Award Number: 9702220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fotios Papadimitrakopoulos papadim@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9702220 Papadimitrakopoulos  This CAREER project addresses fundamental
              materials science issues of organic Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs). Low molecular
              weight sublimable organics, such as 8-hydroxyquinoline metal chelates have been
              advantageous because of the inherent semiconductor purity levels attainable
              with simple high-vacuum evaporation. Although advantages have been envisioned
              for their high molecular weight polymeric analogs, they have not materialized
              due to intrinsic impurities and defects associated with macromolecular
              architecture. The objectives of this project encompass a broad fabrication
              methodology which effectively addresseq these issues and permits complex
              supramolecular structures to be constructed via a facile self-assembly
              approach. Some specific anticipated features include: Direct chemical
              attachment to the substrate, with increased lateral stability by dense packing
              and two dimensional crosslinking, leading to pinhole-free devices of increased
              stability; Film forming uniformity, regardless of shape and size of the
              starting substrate; Chemical surface patterning and subsequent localized growth
              permitting complex device fabrication in simple, additive, buildup fashion as
              opposed to conventional etching techniques. %%% The project addresses forefront
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of organic photonic
              materials and devices, in general.  An important feature of the program is the
              emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and education through
              the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
              research area. For example, the innate simplicity of the chemistry and
              versatility of molecular architecture help bridge a broad array of scientific
              disciplines, while maintaining accessibility to educational levels from
              undergraduate students to highly qualified research scientists . The actual
              fabrication of proto-type devices in the research activity directs and
              motivates young minds into science and engineering, providing them a strong
              foundation in the advanced technologies of the future. ***
