Title       : CAREER: Microdesigning Model Material Systems to Probe Dissipative Interface
               Motion in Heterogeneous Ceramic Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9702610

Award Number: 9702610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Bullard jeff@puffin.mse.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702610  Bullard    The objective of the Faculty Early Career Development
              project is  to investigate the energetics and kinetics of the evolution of 
              thin film clusters and multiphase polycrystals.   This objective  will be
              accomplished by using the new technology of microcontact  printing to study the
              dissipative interface motion of ceramic  "microfeatures" on solid substrates. 
              The unique capabilities of  the proposed methods can avoid the chemical and
              geometrical  complexities of typical systems.  Specifically, the project will 
              address the following issues:  1) development of a new and  straightforward
              procedure for estimating the interphase boundary  energy density between two
              solids, 2) the influence of  film/substrate coherency, and thus the interphase
              boundary energy  density, on the equilibrium shapes of oxide thin film islands,
              3)  identification of those aspects of interfacial energy densities  (relative
              magnitudes, anisotropy) that can significantly  influence the kinetics of
              coalescence and coarsening of oxide  film clusters, and 4) the role of
              geometrical factors, like  proximity correlations between growing and shrinking
              domains,  that can cause coarsening dynamics to depart significantly from 
              existing theories of Ostwald ripening.  In addition, the  principal
              investigator will restructure and modernize the  undergraduate ceramics
              processing laboratory course.  This  includes acquiring modern equipment and
              designing new lab  exercises on powder synthesis from alkoxides, reaction
              sintering,  etc.  Additionally, new computer simulation methods, developed 
              through the PI's research, will be integrated to reinforce  theoretical
              concepts and their practical applications.  A lab  manual, including brief
              descriptions of the scientific principles  underlying each experiment, will be
              produced and made available  on the World Wide Web, along with instructional
              video modules of  each experiment.  %%%  Characterization of the equilibrium
              shapes and coarsening of thin  film islands, using adv anced high-resolution
              spatial and chemical  analysis, will be used to study the energetics and
              kinetics of  the evolution of thin film clusters and multiphase polycrystals. 
              The approaches will yield fundamental new information about the  dynamics of
              interface motion.  Educational innovations at the  University of Illinois will
              focus on restructuring and  modernizing the undergraduate ceramics processing
              laboratory  course.  ***
