Title       : CAREER: Dynamics and Phase Space Structure of Condensed Matter Systems with
               Mesoscopic Degrees of Freedom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9702242

Award Number: 9702242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Alan Middleton aam@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              97022242  Middleton  This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member who is 
              conducting research on computational methods to investigate  transport
              properties in condensed matter systems with  strongly interacting degrees of
              freedom.  The education  component of this award will focus on the integration
              of  computational methods into courses and departmental  infrastructure.    The
              research component is comprised of two parts.  The first  is a study of ground
              states and barriers in extended systems  such as fluid interfaces and magnetic
              domain walls.  New  methods for finding low-energy configurations of interfaces
               and multiple interacting lines will be applied.  The second  component
              involves charge transport in arrays of mesoscopic  islands: in particular,
              charge transport in low temperature  arrays of sub-micron sized conducting dots
              coupled by tunnel  junctions.    The educational component involves developing
              courses which  communicates to both undergraduate and graduate students the 
              rich interaction between condensed matter physics and  computational physics. 
              Modern physical examples from  research will be introduced into the classroom
              to teach  students how to effectively use computational tools to study 
              scientific problems.  %%%   This is a CAREER award to a new faculty member who
              is  conducting research on computational methods to investigate  transport
              properties in condensed matter systems with  strongly interacting degrees of
              freedom.  The education  component of this award will focus on the integration
              of  computational methods into courses and departmental  infrastructure.    The
              research component is comprised of two parts.  The first  is a study of ground
              states and barriers in extended systems  such as fluid interfaces and magnetic
              domain walls.  New  methods for finding low-energy configurations of interfaces
               and multiple interacting lines will be applied.  The second  component
              involves charge transport in arrays of mesoscopic  islands: in particular,
              charge transport in lo w temperature  arrays of sub-micron sized conducting
              dots coupled by tunnel  junctions.    The educational component involves
              developing courses which  communicates to both undergraduate and graduate
              students the  rich interaction between condensed matter physics and 
              computational physics.  Modern physical examples from  research will be
              introduced into the classroom to teach  students how to effectively use
              computational tools to study  scientific problems.  ***
