Title       : Bayesian Analysis of Correlated Categorical Data Models Using Scale Mixtures of
               Multivariate Normal Link Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9702172

Award Number: 9702172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70773              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Hui Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,9218,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Bayesian Analysis of Correlated Categorical Data Models    Using Scale
              Mixtures of Multivariate Normal Link Functions                            
              Ming-Hui Chen                Worcester Polytechnic Institute                   
                        Abstract      General Bayesian multivariate generalized linear models
              are   considered to analyze categorical data when two or more binary   or
              ordinal responses are taken from the same individual or   subject at one time
              or over time.  In order to conduct a unified   analysis of correlated
              categorical data, this research uses a   very rich class of scale mixtures of
              multivariate normal (SMMVN)   link functions. The SMMVN-links include
              multivariate probit,   Student's t links, logit, symmetric stable link, and
              many others.  The main focus of this research is to develop a complete exact  
              small sample Bayesian analysis of correlated categorical responses,   which
              involves prior elicitation, model comparisons (in particular,   choices of link
              functions), model diagnostics, and variable   selection. Various efficient
              computational algorithms are developed   by using sampling-based methods (e.g.,
              Markov chain Monte Carlo).   This research also includes extensions which cover
              dynamic   models, simultaneous autoregressive models, missing covariates,   and
              meta-analysis.     Correlated categorical data arise frequently in biometrics, 
               science, education, and the pharmaceutical and computer industries.   For
              example, the measurements on the sites of a wafer, from which   computer chips
              are made, are spatially correlated; cholesterol   level (low, medium, high) and
              blood sugar level (low, medium, high)   on the same individual are correlated;
              and in tumorigenicity  experiments, different kinds of tumors may be observed
              from the   same mouse or the same rat. Models and analysis incorporating  
              correlation among multiple categorical responses enable researchers   to obtain
              results with greater precision.  Engineers or doctors   are now using very
              rough methods to analyze  such data, but more   advanced methods are needed to
              deal with all aspects of the problem.   Incorporating prior information leads
              to improved interpretation of  the results of a current study and to reduction
              of the cost of a   new experiment.  This research will provide practitioners
              with   more appropriate methods to perform a comprehensive analysis of  
              multivariate categorical data.
