Title       : CAREER: Database Query Processing for Complex Data Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9702149

Award Number: 9702149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Praveen Seshadri praveen@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research develops a novel database system architecture that efficiently
              supports queries over rich data   types like multi-media, time-series,
              matrices, and documents. Complex data types are modeled as   Enhanced Abstract
              Data Types (E-ADTs), which are software modules with a common interface. While 
               the uniform interface leads to extensibility, it also exposes semantic
              information that can be used for query   optimization. The E-ADT architecture
              is demonstrated through the development of the PREDATOR   database system. The
              project studies optimizations that are essential to efficiently support each
              data type,   and extensions of these techniques across multiple data types.
              While initial results demonstrate major   performance improvements compared to
              existing database systems, several issues are being explored   further. What
              should be the contents of a toolkit for data type development? Can the
              mechanism for   extensible types be extended to implement a heterogeneous
              database system? How does one build an   extensible database system in a Web
              environment? The project is developing solutions to all these issues   and
              demonstrating them in PREDATOR. The educational goal of the project is to
              provide a freely   available, full-function, modern database system for the
              database community to use for educational and   research purposes. To this end,
              the code base of PREDATOR is being released, and the functionality of   the
              system is being augmented with many standard database features. This project
              has the potential to   change the fundamental architecture of the next
              generation of object-relational systems, with applications   ranging from
              geographic information systems to multimedia databases.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
