Title       : CAREER: Control Through Molecular Design in Engineering: Molecular Order and
               Function from Ionic Multilayers of Liquid Crystal Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9702752

Award Number: 9702752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula T. Hammond hammond@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  CTS-9702752    This Career project addresses a research and teaching
              career plan based on the idea of molecular design and structure into basic
              engineering principles and curricular.  The molecular self-assembly, molecular
              order and processing to ultimately control material properties is the focus of
              the work described.  Ionic multilayer assembly (also known layer-by-layer
              assembly) is a new means of forming ultrathin organic films by the sequential
              absorption of monolayers of polyions or bipolar organic molecules of
              alternating positive and negative charge.  This method has won favor over
              traditional Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) techniques for forming films with complex
              supramolecular architectures because the layer-by-layer techniques are simpler,
              considerably inexpensive, and highly versatile.  Unfortunately, this technique
              has been limited thus far, because, unlike LB methods, there is no consistent
              means of introducing molecular scale ordering within the layers of the adsorbed
              films.  In this project liquid crystalline polymers are used to introduce order
              in the ionic multilayer assembly process.  The ability to create films with a
              specific desired molecular orientation opens the ionic multilayer technique to
              a broader range of electrical, optical, and sensor applications.  Furthermore,
              if switching induced by an electrical or magnetic field is possible in such
              films, a number of novel smart materials may result from this approach.  The
              educational aspect of the project includes the development of a new course in
              the chemical engineering curriculum which addresses the role of intermolecular
              interactions and self-assembly with respect to basic chemical engineering
              problems.  Changes in the teaching, approach and scope of an undergraduate
              polymer science laboratory and a polymer synthesis course are also addressed
              with emphasis on the issues of molecular scale phenomena and
              structure-processing-property relationships.  Finally, general community
              outreach and a specific program for the men toring of undergraduate and
              graduate minority and women students is included in the Career project.
