Title       : "CAREER: The Stellar Phase Space and Abundance Distributions of the Stars of the
               Milky Way"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9702521

Award Number: 9702521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Majewski srm4n@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract - Majewski  The research to be carried out involves the creation of
              the deepest survey  of positions, absolute proper motions, multi-color
              charged-coupled-device  (CCD) photometry, and spectroscopy for a complete,
              magnitude limited survey  of Galactic stars. The study builds upon the results
              from earlier work in a  single field at the North Galactic Pole (NGP) to
              assemble high quality  proper motions, photometric parallaxes, photometric
              abundances and radical  velocities as a means to explore the combined
              dimensional phase space and  metallicity distribution of stars in the Galactic
              halo, disk, and  Intermediate Population II thick disk. Among the discoveries
              of this  earlier, high precision proper motion survey at the NGP were: (1), the
               large scale height and local normalization of the ubiquitous Intermediate 
              Population II (IPII) thick disk stars; (2), an apparently smooth  kinematical
              gradient between the population I disk and IPII field stars;  and (3), a
              retrograde rotation for the Galactic halo stars. The addition of  spectroscopy 
              data to the deep proper motions has confirmed the additional  discovery of a
              retrograde moving group of halo stars 4.5 kpc above the  Galactic plane, and
              this result has allowed the elucidation of this  kinematical structure as just
              one of several large scale, stellar streams  in this part of the sky. The
              implications of these findings are: (1) the  halo is not a dynamically relaxed
              system, but rather seems to contain  streams of coherently moving debris from
              the break-up of stellar  agglomerations, (2) differences among halo survey
              results might be  attributable to differences in lines of sight, each
              characterized by local  streaming motions rather than by global descriptions,
              and (3) the bulk of  the halo field star population appears to be derived from
              the accretion of  stellar systems, most likely Galactic satellites. This
              conclusion has  apparently been confirmed with the discovery of the Sagittarius
              dwarf  spheroidal galaxy, a Galactic satellit e in the process of tidal
              disruption  by the Milky Way.  The aim is to carry out similar astrometric,
              photometric and spectroscopic  analyses in nine other fields that lie along two
              orthogonal, meridional  planes of the Galaxy.  Photographic plates from the
              Kitt Peak 4-m telescope  will be scanned with the University of Virginia PDS
              microdensitometer to  construct stellar catalogues and for the measurement of
              proper motions.  Multifiber spectroscopy with the HYDRA system on the WIYN
              3.5-m telescope  will provide the third dimension of velocity as well as
              spectroscopic  abundances. This survey, the deepest in situ study of field
              dwarf stars  ever carried out, will allow systematic probing of the thin disk, 
              Intermediate population II and halo without the selection biases that  affect
              other types of Galactic structure surveys.  By mapping the halo  phase space
              distribution along the two meridional planes, it will be  possible to (a)
              constrain the halo stream angular correlation scale, by  looking for similar
              structures in adjacent fields, (b) measure the volume  overfilling factor of
              streams (found to be ~3 in the NGP field) in the  halo, and c look for
              correlations between the field star streams and  Galactic satellites, globular
              clusters, and the alignment planes of these  objects.  The research program
              involves extensive involvement of both undergraduate  and graduate students,
              who are involved, indeed critical, to all phases of  the astrometric,
              photometric and spectroscopic analysis. To increase  understanding  Galactic
              structure and astrometric research that has been  conducted at the University
              of Virginia throughout its long history in  these endeavors, three additional
              efforts of educational outreach will be  initiated for the benefit of both
              University students and the general  public. Each effort centers on conversion
              of the McCormick Observatory to a  unique, first class educational facility:
              (1) New instrumentation for the  historic 26" Clark refractor telescope will
              provide a quick c onversion from  eyepiece to CCD observation, as a means to
              broaden the scope of both course-  related and "Open to the Public" night
              instruction with the astrometric  telescope. The CCD will increase the
              efficiency of telescope viewing by  large groups of visitors, provide the basis
              for new kinds of undergraduate  laboratory exercises, demonstrate modern
              methods in astronomy, allow  classroom instruction via computer display of live
              telescope images, and  provide easier access to telescope viewing for elderly,
              disabled or very  young visitors. (2) The addition of a teaching spectrograph
              will fill an  important gap in the present astronomy majors program. (3)
              Finally, we will  take advantage of McCormick's long tradition of astrometry to
              create a one  of a kind museum of astronomical measuring devices. On the order
              of 5,000  people per year will take advantage of these improvements to the
              McCormick  Observatory.
