Title       : CAREER: Application Performance Guarantees in High Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9702389

Award Number: 9702389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sujata Banerjee sujata@tele.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1076,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Rapid advances  in computer  communication technology will  soon  enable a
              global information   network that will have an  unprecedented  impact on  our
              daily lives.  Two key  issues will need to be addressed  for this to be
              successful: integration of  services, and guarantees of  service  quality. 
              High speed  networks  will carry audio, video,  and  data  traffic from    many
              diverse  applications;   unlike traditional  networks, they  will need to
              provide  guarantees of Quality of Service  (QoS)  to  applications, as 
              required.  However, application-level QoS  requirements  are  best specified   
              in    terms meaningful    to  the  application,  while network level QoS 
              requirements are best specified  in terms meaningful to the network.  The
              problem is to map between the  two.  This problem is further exacerbated by the
              existence of multiple  intermediate protocol  layers  between the  application
              layer  and the  network layer,  as well as the  specification of service
              quality using  different  parameters at the various layers.   Thus a key
              challenge in  the deployment of high  speed networking systems is  the
              understanding  and development of accurate QoS transformation algorithms that
              request  the minimal  network  resources  to  satisfy a   specific  application
               requirement.  Without such   an integrated, holistic treatment  of the  QoS 
              issues, application users  will not see the projected performance  increases
              and   may  end up  requesting  more  network resources  than  necessary.   This
              research  project  will address several  fundamental  questions on application 
              performance  in  high  speed  networks  that  provide  QoS guarantees, and  
              study the relationship between  network  level QoS  and application level QoS 
              in general.  Results obtained by  simulation and  theoretical analysis  will be
               validated  empirically.  The  education component of  the career development 
              plan will include  mentoring activities for women and minority graduate and
              undergraduate  students with the  objective of encouraging them to pursue
              research and  higher education in the networking and  communications area. 
              Further,  a new course on QoS issues for applications will be developed with
              the  first offering  as  a  research  seminar.   A final component  of  the 
              education plan will be to  develop innovative laboratory exercises  on  wide
              area networking  technologies to enhance  classroom understanding  of concepts.
              WWW: http://www.pitt.edu/~sujata
