Title       : CAREER: Variation Risk Management Early in the Product Development Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9702662

Award Number: 9702662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna C. Thornton acthornt@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of tools and methods to manage
              variation risk during the early stages of product development. The methods will
              use a common model set to enable an integrated approach to variation management
              by linking identification of risk areas, the consequence and likelihood of
              failure as well as the development of strategies to mitigate risk. Variation
              risk identification will be achieved by identifying the system level Key
              Characteristics(KCs) of a product -- the product features, manufacturing
              process parameters, and assembly features that significantly affect a product
              -- and flowing them down to the contributing features. The likelihood of risk
              will be measured by propagating the expected variation through the model. These
              measures will be used to weight the relative importance of a set of system
              level KCs and begin to determine the best approach for mitigating risk. Tools
              to measure the likelihood and consequence of variation risk under uncertainty
              will also be developed. Three risk mitigation strategies will be developed by
              this research: change the product architecture to create a more robust design,
              improve the manufacturing process to reduce the input variation, and/or
              implement measurement plans to track variation in production.  The tools will
              be used to optimize the selection of the lowest cost mitigation strategy.  The
              early identification and mitigation of variation risk will enable product
              developers to increase product complexity, reduce design cycle times, and
              improve the cost and quality of the products. Specifically, these methods will
              reduce several consequences of variation--design changes, institutionalized
              rework, and low quality. The use of the integrated models will enable an
              organization to effectively manage risk throughout the development and
              production of the product.  The use of quantitative methods will improve the
              efficiency and accuracy of the risk management process.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
