Title       : (CAREER) Timing and Distribution of Erosion and Extreme Hydrologic Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9702643

Award Number: 9702643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Bierman pbierman@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702643  Bierman    The densely populated northeastern United States is subject
              to extreme hydrologic events that impact the landscape.  Some of these events
              are meteorological; nor'easters, hurricanes, and convective thunderstorms
              generate rainfall of sufficiently high intensity and duration to cause property
              damage, ecologic disturbance, and erosion.   Other events are human-induced; a
              century ago, the region was almost completely cleared of forest, increasing
              rates of runoff and erosion.   The history of deforestation and reforestation
              is well documented; yet 200 years of data are insufficient to characterize the
              spatial and temporal distribution of the largest storms, those having the
              greatest recurrence intervals, those capable of the greatest damage, and those
              causing the most significant, episodic landscape change.    It is our working
              hypothesis that in the well-forested Northeast, where infiltration rates are
              typically high, lacustrine and alluvial fan sedimentation occurs primarily
              during very intense and/or long duration storms when soil pore pressure
              increase sufficiently to trigger landslides and saturation overland flow.  Our
              data indicate that sedimentation can also be triggered by deforestation, such
              as occurred during colonial land clearance; yet, pollen, charcoal, and
              macrofossil data indicate that New England has been clothed in forest
              continuously since 11,000 years ago.  Although local erosion and sedimentation
              events could be triggered by tree die back, fire, or localized storms,
              large-scale storms seem the most reasonable explanation for regionally
              synchronous sedimentation events.      To further my long-terms goals,
              understanding rates of landscape change and using research-based inquiry as a
              teaching tool, this proposal seek funds to collect, analyze, date and compare
              30-40 Holocene sedimentary records from the Northeast (New England and New
              York).  By comparing the ages of sedimentation events at wide-spread sites, we
              will determine the percentage and timing of deposit ional events that are
              regionally synchronous.  To establish the timing of lacustrine sedimentation
              events, we will collect, date, and analyze cores from 15-20 "hydrologically
              sensitive" ponds, those with large, steep, drainage basins.  To constrain ages
              of terrestrial sedimentation events, we will trench, describe and date deposits
              in 15-20 alluvial fans.  We will use both data sets to map (for the past 10,000
              years) the temporal and spatial distribution of sedimentation events and by
              analogy, the paleo-distribution of storm events capable of causing significant
              hillslope erosion.  Not only will we publish our data through conventional
              channels, but we will create a dynamic Web site and interactive exhibit in the
              heavily used Perkins Geology Museum at UVM.  The Web site will be both a data
              repository updated as the project progresses and a teaching tool for Earth
              Science education from the pre-college through the University level.
