Title       : Modeling the Effects of Leads Upon the Atmosphere and the Surface Heat Budget of
               the Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9702583

Award Number: 9702583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven K. Krueger skrueger@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  OPP-9702583       KRUEGER, STEVEN  UNIVERSITY OF UTAH            This
              research project is a key component of a large, coordinated, multi-investigator
              program, Surface Heat Budget of the Arctic (SHEBA) Ocean.  The research program
              will be conducted for 14 months from a ship frozen into the ice pack. This
              investigator will develop a model of  the effects of leads in the sea ice on
              atmospheric conditions above the permanent ice cap of the Arctic Ocean. The
              data used to validate the model will be collected from a scientifically
              instrumented aircraft during the Spring and Fall in conjunction with a DOE
              Atmospheric Radiation Measurement research program jointly conducted at the
              site. These researchers will determine the flux of incoming heat radiating onto
              the ice floe as a function of changing cloud conditions as well as the effect
              of open water among the ice on the cloud conditions. Their results will help
              determine how atmospheric heating is coupled to adsorption of heat by the sea
              ice. These measurements are critical to understanding how heat is reflected or
              absorbed by the ice as it melts in the summer and thickens in the winter in
              response to seasonal variations in climate. The modeling program makes an
              essential contribution to the SHEBA team of researchers who will measure
              atmospheric variables with a large array of instruments on the ice floe and
              aircraft flying above as well as ice and ocean property measurements made on
              and below the ice floe. The combined set of measurements in SHEBA will allow
              refinement of climate models for the Arctic region. Those improved models will
              lead to better predictions of the climate and the permanence of the Arctic ice
              cap under a proposed global warming that could occur if atmospheric carbon
              dioxide levels are increased above present levels.
