Title       : Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences (SIMS) at Berkeley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9702357

Award Number: 9702357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Nolan nolan@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences at Berkeley      The
              University of California at Berkeley proposes to develop and  operate the
              Summer Institute for the Mathematical Sciences  (SIMS), a 6-week program for
              mathematically talented  undergraduate women. SIMS provides 24 women, selected 
              nationwide, with an intensive mathematics program that is  designed to motivate
              and prepare them to enter and complete  successfully a Ph.D. program in the
              mathematical sciences.    SIMS aims to provide participants with a mathematical
              experience  that will give them a taste of what it is to be a researcher in 
              the mathematical sciences, and it aims to communicate to the  students that
              women can and should be doing mathematics. At the  heart of the program are
              four seminars, two each in pure and  applied mathematics. Each seminar is led
              by a woman, selected  nationwide, who is an active research mathematician and a
               talented teacher. She is aided by a teaching assistant who is a  graduate
              student in mathematics. The students take two  seminars, one pure and one
              applied. The character of the work is  very different from that which is
              encountered in typical  undergraduate mathematics courses. Students immerse
              themselves in  the seminar material to discover and prove results without the 
              aid of textbooks, they are given many hard problems and projects,  and they
              learn how to obtain and express mathematical ideas in  conversation and in
              writing. In addition to the seminars,  mathematics colloquia are held twice
              weekly. In these talks,  well-known mathematicians introduce the students to a
              vast  panorama of mathematical topics. There are also panel discussions  on:
              applying to graduate school and fellowship sources, the  variety of graduate
              programs available in the mathematical  sciences, non-academic careers in
              mathematics, and the challenges  women face as graduate students and as
              professionals in the  mathematical sciences.
