Title       : Galois Representations and Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9702885

Award Number: 9702885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Taylor rtaylor@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Taylor  9702885  This award provides funds for the principal investigator to
              continue his research into the relationship between representations of Galois
              groups and automorphic forms. There is, of course, an extensive conjectural
              framework in this area (Langlands' conjectures, supplemented by other
              conjectures such as Serre's conjecture and the Mazur-Tilouine conjecture).  In
              a sense there are two problems here. The first problem is attaching Galois
              representations to modular forms and, and the second is attaching modular forms
              to Galois representations. Until recently, most work, including the
              investigator's, focused on the first problem. Taylor worked on constructing
              Galois representations for Hilbert modular forms, genus 2 Siegel modular forms
              and modular forms for GL(2) over an imaginary quadratic field. He made heavy
              use of ``congruence techniques''. There are still fascinating open questions on
              this problem, but the PI's present interest has now shifted to the second
              problem.  Until recently there was only really one isolated result on the
              second problem --the Langlands-Tunnell theorem. The situation changed when
              Andrew Wiles initiated, and he and the PI completed, a proof that a suitable
              l-adic lift of a modular mod l representation was itself modular.  Combined
              with the Langlands-Tunnell theorem this proved the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture
              for semi-stable elliptic curves and hence (by the Frey-Serre-Ribet argument)
              Fermat's Last Theorem. Also using this work, Nick Shepherd-Barron and the PI
              have recently managed to show that many mod 5 and mod 2 icosahedral
              representations are modular. In the immediate future, the PI will look at
              extensions of these arguments. One extension is to relax the conditions on the
              ramification of the lift at l. Another direction to extend the argument to
              higher dimensional representations and automorphic forms on unitary groups. In
              the medium term, the PI will investigate whether or not this result can shed
              light on the Artin conjecture for 2-dimensional odd ic osahedral
              representations.    This project falls into the general area of arithmetic
              geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number
              theory and geometry.  This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful -
              having recently solved problems that withstood generations.  Among its many
              consequences are new error correcting codes.  Such codes are essential for both
              modern computers (hard disks) and compact disks.
