Title       : CAREER: Generic Phase Diagram of the Mixed State of Type IISuperconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9702535

Award Number: 9702535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo Safar hsafar@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9702535 
              Safar      This  experimental  CAREER grant project  focuses  on  the  phase 
              diagram   describing   the   flux   penetration   in   Type    II 
              superconductors.  The  discovery by the PI  of  the  solid-liquid  transition  
              undergone  by  the  flux  lattice  in  the   cuprate  superconductors spurs
              investigation more generally among Type  II  superconductors of this phase
              diagram. Of particular interest are  the  effects  that anisotropy, disorder
              and thermal  fluctuations  have  on  creating the newly observed vortex liquid 
              and  related  states  of  the  Type  II superconductor.  The  experiments  will
               measure  the temperature and magnetic field dependencies  of  the  linear and
              nonlinear resistivities which arise by flux motion. In  addition,  the critical
              currents, and energy barriers (activation  energies) will be measured. The
              experimental measurement of flux-  flow voltages will cover a very broad
              voltage dynamic range: sub-  picovolt  to  nanovolt  range  using a 
              custom-built  SQUID-based  voltmeter,  and from nano to millivolts using state 
              of  the  art  commercial  voltmeters. The materials to be studied include  both
               cuprate  and  conventional layered superconductors. The  proposed  research 
              will  be  integrated into an  education  plan  to  help  enhance   student 
              learning  and  to  train  future   scientists,  including members of
              under-represented minority groups.  %%%  This  CAREER  grant  project  involves
               fundamental  experimental  research   on  the  interaction  of  magnetic 
              fields  with   the  superconducting   state.   It  is  focused   on   the  
              Type   II  superconductors, which are more tolerant of magnetic  field  than 
              Type I superconductors, in that magnetic field can penetrate  the  Type II
              superconductor in the the form of quantized flux lines or  vortices,  without 
              necessarily destroying  the  zero  resistance  state.  Electrical  resistance,
              and  therefore  heating  effects,  occur  in Type II superconductors when the
              current density, exerts  a  sufficiently strong force on the flux lines to
              cause  them  to  move. This field of research therefore is relevant to the
              current  handling  capacity  of superconductors in applications  involving 
              high  currents  and high magnetic fields, such as electric  power  cables and
              windings in motors or generators. A new phenomenon  in  this  connection,
              melting or liquid-like motion of the  quantized  flux lines, has been
              discovered in the past few years in the high  transition   temperature  cuprate
               superconductors,   which   are  particularly  promising  for  applications  in
               current  carrying  cables.  The  fundamental research carried out  in  this 
              project  therefore  is  expected to contribute in  the  long  term  to  an 
              improved  electric  power  technology.  The  research   will   be  integrated 
              into  an  education plan  to  help  enhance  students  learning  and  to train
              future scientists, including  members  of  under-represented minority groups. 
              ***
