Title       : PECASE: Fundamentals Limits and Codes for M-ary Recording Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9702024

Award Number: 9702024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                      In conventional magnetic and optical recording, data is stored by 
              saturating the media in one of two states.  In M-ary recording, more than  two
              recorded signals are used, allowing for larger storage capacity and  higher
              data transfer rates.  A number of M-ary recording channels are being  developed
              for optical recording  and a good deal of work has been done by  the PI and
              others in this area.    The primary objective in the research  plan is to move
              to the next level in the understanding, modeling and  analysis of channels,
              codes and signal processing for M-ary recording  channels.  The research plan
              addresses fundamental limits of M-ary  constrained recording channels and new
              coding approaches which seek to  achieve them.  The teaching plan seeks to
              increase the number of trained  engineers in signal processing and
              communications for recording and  emphasizes close connection with and feedback
              from industry.     The specific research and educational objectives are:  1) To
              integrate  communications and optical models to better characterize the
              fundamental  limits (i.e. channel capacity) associated with optical (both
              binary and  nonbinary) recording channels.  2) To develop new methodologies for
              code  design for M-ary channels whose constraints are typically difficult to
              deal  with.  3) To develop new modulation codes for M-ary recording channels 
              which exploit their three dimensional nature.  4) To develop new  educational
              approaches that emphasize the interrelation of system  components and help
              develop a broader perspective. 5) To emphasize  interaction with industry and
              to take advantage of undergraduate and PhD  co-op programs.   6) To continue
              developing outreach programs for  encouraging research careers for
              undergraduates.     The proposed research and educational activities will:  1)
              Educate and  train a core group of researchers in the emerging area of M-ary
              recording  both in fundamental limits and practical systems implementations. 
              2)  Result in modulation codes that are c onceived and designed from a systems 
              and practical perspective and achieve the largest known information density.
