Title       : PECASE: Applications-driven Research in Multiprocessor Architecture and Software
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9702115

Award Number: 9702115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaswinder P. Singh jps@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this effort research and education at the  boundary of parallel systems and
              applications  will be performed. It is motivated by the need  for application
              insights to make fundamental  advances in parallel systems, and the recent 
              convergence in multiprocessor architectures to  general purpose nodes connected
              by a  communication architecture. On the research  side, challenging,
              irregular, dynamic  applications will be parallelized on real  systems in close
              collaboration with domain  researchers, particularly in probabilistic  protein
              structure determination and adaptive  unstructured meshing, and their
              implications  for parallel architecture and software  understood. General
              techniques for partitioning  such complex applications will be developed, 
              particularly for the emerging class of cache-  coherent distributed-memory
              multiprocessors.  The applications will be distributed as  benchmarks to the
              parallel computing community.  Architectural implications, particularly 
              communication demands, scaling and resource  distribution, will be examined,
              and scaling  methodologies developed. Funds permitting, a  range of commercial
              systems will be evaluated  using applications, to understand the impact of 
              their communication architectures and  tradeoffs, and insights  into
              programming and performance debugging  environments studied. On the education
              side, a  new undergraduate course in parallel  architecture will be developed,
              and a textbook  on parallel architecture is being written to  articulate the
              convergence and develop parallel  architecture as an engineering rather than 
              exotic discipline.
