Title       : CAREER--Metalorganic Molecular Structure as a Template for Anisotropic Thin Film
               Ceramics: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Materials Processing and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9702589

Award Number: 9702589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Fuierer fuierer@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9702589  Fuierer    The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development
              project is  to advance the state-of-the-art and understanding of sol-gel 
              chemistry routes to functional ceramic thin films by  investigating the effects
              of the molecular structure of  oligimers, derived from metalorganic precursors,
              on the ultimate  crystallographic structure (orientation) of ceramic films upon
               heat treatment.  Bismuth titanate will be used as the model  ceramic material,
              due to its intrinsic structural anisotropy and  its useful ferroelectric and
              piezoelectric properties.  The  experimental techniques employed will test the
              prediction that  the homocondensation of Ti-O-Ti-O type molecular species and 
              their subsequent deposition by spin coating on the surface of the  substrate
              can lead to strongly-axis oriented films due to the  similarity in atomic
              bonding in the a-b plane of crystalline  bismuth titanate.  These experiments
              will attempt to go beyond  recent studies that illustrate the effect of
              oligomer molecular  structure on other sintered microstructural features such
              as  porosity and grain size.  This will be accomplished primarily by  two main
              ideas: (1) by taking a somewhat unorthodox approach of  promoting
              homocondensation in mixed systems and allowing  solutions to age for long
              periods of time, and (2) utilizing a  new experimental technique of oxygen
              isotope nuclear magnetic  resonance to determine the composition of the
              oligimer backbone  by analyzing the chemical environment of the oxygen.  The 
              principal investigator intends to incorporate an increasing  amount of chemical
              principles into classroom instruction of both  undergraduate- and
              graduate-level materials courses.  The  principal investigator's long term
              career goals are to become an  expert in the area of solution processing of
              anisotropic ceramic  films, and to continuously strive toward effective
              teaching of  the multidisciplinary field of materials science and engineering. 
              %%%  Proof of this phenomenon in sol-gel processing wi ll have  significant
              implications by providing a means of obtaining  textured films of other
              technologically important anisotropic  materials without relying on special
              substrates for epitaxial  growth.  In addition, the research will yield
              important  information about the kinetics of hydrolysis and condensation 
              reactions in solution and crystallization processes in chemical  thin films. 
              Thus, the project is expected to contribute to the  advance of improved
              materials for useful electronic, optical, and  magnetic devices.  The project
              is also aimed at helping to bridge  the gap between chemistry and materials
              science and engineering  by emphasizing the multidisciplinary aspects of these
              disciplines  in the classroom.  ***
