Title       : Collaborative International Research: Investigation of Structures, Structural
               Fabrics and Metamorphic Associations in Northern Victoria Land
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9702161

Award Number: 9702161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Siddoway csiddoway@cc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702161  Siddoway    Abstract    This award allows a US investigator to join an
              Italian Antarctic  Program geological field team in northern Victoria Land, 
              Antarctica.  The overall goal of the field program is to obtain  detailed
              structural, petrographic, isotopic, and geochronological  information that
              bears on the history of early Paleozoic  magmatism in northern Victoria Land
              (NVL), and to relate this  information to plate convergence during the Ross
              Orogeny.  The  group will test the hypothesis that high temperature-low
              pressure  metamorphism in NVL occurred within the regional contact  metamorphic
              aureole of fundamentally arc-related plutons, within  a structural regime
              related to convergence. Detailed structural  studies by the PI are expected to
              help characterize the dynamic  setting in which the plutons were emplaced and
              correlate  structural fabrics in host rock with changes in pressure- 
              temperature conditions of metamorphic recrystallization in host  rocks.  The
              work will be used to verify the polarity of the  magmatic arc during plutonism
              and establish the relationships  with early Paleozoic plutons to the south. 
              The  results of this  work will be used to infer the configuration of
              AntarcticaOs  early Paleozoic active margin in NVL, for comparison with models 
              developed in other parts of the Transantarctic Mountains.  Interpretations
              developed in the course of this work will be  integrated with tectonic and
              structural interpretations for other  parts of the proto-Pacific margin of
              Gondwana.    Methods used in the study will include structural mapping, 
              structural and metamorphic petrology, and fluid inclusion  analysis.  The field
              program in \centered on the Deep Freeze  Range, with an additional possibility
              of examining sites in the  vicinity of the Lanterman Range.  The specific
              contribution  supported by this award will be study and interpretation of the 
              relations between deformation, magmatic pulses, and high  temperature-low
              pressure metamorphic recrystallization.
