Title       : CAREER: Micromechanical Engineering and MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9702875

Award Number: 9702875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang-Jin Kim cjkim@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702875  Kim  Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) is an enabling technology,
              opening a new scientific frontier.  A fundamental issue is that the
              conventional engineering science is not always valid at the micrometer scale. 
              Since human experience and our educated knowledge may defy proper engineering
              in microscale, it is important to lead students to re-construct their body of
              knowledge and form a discipline of its own for microengineering. It is my goal
              in academia to establish a systematic and effective structure for MEMS
              education in mechanical engineering.  The effect, I believe, is advancement of
              mechanical engineering areas by taking advantage of MEMS technologies and also
              enrichment of MEMS research with more balanced expertise available.  To reach
              this goal, we are establishing a Ph.D. major field in our Mechanical and
              Aerospace Engineering Department of UCLA.    The research plan is to use
              micron-sized liquid-metal droplet as another building block for MEMS.  It has
              been shown in my lab that an array of metal droplets on the order of
              micrometers can be formed at desired locations on substrate.  With its unique
              properties, liquid metals can open new possibilities for MEMS devices.  Mercury
              and low-melting-temperature metal alloys are being considered.  The proposal is
              directed towards the development of Large-Scale Integrated Relay (LSIR), which
              has both the functional superiority of microrelays and the large-scale
              integration of semiconductor transistors.  Based on the droplet-based relay
              cell, which has dramatically simple configuration and small foot area, an LSIR
              chip is expected to contain 10 K to 1 M calls of  bistable relay on it.  A high
              performance, low density LSIR will be developed for signal multiplexing and a
              high density device for non-volatile, radiation-hard memory to be integrated
              with CMOS chips.    The scale effects and surface physics studied in the MEMS
              courses described in the education plan will play a critical role in
              understanding the behavior of the droplets.  It is an objective of the proposal
              that the information obtained from the research, such as microscale phenomena
              of droplets and fabrication techniques, be incorporated into MEMS courses.  ***
