Title       : CAREER: Soil Improvement for Mitigating Seismic Hazards to Waterfront Retaining
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a9702744

Award Number: 9702744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Dickenson sed@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9702744  Dickenson  This action is to support an integrated research and 
              educational-enhancement project submitted under the NSF  Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) Program. The  primary objectives include investigating the
              use of soil  improvement for insuring acceptable seismic performance of 
              waterfront retaining structures, and creating an  interdisciplinary,
              design-oriented course sequence for  undergraduates in civil, construction and
              environmental  engineering that will emphasize university-industry 
              collaboration.  The research component addresses the use of soil improvement 
              as a means of limiting to acceptable levels the earthquake  induced
              deformations of waterfront retaining structures.  Recent experience has shown
              that waterfront retaining  structures are vulnerable to damage from
              earthquakes, even  under only moderate levels of ground shaking, a primary 
              cause being the liquefaction of the saturated loose sandy  soils that typically
              prevail at port facilities. The  economic impact of these losses to the
              affected ports and to  commerce dependent on port operations has been severe. 
              Although soil improvement technology has been used to  mitigate liquefaction
              hazards at numerous ports around the  world, engineering standards for
              specifying the extent of  remedial soil treatment required to insure the 
              serviceability of the waterfront components after a design  level earthquake
              have not been developed.  The methods to be employed include centrifuge
              modeling of  anchored sheetpile bulkheads and rockfill dikes, and 
              supplementary numerical analyses. Anchored bulkheads and  rockfill dikes have
              been selected for investigation due to  their extensive use at port facilities
              in the United States.  Technology transfer is a key component of the research.
              The  results of this study will provide port engineers with  improved methods
              for evaluating the seismic performance of  common waterfront retaining
              structures, as well as design  guidelines for mitigating liquefaction hazards
              to these   structures.  The principal objective of the educational component is
              to  develop the curriculum for an integrated sequence of courses  that provide
              a "capstone" design experience for senior-level  undergraduates. The capstone
              sequence is intended to provide  students with a project that requires: (1) the
              formation of  a multi-disciplinary design team, (2) synthesis of acquired 
              knowledge in the planning and design of a significant civil  engineering
              project, and (3) additional experience with oral  and written presentation
              skills. Course sequences will  reflect the partnerships that exist in
              contemporary  engineering practice. The synthesis and application of prior 
              course work will be fostered by the student's participation  in a "real-world"
              design experience. In addition to the  coordinated engineering design, the
              projects will emphasize  ethics in practice, economics, environmental impacts,
              and  the influence of socio-political factors on design. This  integrated
              program will include: interdisciplinary team  building and the role of
              collaboration in practice, and the  influence of "non-engineering" factors on
              the design and  construction of civil engineering works. The significance of 
              the capstone program is that this instructional technique  has been identified
              as a method of enhancing student's  preparation for careers in the dynamic
              field of civil and  environmental engineering.
