Title       : CAREER: A Multiscale Hierarchical Approach to Reaction Processes and Its
               Integration Into the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9702615

Award Number: 9702615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dionisios G. Vlachos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   CTS-9702615      The desire to design and control large scale
              chemical processes based on an understanding of molecular phenomena, and
              therefore, from "first principles" and to microfabricate new materials with
              atomic resolution for diverse areas such as superconductivity, ferromagnetism,
              selective catalysis, and separations is one of the future trends in chemical
              engineering.  A factor in the development of this new trend is the revolution
              in computational capabilities which has opened the horizon to modeling of
              nanometer length scales and pico to nanosecond time scales.  Despite the many
              available models at different reactor length scales, no general engineering
              strategies exist for designing homogeneous-heterogeneous reactors based on a
              molecular scale control strategy and for teaching future engineers how to link
              molecular with macroscopic scales.    The PI plans a research program of
              integrating continuum state-of-the-art fluid-phase models and molecular
              simulations for multicomponent reacting flows and experimentally validating
              them.  The specific research objectives include:  (1) To develop efficient
              Monte Carlo simulations (higher hierarchical level models) which can handle
              multicomponent surface reaction systems and surface inhomogeneities (e.g.,
              absorbate-adsorbate interactions and surface dynamics).  (2) To integrate
              multiple reactor scales by linking surface Monte Carlo simulations with
              existing detailed continuum fluid mechanics -- multicomponent transport -- 
              detailed gas-phase kinetic models using hybrid models.  (3) To validate the
              proposed methodology with well-designed experiments.  The new methodology will
              be applied to methane oxidation and selected subsystems over noble metals to
              consider simultaneously: selectivity, safety, and environmental aspects.  Such
              problems are of significance to partial oxidation reactors )e.g., conversion of
              natural gas to synthesis gas or methanol, propylene to propylene oxide, etc.)
              and complete oxidation reactors for energy productio n with reduced pollutants
              (e.g., catalytic gas turbines).    The integration of the methodology into the
              curriculum, through a new classroom model (funded by General Electric) of
              interactive computing and visualization, will train future engineers with
              decision making by design skills on multiscale processes.  Specific educational
              objectives include:  (1) To improve the decision making by design skill of
              students on real-life, open-ended problems by integrating the research
              multiscale hierarchical strategy into existing courses and engaging students in
              research activities.  (2) To examine a new evaluation method and improve
              teaching techniques by increasing active participation of students through a
              new classroom model of interactive computing and visualization.  (3) to employ
              the research methodology into a new course on the synthesis of inorganic
              materials (to be an elective for undergraduate and first-year graduate
              students).
