Title       : Molecular Systematics and the Evolution of Habitat Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9702338

Award Number: 9702338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall keith_crandall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Crandall  9702338    Phylogenetics is a field of study that is of central
              importance to  others such as ecology, molecular biology, systematics, and 
              evolutionary biology. As applications of phylogenetics increase,  so too does
              the breadth of ~ese applications. From molecular  studies of the biochemical
              function of genes, to human studies  such as transmission patterns in HIV-I,
              "phylogenetic thinking"  has lead to major discoveries in a broad array of
              disciplines. The  object of this study is to bring phylogenetics to a broader
              array  of peop e through high school outreach, museum displays, and 
              undergraduate/graduate education. In addition, phylogenetic  thinking is
              pervasive in my research program. The primary research  goal is to establish
              phylogenetic relationships among the 24  species within the two sister
              subgenera of freshwater crayfishes,  Jug~cambarus and Glareocola (Decapoda:
              Cambaridae). Once  phylogenetic relationships are established, the PI will test
              the  monophyly of these two subgenera relative to representatives from  five
              other subgenera within the genus Cambarus. Phylogenetic  estimates will be
              based on nucleotide sequences from the 1 6S  region of the mitochondrial genome
              and the nuclear gene astacin.  Once,a phylogeny is estimated and monophyly is
              established, the PI  will explore the evolutionary biology of habitat
              specificity using  comparative methods. The beauty of this group of freshwater 
              crayfishes is that they are distributed into the four main  ecotypes within
              which crayfishes are found: lotic waters (8  species), lentic waters (5
              species), primary burrowers  (semi-terrestrial, 5 species), and caves
              (subterranean, 6  species). Therefore, they provide a unique opportunity to
              study  the evolution of habitat specificity in crayfishes. Do crayfishes 
              invade a habitat and radiate within that habitat? Is there a  repeated
              evolutionary sequence of habitat specificity, such as  lotic to lentic, to
              burrower, to cave? Or are habitat  specif~cities randomly distributed over  the
              phylogeny? The PI's  research will address these questions and use the answers
              as  examples of the utility of the phylogenetic approach in my  educational
              programs.
