Title       : CAREER: Influence of Unsteady Stretch on Premixed Flame Kernel Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9702277

Award Number: 9702277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Roberts wlrobert@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9702277    This is study of the interactions of a spark-generated
              flame kernel at various stages of growth with a single, well-defined eddy of 
              known velocity and length scale in order to identify the optimal hydrodynamic
              flowfield for the fuel-air mixture in a modern internal combustion (IC) engine.
               It is intended to identify which eddies are most beneficial and  which are
              most beneficial and which a re most destructive in terms of kernel growth for
              various kinetics parameters such as equivalence ratio and Lewis number.  It is
              known that at low to moderate turbulence levels there is a marked increase in
              the burning rate and in the flammability limits of the premixed reactants, but
              that this reverses as turbulence intensity increases and the length scale of
              the eddies become small compared to the reaction zone, since the eddies are now
              able to locally quench the flamefront.  Advanced laser diagnostics are used to
              measure temperature, velocity field, and state of reaction.  Hydroxyl and
              methylidine radicals are detected to locate the reaction zone and to indicate
              the state of the reaction; their absence indicates a quenched flamefront. 
              Temperature is measured by Rayleigh scattering and by seeded nitric-oxide
              planar laser-induced fluorescence (PPLIF), while particle-image velocimetry
              (PIV) is used to measure the two-dimensional velocity field and thereby
              determine the local, instantaneous strain executed on the flame kernel  by the
              local flowfield.    In an internal combustion engine, the spark generates a
              flame kernel that may transfer its energy to the fuel-air mixture resulting in
              a vigorous, self-sustaining flame front, or, alternatively, may be quenched
              (extinguished) by a combination of hydrodynamic strain and curvature,
              collectively termed stretch.  In the case of localized extinction, the kernel
              may survive but exhibit a severe degradation of ovepall combustion efficiency
              and in increase in pollutant emissions.  Perturbation of kernel growth rate is
              the major cause of cycle -to-cycle variations in engines.  Thus understanding
              of this phenomenon is the key to engines that give smooth, efficient, and clear
              performance.
