Title       : Novel Biodegradable Electrically Conducting Polymers for Nerve Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9702882

Award Number: 9702882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine E. Schmidt schmidt@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5342,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702882  Schmidt  The  proposed  research  focuses  on  the  synthesis  of  a 
              novel  biodegradable   polymer  that  will  be  inherently   electrically 
              conductive.   This  research  is  motivated  by  past  work  which 
              demonstrates  that electric fields and electrical charges  improve  the 
              healing  of several tissues, including bone and nerve.  There  are  drawbacks 
              to  the presently available approaches.   External  electromagnetic  fields 
              suffer from the inability  to  accurately  localize the electrical effect to
              the desired tissue, and the  use  of  non-biodegradable electrically-conducting
               or  electrically  -  charged  materials  can pose long-term risks that  are 
              associated  with  any permanent material.  Thus, there is ample motivation  to 
              develop  a biodegradable polymer, which has desirable electrically  conductive 
              properties  that can be localized  to  the  tissue  of  choice,  and which will
              not pose long-term health risks.   Such  a  polymer  does  not currently exist.
               In addition to  its  possible  utility for peripheral nerve regeneration, the
              polymer could  also  be  applied to other areas of tissue engineering as well,
              such  as  spinal  cord  regeneration and muscle  tissue.   To  synthesize  a 
              biodegradable   electrically  conducting   polymer,   electrically  conducting 
              pyrrole oligomers will be coupled to one  another  via  hydrolyzable
              (degradable) urethane linkages.  Pyrrole was selected  based  on  extensive 
              previous research by  the  PI  showing  that  poly(pyrrole) is biocompatible
              and can be used to significantly  s  the  extension of axons from nerve cells. 
              Poly(pyrrole),  in  the  form  of guidance channels, has also been shown by the
              PI to guide  peripheral nerve regeneration better than inert materials such  as
               silicone.       Unfortunately,  poly(pyrrole)  in  its  present  form  is  
              not  biodegradable  and  not  easily processed into  different  shapes.  Thus,
              pyrrole oligomers will be coupled with urethane linkages  to  render  it
              biodegradable an d more easily processed.  The  urethane  linkage was selected
              for many reasons, including urethane's  prior  use  in  clinical applications
              such as heart valves and  the  fact  that  urethane,  in  its uncrosslinked
              form, is biodegradable  and  pliable.  Other cross linking chemistries (e.g.,
              an ester linkage)  will  be  utilized in the unlikely event that the polymer 
              product  proves  to  be  deleterious  to living  tissue.  In  summary,  the 
              proposed  studies  will  focus  on  the  synthesis  of   a   novel 
              biodegradable electrically conducting polymer, based  on  previous  work 
              showing  that  electrical charges are  beneficial  to  wound  healing,  and  in
               particular, to nerve regeneration.   Thus,  the  resultant  polymer will be a
              useful material not only for  devices  to   aid  peripheral  nerve 
              regeneration  (e.g.,  nerve  guidance  channels), but for other tissue
              engineering applications as well.  ***
