Title       : CAREER: Development of a Mobile Architecture (Mobi-Arch)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9702449

Award Number: 9702449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy K. Camp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research Plan:  The second roundtable on the state of the Internet in September 
              1996 stated that the evolution of the Internet will follow   three paths:
              multimedia, multicast, and mobility. This project   combines two of the three
              evolution paths: multicast and mobility.    Laptop and palmtop computers are
              now available at affordable   prices; studies indicate that laptop computers
              are currently   35% of computer sales. With the explosive interest in   laptop
              computers, there is now the desire for continuous Internet   access no matter
              where users are. In other words, users desire an   Internet version of the
              cellular telephone.     Multicasting capability (transmitting a message to a
              group   of hosts instead of a single host) are an important facility   on the
              Internet. Thousands of users currently obtain data from   the MBONE or
              multicast backbone through its numerous multicasting   applications (e.g.,
              video-conferencing system). Furthermore, since   a multicasting facility is
              part of the next version of the   Internet Protocol (IPv6), even more users
              will begin using   multicasting applications on a regular basis.     This
              project concerns both mobility and multicasting. The Internet   Engineering
              Task Force lists multicasting as a desired service   in our future mobile
              environment. However, the current   Internet protocol for mobile hosts does not
              handle multicasting   and the current Internet multicasting protocol does not
              transmit  messages to mobile hosts. This project is to develop protocols   that
              will allow mobile hosts to transmit and receive multicast   messages in the
              Internet efficiently.     For more information, see 
              http://cs.ua.edu/faculty/camp/camp.html/mobi-arch.html    Education Plan:  The
              education aspect of this project revolves around the ``women in  computing''
              issue. Over the past year, we have been exploring gender   issues in computer
              science, since the decreasing percentages of   women in our field is
              discouraging. During this project, we will   initiate programs a t the
              university and in the community to try   to reduce the decreasing female trend
              that we are seeing in   our field.     For more information, see 
              http://cs.ua.edu/faculty/camp/camp.html/women.html
