Title       : CAREER: Parallel Algorithms and Software for Irregular Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9702991

Award Number: 9702991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Aluru   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Career project is to apply techniques from  parallel computing
              and computational geometry to develop  theoretically sound and practically
              efficient parallel algorithms  for a class of irregular scientific applications
              and to infuse  the resulting knowledge into parallel computing and
              computational  science programs.    The main goal of the research is to develop
              parallel algorithms  and software for scientific applications that depend upon 
              interactions between entities (such as particles, atoms) located  in two or
              three dimensional space. To achieve this goal, a two-  pronged strategy will be
              used: Firstly, efficient parallel  solutions will be developed for specific
              applications. Secondly,  general techniques useful for parallelizing irregular 
              applications that depend on multidimensional point sets will be  investigated. 
              Two specific applications, considered to be Grand  Challenge problems by the
              High Performance Computing and  Communications (HPCC) Subcommittee, will be
              studied: The N-body  problem and Protein Accessible Surface Area Calculations.
              The N-  body problem is to simulate the motion of particles under the 
              influence of mutual force fields based on an inverse square law.  N-body
              computations are useful in such diverse fields as  astrophysics, plasma
              physics, molecular and fluid dynamics,  computer graphics and numerical complex
              analysis. Protein  Accessible Surface Area calculations are used to study the 
              structure of proteins, an important problem in computational  molecular
              biology. The access patterns required by many  scientific applications that
              depend on distribution of  particles/atoms can be abstracted into primitive
              queries on  multidimensional point sets. General techniques for efficient 
              parallel execution of such applications will be investigated and  software to
              aid programming such applications will be developed.    Education Plan:    The
              main goal of the education plan is to develop curriculum in  parallel computing
              and computational science at New  Mexico State  University and to train
              students to apply computer science  principles in solving important scientific
              applications on future  generation computing systems. A course in parallel
              computing has  already been developed and a textbook on algorithm design for 
              parallel computers is being written. Additional courses in  parallel computing
              will be developed and introduced. It is  intended to develop curriculum and
              establish a new computational  science program on campus. The results of the
              proposed research  will be integrated into courses in parallel computing and 
              computational science.
