Title       : CAREER: Microanalytical Methods for Investigation of Metabolism and Transport of
               Substance P
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9702631

Award Number: 9702631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Lunte   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  development of
              analytical methods to quantify the partitioning of  substance P through the
              blood brain barrier.  Professor Lunte and  her students at the University of
              Kansas will study methods to  derivatize substance P so that it can be
              analytically detected.   One strategy involves pre- or postcolumn
              derivatization of  substance P with naphthalene-2,3-dicarboxaldehyde combined
              with  capillary electrophoresis so that laser induced fluorescence  detection
              can be used.  The second approach involves precolumn  derivatization with the
              biuret reagent followed by  chromatographic separation with dual electrode
              electrochemical  detection.  This CAREER project will enable students to learn 
              state-of-the-art methods for quantifying picomolar concentrations  of
              biologically significant analytes and to test the hypothesis  that substance P
              crosses the blood brain barrier and plays a role  in central nervous system
              function.  Substance P is a neuropeptide that plays a role in maintaining  the
              functional status of the brain at very low concentration  levels.  The nature
              of its role has not been quantified because  there are no functional groups on
              the molecule that impart either  spectroscopic or electrochemical responses
              that can be used as  analytical signals.  In this CAREER research project
              Professor  Lunte and her students will develop two separate methods that 
              permit the analysis of substance P at the concentration levels  required. 
              Substance P will be modified so that a fluorescence  signal can be measured in
              one procedure and an electrochemical  modifying agent will be used in a second
              procedure so that an  electroanalytical signal can be measured.  These
              modification  procedures will be coupled with the separation method capillary 
              electrophoresis in order to make the analyses selective for  substance P.  In
              addition to the educational impact of involving  students in this work,
              Professor Lunte will implement a course  for all science students designed to
              improve the efficacy of  communicating scientific information between
              scientific  disciplines and to the public at large.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
