Title       : PECASE: Information Processing Models of Memory Retrieval and Response Priming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9702291

Award Number: 9702291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trisha Van Zandt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9702291  Van Zandt    An important area of research in cognitive psychology is
              how  information, whether directly impinging on the senses or  retrieved from
              memory, is transformed during cognition to allow  performance of simple tasks. 
              Understanding this process of  transformation provides the basis for
              understanding human  behavior more generally.  This research will emphasize a 
              theoretical, model-driven approach to the study of behavior, in  which a number
              of models of human information processing will be  developed and tested.  In
              particular, this research will use  neural network models and certain
              statistical models to explain  the interactions between behavioral variables
              (such as reaction  time, response accuracy and confidence) in memory retrieval 
              tasks.  In addition, the research will involve the construction  of
              biologically plausible models of simple decision-making in an 
              interdisciplinary, collaborative effort with Dr. Ernst Niebur of  the Zanvyl
              Krieger Mind/Brain Institute.  These models may  represent a step toward the
              development of biologically realistic  models of human cognition.    As
              psychological science becomes more specialized, students  require more
              mathematical and statistical training.  The research  and educational
              activities in this project will teach graduate  and undergraduate psychology
              students about modeling human  behavior.  Changes to the undergraduate
              psychology curriculum at  the Johns Hopkins University will incorporate
              laboratory and  research experience in introductory level experimental
              psychology  courses.  Redesigned statistics and experimental design courses 
              will emphasize computer methods and psychological applications.   As a result,
              Hopkins undergraduates will have a deeper  appreciation for scientific and
              quantitative methods in  experimental psychology.  Furthermore, students with
              interests in  cognition and neuroscience will have opportunities to do 
              collaborative research in these areas by assisting directly with  the research
              in this proj ect.    This research, assisted by undergraduates and graduate
              students,  will progress toward an understanding of the differences and 
              similarities between network models and more traditional  statistical models of
              cognition.  Finally, the application of  these kinds of dynamic models of
              cognition to problems in memory  retrieval will increase our understanding of
              the ways that humans  use information in making decisions about the world and 
              ultimately enable the development of automated methods to help  people make
              such decisions in more effective ways.    ***
