Title       : A Multidisciplinary Approach to Improving Understanding of Science and
               Technology for Non-Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9156081

Award Number: 9156081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn E. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard P. Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Laverty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne A. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Two new first year courses for non-science, non-engineering                    
              students will be developed.  The courses will examine, in a                    
              clear and practical way, important technologies which affect                   
              everyday life.  The technologies studied will illustrate the                   
              application of science and mathematics to real world problems                  
              and will show how the engineering method is applied to develop                 
              and continually improve each example of technology.  This                      
              partially quantitative study of different technologies will be                 
              interesting to non-engineering students and will greatly                       
              increase their technological literacy and insight to a level                   
              which cannot come from the most rigorous mathematics or science                
              courses.  Subject matter in the courses will change over time                  
              and will deal with topics of current national or local interest                
              such as Energy and Society, Electricity Supply, Modern                         
              Communications, and Family Housing.  Engineering, Arts,                        
              Humanities, and Social Science faculty will participate                        
              together in the courses.  Much of the teaching will be done by                 
              Engineers, but each topic will be set in a social and                          
              historical context.  Field trips and laboratory projects will                  
              be incorporated as much as possible.  Achievement of the                       
              project objective will be measured by a comparison of the                      
              attitudes, activities, and achievements of students who have or                
              have not taken the courses.  The project is intended to provide                
              a model for other institutions interested in improving the                     
              scientific and technological literacy of their non-science and                 
              non-engineering students.
