Title       : Environmental Chemistry Curriculum Development for a Large Introductory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1992     
File        : a9156123

Award Number: 9156123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Kegley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Students in the freshman chemistry laboratory will be exposed                  
              to a variety of chemical principles in the context of                          
              environmental chemistry. The goals of the program are three: 1)                
              to interest students in science early in their academic                        
              careers, particularly women and minority students; 2) to expose                
              students to real-life issues that chemists face; and 3) to                     
              increase both the scientific literacy and the writing skills of                
              all students who participate. The program is module-based,                     
              where each module focuses on a specific question that the                      
              students must answer about a site of environmental interest.                   
              The questions are related to the analysis of drinking water                    
              quality, lead deposition near freeways, and toxic waste sites.                 
              A "discovery" method of teaching the course will be employed,                  
              in which the students will be presented with a question and                    
              then must propose answers themselves instead of being presented                
              with a solution. Teamwork and discussion in the area of                        
              decisionmaking will also be emphasized. After deciding how they                
              will answer the central question, the students will visit the                  
              sites, take samples, and bring them back to the laboratory for                 
              testing. A variety of sophisticated techniques will be                         
              utilized, including ion chromatography, atomic absorption                      
              spectrometry, and gas chromatography. The students will hand in                
              written reports on their work instead of the usual "fill-in-                   
              the-blanks" type of form used in many freshman chemistry labs.                 
              The final module will consist of independent projects, with the                
              topic chosen by the student. The projects will require the                     
              student to use his or her knowledge of sampling, site                          
              assessment, laboratory techniques, and writing skills to study                 
              an environmental problem and present the results of that study                 
              to the rest of the class in a poster session during the final                  
              laboratory period.  An Advisory Committee and symposium on its                 
              findings and products will accompany the project.
