Title       : Electronics Made Simple
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9156237

Award Number: 9156237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion O. Hagler mhagler@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Marcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project applies artificial intelligence techniques to                     
              implement the concept of intelligent attendants or guides whose                
              behavior (even personality) can be made to depend upon the                     
              attributes of the learner.  The project accomplishes this by                   
              developing a SIMPLE (a set of many rooms) to accompany the                     
              first electronics course for students of electrical                            
              engineering.  The SIMPLE emphasizes providing quick and ample                  
              feedback to students about their performance on the analytical                 
              and problem-solving aspects of electronics, including both                     
              simple exercises and open-ended design problems.  The learner                  
              gets immediate feedback, as well as the benefits of learning                   
              independent self-assessment of work, on complex open-ended                     
              problems without direct participation by the instructor.  The                  
              goal is to immerse learners in an intensely interactive                        
              computer simulated environment related to the subject matter                   
              they wish to learn.  In the simulation, the learner sees a                     
              collection of connected "rooms" that may contain, at the                       
              pleasure of the instructor, informative notes and explanations                 
              (with graphics), project assignments, and tools (word                          
              processor, spreadsheet, text editor, and specialty software                    
              such as MathCAD and PSpice).  By touring the complex of rooms,                 
              the learner acquires knowledge, accomplishes tasks, and                        
              demonstrates competence by interacting with the simulated                      
              environment.  A key part of the effort is to publicize the                     
              SIMPLE and to provide relatively polished versions of several                  
              archetypical rooms (on floppy disks and over INTERNET) for the                 
              Plus/HyperCard environment to other faculty so that they can                   
              develop additional material for this and other courses.
