Title       : Physics and the 3 Rs: Recruit, Restructure and Retain. A Laboratory Oriented,
               Introductory Physics Course by Guided Inquiry to Attract & Retain Women and
               Minority Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9156179

Award Number: 9156179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Program Director                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299767             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Meisner jm@curie.uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Ponting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              The Physics Department of UNCG and the Department of                           
              Mathematics and Computer Science of Bennett College are testing                
              an integrated two semester introductory physics course for                     
              science majors.  The course serves either as preparation for,                  
              or as a replacement of the traditional survey course.  The                     
              project is a cooperative venture between a predominantly white                 
              state university of 11,000 and a private college of 600 African                
              American women. The project is evaluating the effects of a                     
              decidedly different approach to the traditional two semester                   
              introductory physics course on women, minority and 'second                     
              tier' students.  The attraction of the students to the course,                 
              the knowledge of physics gained and retained during the course,                
              and the retention rate of the students in the course are all                   
              being measured.  In addition, the future success in courses in                 
              the physical sciences and mathematics will be monitored. The                   
              tenet behind the proposed course comes from recent research in                 
              physics education, observations collected by the PIs over many                 
              years of teaching introductory courses, recent work done by the                
              PI in Project PIEDMONT, documented evidence describing the low                 
              entry rate and high attrition rate of women and non-Asian                      
              minorities in physical sciences, and the demographic studies                   
              which profile the necessity of increasing the numbers of these                 
              populations in the areas of science, mathematics and                           
              engineering.  Students in the proposed course are examining                    
              fewer subject areas in greater depth than students in the usual                
              survey course, and are doing so in ways which are pedagogically                
              more sound and intellectually more exciting.  The four-credit                  
              hour per semester course is being taught entirely in a                         
              laboratory setting for two hours per day, three days a week.                   
              The students are developing a firm foundation of concrete                      
              experiences through a method of guided inquiry, and are being                  
              exposed to the use of modern data acquisition and analysis                     
              tools through a microcomputer based laboratory component.
