Title       : Incorporating Object-Oriented Concepts in the Undergraduate Computer Science
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1992     
File        : a9156079

Award Number: 9156079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajiv Tewari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at a comprehensive redesign of the three-                
              course introductory computer science sequence for undergraduate                
              computer and information science majors.  The course sequence                  
              wasexamined in the light of the new ACM/IEEE report "Computing                 
              Curricula '91" to ascertain how best to revise the courses to                  
              bring them closer to recommended curricula in the report.  Some                
              of the fundamental and recurring concepts identified in the                    
              ACM/IEEE report, such as complexity of large programs, levels                  
              of abstraction, the concept of binding, abstract data types,                   
              evolution of requirements, and the importance of software                      
              reuse, are not adequately represented in the current                           
              curriculum.  The project introduces these concepts through the                 
              introduction of object-oriented theory, software engineering                   
              concepts, and object-oriented programming and design in the                    
              introductory curriculum.  It is believed that the object-                      
              oriented approach will prove more effective in introducing the                 
              fundamental and recurring concepts identified above.  The                      
              objective of the proposed revision is to bring the introductory                
              computer science curriculum more in line with the current                      
              state-of-the-art of software development technology.  The                      
              project will provide the students with access to class                         
              libraries, thus enabling them to develop moderately large and                  
              realistic projects using contemporary application development                  
              environments.  The aim is to better prepare the students for                   
              advanced undergraduate courses, graduate studies, and the                      
              competitive job market.  The changes are consistent with the                   
              sample course descriptions in the report "Computing Curricula                  
              '91", hence it is believed that the results should be                          
              generalizable to a large number of computer science                            
              departments.
