Title       : Biological Literacy Through Classroom Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1994   
File        : a9156087

Award Number: 9156087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77702              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo E. Handelsman joh@plantpath.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis Sequeira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Biology teaching should incorporate the process of scientific                  
              inquiry, not just the information resulting from it. Only by                   
              involving students directly in scientific experimentation and                  
              intellectual debate can they be expected to develop the                        
              fundamental understanding of biology required for biological                   
              literacy. Engaging students in this process demands a classroom                
              that motivates learning, teaches analytical skills as well as                  
              information, and captures the spirit of curiosity and                          
              questioning.  To meet these demands for the broadest spectrum                  
              of students we will address three objectives.  First, we will                  
              design and evaluate simple, low-cost experimental exercises                    
              that illustrate fundamental biological principles and can be                   
              conducted in an introductory course without a laboratory.                      
              Second, we will construct a set of exercises in scientific                     
              study skills that will address the difficulty, shared by many                  
              college students, of learning scientific material. The                         
              innovative aspect of our approach to study skills is that we                   
              will teach them in a forum that is tightly coupled with the                    
              biology instruction, which will provide for exchange between                   
              the biology instructor and the study skills instructor.                        
              Finally, drawing on cooperative learning approaches that are                   
              highly effective in other fields, we will develop exercises                    
              that can be used to involve all members of small or large                      
              classes in active thinking and learning. The product of this                   
              project will be a published manual that will explore the                       
              philosophy of building community in the classroom and will                     
              describe the exercises in experimentation, study skills, and                   
              cooperative learning that can be incorporated into                             
              introductory-level biology curricula.
