Title       : Taxonomy and Biogeography of Polar Sea Ice Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9006788

Award Number: 9006788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Staley jtstaley@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   During the winter the temperature becomes sufficiently low                
              for sea water to freeze in high latitude polar regions.  The                   
              layer of ice on the sea may thicken to over two yards in depth.                
              As the following spring approaches, microorganisms begin growing               
              in the lower foot of the sea ice.  This community of sea ice                   
              microorganisms is dominated by sea ice algae that grow to                      
              sufficient density to impart a red to brown color to the lower                 
              layer.  Bacteria derive nutrients from the ice algae and grow                  
              with them in the layer.  Although considerable work has been                   
              performed on the sea ice algae, little is yet known about the                  
              kinds of bacteria that grow in this cold environment.                          
                   Dr. James Staley of the University of Washington has                      
              collected sea ice bacteria from both antarctic and arctic zones                
              and has discovered novel forms, some with specialized gas                      
              vacuoles in their cells.  Using standard bacteriological tests as              
              well as newer molecular methods of DNA analysis, including                     
              ribosomal gene sequencing, Dr. Staley is characterizing the                    
              various bacterial strains collected from polar sea ice.  One                   
              objective is to determine whether the same species of bacteria                 
              occur in both the north and south polar ice communities.  Another              
              objective is to assay the range of taxonomic diversity present in              
              the two geographically separate regions.  Knowledge about true                 
              cold-adapted bacteria would have eventual implications for                     
              decomposition and waste disposal in polar regions and cold marine              
              waters.
