Title       : Chemistry of Diamond Nucleation and Growth: Kinetic Measurement, Modeling, and
               Film Characterization via REMP/MSand Solid State NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1992       
File        : a9006705

Award Number: 9006705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen K. Gleason kkgleasn@athena.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack B. Howard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert H. Sawin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9239,
Abstract    :
              Diamond thin films have numerous potential technological                       
              applications due to their extraordinary physical properties.                   
              Improvements in film quality, deposition rate, and uniformity                  
              are keys to the realization of this potential, requiring                       
              understanding and control of diamond nucleation and growth.                    
              In particular, heteroepitaxial diamond thin films for                          
              semiconductor devices have yet to be achieved. A multifaceted                  
              approach involving both experimental measurements and                          
              theoretical predictions of species impinging upon the growing                  
              surface, coupled with characterization and modeling is                         
              essential for unlocking the complexities of diamond deposition                 
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The PIs plan to develop a mechanistic understanding of diamond                 
              growth which can be used for the design of equipment and                       
              processes for crystalline, high quality diamond thin films.                    
              The kinetic mechanisms of diamond growth will be                               
              experimentally probed using a hot-filament reactor. Using                      
              molecular beam sampling to extract the species striking the                    
              heated wafer surface, the precursors for diamond deposition                    
              will be measured using Resonancely Enhanced Multiphoton                        
              Ionization Mass Spectrometry (REMPI/MS).  The gas phase                        
              concentrations will also be measured using Laser Induced                       
              Fluorescence (LIF) and Coherent, Anti-Stokes Raman                             
              Spectroscopy (CARS).  Both chemical and physical transport                     
              models will be constructed and tested against the experimental                 
              data in order to identify the main processes or steps that                     
              control the kinetics of diamond nucleation, growth, and defect                 
              formation.  The defect structures of diamond films will be                     
              measured using Carbon 13 solid state Nuclear Magnetic                          
              Resonance (NMR) as well as conventional techniques.  The NMR                   
              results will be analyzed to identify the type and quantity of                  
              defects and will be correlated to conventional techniques such                 
              as Raman scattering to relate these studies to others in the                   
              literature.  Selective Carbon 13 isotopic labeling will be                     
              used to gain insight into the kinetics of diamond formation.                   
              The nucleation of diamond growth will be quantified using                      
              Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) to count and measure the                   
              nuclei during the initial phases of growth.  Devices will be                   
              fabricated and tested, and their characteristics will be                       
              correlated with the diamond growth parameters and film                         
              characterization.
