Title       : Mitochondrial Presequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9006691

Award Number: 9006691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Roise   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9251,
Abstract    :
                 The biophysical mechanism of protein translocation into                     
              mitochondria will be studied.  Most proteins imported from the                 
              cytoplasm into mitochondria contain amino-terminal targetting                  
              sequences that direct the uptake of the proteins into the                      
              organelle.  These sequences have characteristic physical                       
              properties and function as independent domains of the precursor                
              proteins.  The minimal sequence necessary for targetting the                   
              beta-subunit of the yeast F1-ATPase into mitochondria has been                 
              identified and heavily mutagenized by other workers.  These                    
              studies have identified residues that are critical for the                     
              function of this targetting sequence.  Peptides corresponding to               
              the the wild-type sequence, and a series of single and double                  
              point mutants that are greatly diminished in their ability to                  
              import proteins into mithocondria in vivo, will be synthesized                 
              chemically.  The physical behavior of the peptides will be                     
              measured using biophysical techniques and compared to the                      
              properties previously found for other mitochondrial targetting                 
              sequences.  Sensitive and quantitative fluorescence- based assays              
              will then be used to measure peptide binding to and import into                
              isolated yeast mitochondria.  Effects of the mutations on                      
              interactions of the peptides with mitochondria will identify                   
              features of a presequence that are important for its function.                 
                                                                                             
               The mitochondrion is the major energy transducing unit of                     
              eukaryotic cells, containing within it the enzymatic machinery to              
              carry out oxidative phosphorylation (i.e., oxidative conversion                
              of C-C bond energy to CO2 and ATP).  The organelle (like its                   
              cousin, the chloroplast) contains its own DNA, RNA, and                        
              protein-synthetic machinery, and some of its integral proteins                 
              are mitochondrial gene products.  However (again like the                      
              chloroplast), most of the proteins found in the mitochondria are               
              products of nuclear genes, which are translated by cytoplasmic                 
              ribosomes and subsequently translocated across the mitochondrial               
              double membrane system.  This project addresses the very                       
              important problem of the mechanism of this protein translocation               
              process.
