Title       : Phylogeny and Morphometry in the Cenozoic Bryozoan Adeonellopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9006983

Award Number: 9006983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61519              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott H. Lidgard lidgard@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Cheilostome bryozoans are colonial marine invertebrates that              
              are a common constituent of post-Paleozoic seas.  The individual               
              polyps that comprise the colony are capable of differentiating                 
              into several different "heteromorphs", each of which serves a                  
              distinct function that benefits the colony (e.g., protection from              
              encrusting competitors).  Biologists have tended to rely on the                
              characteristics of individual zooids (within which polyps                      
              reside) in distinguishing species and constructing                             
              classifications.  Dr. Scott Lidgard proposes a study of both                   
              zooid- and colony-level features, for the purpose of establishing              
              their relative value in unravelling evolutionary relationships in              
              a genus of fossil cheilostomes.  Dr. Lidgard will use the most                 
              current techniques of computer-based image analysis and                        
              phylogenetic reconstruction.                                                   
                   The proposed research has implications beyond                             
              paleontologists interested in bryozoan classification.  The focus              
              on colony-level organization is relevant to botanists and                      
              invertebrate zoologists interested in corals, sponges, and other               
              colonial groups.  The results of this study will suggest whether               
              or not the colony-level of integration has a significant effect                
              on the evolutionary history of these groups, and on the way                    
              research is conducted on them.
