Title       : Fiber Diffraction from Macromolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9006352

Award Number: 9006352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Makowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop new strategies for                      
              determining the structures of macromolecular assemblies not                    
              amenable to conventional crystallographic analyses.  The                       
              focus will be on assemblies made up of many identical                          
              subunits arranged into helical or planar arrays.  Most of the                  
              subunits making up these assemblies cannot be made to form                     
              three dimensional crystals nor can the assemblies themselves                   
              be crystallized.  Diffraction from the non-crystalline                         
              specimens that they do form has intrinsic limitations that                     
              make extraction of structural information more difficult than                  
              for crystallographic studies.  In this project Dr. Makowski                    
              will develop methods to exploit new sources of phase                           
              information, methods for integrating structural information                    
              from other experimental techniques, and continue development                   
              of fundamental techniques needed for successful use of fiber                   
              diffraction.  Specific objectives include; (1) use of                          
              multiwavelength anomalous scattering for phasing fiber                         
              diffraction patterns; (2) development of a method for                          
              refining structural models directly against film data; (3)                     
              use of simulated annealing for refinement of structural                        
              models against fiber diffraction data; (4) development of                      
              methods for integrating other structural information as                        
              restraints into the refinement of a structural model; (5)                      
              development of quantitative methods for assessment of                          
              structural models; (6) exploration of new methods of specimen                  
              preparation.  These methods will be tested on a variety of                     
              macromolecular assemblies.  The objective of the work is an                    
              integrated set of methods applicable to a very broad range of                  
              macromolecular assemblies.
