Title       : Host Range Expansion of the Fungus Atkinsonella hypoxylon Infecting Danthonia
               Grasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1993     
File        : a9006858

Award Number: 9006858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Clay CLAY@Indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The goal of the proposed research is to determine the causes              
              and consequences of the shift by a plant parasitic fungus to new               
              plant species that it could not infect previously.  The                        
              investigator will conduct several experiments designed to                      
              determine whether the shift to new host species resulted from                  
              genetic changes in the fungi or the plants, or whether the shift               
              occurred independently of genetic changes.  Preliminary results                
              suggests that genetic changes in the fungi allow them to infect                
              additional host species.  In addition, he will investigate how                 
              the new fungal/plant combinations are adapting to each other                   
              compared with the old combinations, particularly whether the                   
              fungus differs in its pathogenicity on the new host species.                   
                   This research has important basic and applied significance.               
              Most previous research on host/parasite interactions has                       
              considered association that are historically ancient.  Little                  
              research has considered biological interactions between host and               
              parasite in the early establishment of the relationship when                   
              important evolutionary changes are likely to occur.  This                      
              research will provide significant information about this early                 
              stage.  The research will also have important applied                          
              significance in understanding how disease organisms gain the                   
              ability to infect new host species that previously were                        
              resistant to infection.  The movement of the AIDS virus from                   
              primates to humans is an example of how significant this process               
              can be.  Because the host plants in this study are grasses, our                
              most important group of agricultural plants, this research will                
              aid in understanding and perhaps preventing disease epidemics in               
              crop grasses like corn, rice, and wheat.
