Title       : Reinforcement in a Zone of Overlap and Hybridization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9006484

Award Number: 9006484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Howard dahoward@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The research proposed by Daniel Howard and John Doherty                   
              addresses some of the most difficult problems in biology;                      
              namely, how does reproductive isolation (the absence of                        
              interbreeding between individuals of different species) develop                
              as one species splits into two and, in particular, what is the                 
              role of selection against hybridization in the evolution of                    
              reproductive barriers?  Answers to these questions are central to              
              an understanding to the development and conservation of                        
              biological diversity on earth.  The questions will be approached               
              by studying ground crickets that are in the process of splitting               
              to form new species.  Answers obtained from the study will be                  
              relevant to all sexually reproducing organisms.                                
                   Research over the past three years has identified male                    
              calling song differences as a potential reproductive barrier                   
              between the newly forming species, Allonemobius fasciatus and A.               
              socius.  The identification of this potential barrier during a                 
              critical stage of species formation provides a rare opportunity                
              to study the evolution of reproductive isolation during a                      
              speciation event.  During the next three years, the hypothesis                 
              of reinforcement will be tested.  This hypothesis states that                  
              the calling song displacement exhibited by A. fasciatus in areas               
              where it occurs with A. socius represents a reproductive barrier               
              that has evolved as a consequence of selection against                         
              hybridization.  The work will include investigations of :  (1)                 
              geographic variation in male calling song, (2) female response to              
              song, (3) the genetics of song differences, (4) the cost of a                  
              hybrid mating, and (5) sperm competition.  The proposed studies                
              will not only provide a rigorous test of the hypothesis of                     
              reinforcement, but they will provide fundamental information on a              
              trait potentially responsible for reproductive isolation.  Only                
              by combining studies of the genetics, behavioral ecology, and                  
              developmental biology of specific traits serving as reproductive               
              barriers with analyses of geographic distribution patterns, will               
              biologists arrive at an understanding of the process of                        
              speciation.  The proposed research should lead into even more                  
              rigorous studies of the acquisition of reproductive isolation                  
              between A. fasciatus and socius.  These species are rapidly                    
              becoming a model system for the study of biological processes.                 
                   From an applied perspective, the family Gryllidae (crickets)              
              includes some very serious agricultural pests.  The proposed                   
              research will provide badly needed information on the                          
              reproductive biology of crickets - information that can be used                
              to help develop biological control programs.
