Title       : A Program of Research in Environments for Scientific Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1992      
File        : a9006137

Award Number: 9006137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $688500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hopcroft jeh@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The fundamental goal of this research is the development of the                
              science base necessary to reduce the time and effort required to               
              assemble and use computer tools for simulation and analysis of                 
              physical systems.  Most existing simulators solve a limited range of           
              problems, are difficult to modify, and are difficult to integrate              
              because each uses its own representation scheme.  The research will            
              address these issues and build an environment that automates many of           
              the steps in creating a simulator.                                             
              Defining a simulator requires; choosing equations to model the                 
              behavior of the physical systems, choosing and implementing                    
              computational methods for solving the equations defining mechanisms            
              to handle the complex control flow of simulations, and choosing                
              representation schemes for physical objects, their properties,                 
              equations, etc.                                                                
              Currently, these steps are carried out implicitly, without computer            
              aid.  The researchers will design a software architecture that                 
              allows simulators to be described in terms of equations and                    
              mathematical properties naturally suited to the problem.  The                  
              research will develop: a model representation system for                       
              representing the quantities and laws that describe the physical                
              behavior in a given analysis model; and analysis specification                 
              system, a language for defining the behavior of a simulation in                
              terms of the laws and quantities; a scene editor; and a low level              
              interface for integrating existing modules such a numerical packages           
              or finite element codes.
