Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Control for Stochastic Wear Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9006674

Award Number: 9006674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Heinricher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Stockbridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigators will study stochastic process                 
              models for systems which are naturally monotone and they will                  
              solve stochastic control problems for these systems. One                       
              important application for such processes is in optimal control                 
              and replacement problems for systems subject to deterioration                  
              and failure.  They will work with a class of system models for                 
              wear in which one component of a vector process is monotone.                   
              These systems are constructed from diffusions and dynamic                      
              programming techniques for the analysis of controlled diffusions               
              can be extended.  The monotonicity of the wear process provides                
              additional structure and their analysis will take advantage of                 
              this structure.                                                                
                   The principal investigators will study stochastic process                 
              models for systems which are naturally monotone and they will                  
              solve stochastic control problems for these systems. One                       
              important application for such processes is in optimal control                 
              and replacement problems for systems subject to deterioration                  
              and failure.  This area of application combines tools from the                 
              areas of probability and applied mathematics.
