Title       : Experimental Tests of Food Web Theory in Aquatic Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9006462

Award Number: 9006462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Morin pjmorin@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Food web theory predicts a series of relationships between                
              the species richness (number of species) of a natural assemblage               
              and the stability of species abundances in time.  In spite of the              
              importance of food web dynamics to both basic and applied issues               
              in ecology, few of these predictions have been tested                          
              experimentally.  This project will first assemble replicated food              
              webs of protozoans that differ in species richness, connectance                
              (number of species interactions in an assemblage) or number of                 
              trophic levels.  These webs will then be used to evaluate the                  
              persistence and temporal stability of communities with and                     
              without small perturbations in nutrient levels.  These enrichment              
              experiments are very important to improve the knowledge base of                
              fertilization effects in nature, an area of great concern as a                 
              result of the nutrient loading associated with global change.  In              
              another set of experiments, the effects of species richness will               
              be determined in the laboratory relative to the persistence and                
              variability of species.  A final group of trials will examine                  
              whether the degree of connectance in food webs affects their                   
              stability, and whether stability decreases as food chains                      
              increase in length.  Although these experiments will be done on                
              assembled communities in the laboratory, ancillary studies will                
              employ similar approaches to explore whether natural protozoan                 
              communities collected from the field will perform similarly to                 
              those constructed artificially.
