Title       : Crosslinks Between Plant Cell Wall Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1992   
File        : a9006052

Award Number: 9006052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Mort amort@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Geno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The structure of plant cell wall is not known in enough detail to              
              explain any of its biological roles in such processes as growth,               
              disease, resistance, and maintenance of cell shape.  Our lack of               
              structural knowledge is probably due to both the complexity of                 
              the structure and the paucity of researchers working on detailed               
              structural analysis of cell walls.                                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Mort is proposing to continue analysis of the structure of                 
              the pectins of cotton suspension culture cell walls.  The goal                 
              over the next four years is to fully characterize the primary                  
              structure of these pectins.  He will characterize the                          
              rhamnogalacturonan I (RGI) region with respect to the structure                
              of its sidechains, the distribution of acetylation in its                      
              backbone, and to what polymers RGI is attached.  He will                       
              determine the size of the homogalacturonan regions in cotton                   
              pectins, the distribution of rhamnosyl residues in them, the                   
              distribution of methyl esterification in them, and the type and                
              distribution of sidechains directly attached to the galacturonic               
              acid residues (if they exist).  He will also determine the nature              
              of the linkage between the homogalacturonan region of pectin and               
              RGI.  When these details of the structure of cell wall pectins                 
              are known it will easier to study the complexities of the                      
              biosynthesis of pectins and the functional significance of the                 
              structural complexities of pectins, and to construct a more                    
              detailed model for the structure of dicot cell walls.  It will                 
              also be easier to understand the interaction of plant pathogens                
              with cell walls.
