Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Ultrafast Optical Switching in High
               Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9006847

Award Number: 9006847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoi S. Kwok   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project involves the study of ultrafast phenomena in high                 
              temperature superconducting thin films.  The Research Equipment Grant          
              will enable construction of an ultrafast electro-optic sampling system         
              to investigate the generation of nonequilibrium carriers by ultrashort         
              laser pulses.  Preliminary laboratory results by the principal                 
              investigator indicate the presence of such effects have been observed.         
              Such effects should have important applications to ultrafast optical           
              switching, and to ultrafast electrical pulse generation and                    
              propagation studies.  These studies are also relevant to future opto-          
              electronic integrated circuits applications.  In the proposed                  
              experiments, high quality superconducting films as thin s 400 A are            
              generated by the process of plasma-assisted laser deposition on                
              various dielectric substrates, and patterned into transmission line            
              structures.  Since no post-annealing is necessary in this sample               
              preparation technique, these lines are smooth with controllable grain          
              sizes.  Femtosecond laser pulses at various wavelengths are then used          
              to measure the temporal response of these patterned films.                     
              Wavelengths from 0.4-4.4 um will be used.  It is expected that the             
              ultimate response time should be less than 1 ps for the new oxide              
              superconductors.  Such studies are also of fundamental interest to the         
              understanding of nonequilibrium processes in high temperature 2-               
              dimension superconductors.  Other applications include ultrafast and           
              wideband detection of radiation and ultrafast optical signal                   
              processing.
