Title       : Evolution of Copper Resistance in Plant Microbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1992   
File        : a9006195

Award Number: 9006195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Cooksey Cooksey@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research is to investigate how plant-associated              
              bacteria adapt to toxic levels of copper in the environment.                   
              Copper is an important bactericide used frequently for disease                 
              control on agricultural plants, and microbes associated with                   
              those plants are therefore exposed periodically to high levels of              
              this metal.  The development of copper resistance in plant                     
              pathogenic bacteria may pose a threat to the future use of copper              
              in plant disease control, and a better understanding of how this               
              resistance develops will be important for evaluating this threat.              
              In addition, knowledge of how plant microbes develop copper                    
              resistance may be useful in designing methods for detoxifying                  
              copper in contaminated wastewaters or for genetically modifying                
              plants and beneficial microbes for increased tolerance to copper               
              in the agricultural environment.                                               
                   Microbial resistance to toxic metals such as mercury has                  
              been studied extensively, but copper resistance has received much              
              less attention.  Unlike many other heavy meals, copper is                      
              required by living organisms as a component of certain enzymes;                
              at low levels it is beneficial, but at high levels it is toxic.                
              The evolution of copper resistance in microbial populations must               
              therefore involve a balance between mechanisms to prevent copper               
              toxicity and the ability to maintain enough copper for cell                    
              growth.  Dr. Cooksey isolated copper-resistant bacteria from an                
              agricultural system where copper compounds are routinely applied               
              to plants for bacterial disease control.  Genes encoding copper                
              resistance have been cloned and characterized.  This proposal                  
              concerns the biochemical function of the cloned genes, their                   
              genetic regulation, and their relationship to homologous genes                 
              that have recently been detected in several bacterial species.                 
              Dr. Cooksey has hypothesized that the copper resistance genes                  
              have evolved from genes that produce normal copper-containing                  
              proteins.  These proteins may have been modified to bind more                  
              copper and prevent the toxic metal from reaching high                          
              concentrations in solution inside the bacterial cell.  Since                   
              copper is essential for growth, however, the resistance genes                  
              should be expressed only when toxic levels of copper are present;              
              Dr. Cooksey has shown that the resistance genes are copper-                    
              inducible, and this proposal addresses basic mechanisms of                     
              copper-inducible gene expression.
