Title       : Semantics of Parallel Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1992  
File        : a9006064

Award Number: 9006064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Brookes brookes+@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                   This is a basic research program concerning semantic models for           
              parallel programming languages.  Initial emphasis is on the design of          
              a mathematical model of parallel algorithms  extending and                     
              generalizing earlier work of Berry and Curien on sequential algorithms         
              and concrete data structures.  The model is intensional, in that the           
              denotation of a program includes information about parallel                    
              computation strategy in addition to information about the extensional          
              or functional behavior of the program.  This allows a novel                    
              intensional strictness ordering on parallel algorithms that plays a            
              fundamental role in our theory; for instance, application of a                 
              parallel algorithm to its arguments is a continuous operation with             
              respect to this ordering.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   It will be shown that the model forms a cartesian closed category         
              in which an elegant account of parallel functional computation can be          
              given.  It will support semantically-based techniques for proving both         
              traditional (extensional) correctness properties and efficiency                
              properties that depend on intensional aspects of program behavior.             
              The intensional information will be used to determine a hierarchical           
              class of algorithms based on an intuitively reasonable notion of               
              "degree of parallelism".  This idea will provide a framework for               
              assessing the relative expressive powers of various sequential and             
              parallel primitives.  In the long term theoretical insights gained in          
              this investigation will be in the design of new programming languages          
              that employ parallelism uniformly and generally, yet whose semantic            
              properties are well understood, and for which tractable proof methods          
              can be devised.
