Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: A Gas ChromatographicSystem for Complex
               Mixtures from High Temperature, Heterogeneous Hydrocarbon Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1990     
File        : a9006819

Award Number: 9006819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Niksa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Cappelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Kruger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Two gas chromatographs systems are to be purchased, one with                   
              conventional detectors for the polar and nonpolar                              
              noncondensibles, and the second with mass specific detection                   
              (GC/MS) for the polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).  The                  
              supporting research emphasizes heterogeneous hydrocarbon                       
              processing at high temperatures, especially pollutant                          
              formation during heterogeneous combustion.  Catalytic exhaust                  
              reduction, NOx formation during coal combustion, and diamond                   
              film CVD are the topical areas.  The catalytic converter                       
              program aims to generate the first reliable set  of scalar                     
              fields under carefully controlled conditions, and use them to                  
              test the present widely held beliefs concerning rate laws and                  
              model parameters.  The refinery gas analyzer will be used to                   
              measure the polar and nonpolar noncondensible fuel and product                 
              species, to determine transverse profiles of the reaction                      
              species at selected axial positions in a metal monolith                        
              converter channel.  The GC/MS system will be used for PAH                      
              species in the exhaust, especially those from alternative fuel                 
              formulations.  In relation to NOx formation during coal                        
              combustion, most of the fuel-N escapes the coal bound into tar                 
              with the result that substantial fractions of the volatilized                  
              fuel-N can be reintegrated into a carbonaceous solid phase.                    
              It is conceivable that the efficiency of NOx abatement under                   
              fuel rich conditions is due to the promotion of soot                           
              formation, rather than the direct formation of nitrogen from                   
              small molecular products such as HCN or ammonia.  The final                    
              project is directed at diamond deposition from plasma-                         
              processed hydrocarbon gases, and from the post-flame gases of                  
              an oxyacetylene torch.  It is suspected that the gas phase                     
              chemistry when methane is abundant yields significant amounts                  
              of PAH, and that the PAH is necessary for the formation of an                  
              amorphous carbon interlayer.  The chromatographs will be used                  
              to analyze the noncondensibles and PAH in the effluent, to                     
              clarify the connections between the interlayer and the rate of                 
              diamond deposition.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The two gas chromatographs to be purchased are essential for                   
              experimentation in combustion, pollution sciences, and high                    
              temperature materials processing.  Together with the existing                  
              capability for very heavy hydrocarbon liquids analysis using                   
              high performance liquid chromatography, the new systems will                   
              enable determination of virtually all stable species                           
              associated withthe three research areas described.
