Title       : Collaborative Research: Genetic Divergence and Life History in a Plant
               Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1994   
File        : a9006479

Award Number: 9006479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99084              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Semlitsch SemlitschR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Candace E. Galen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   Most natural populations of plants and animals display great              
              genetic variability, even though many factors reduce genetic                   
              diversity within a species.  Plant and animal breeders, as well                
              as conservation biologists, often attempt to maintain genetic                  
              diversity within desirable lines, since such diversity is thought              
              to reduce the possibility of extinction due to inbreeding                      
              depression, disease, parasites, and new environmental challenges.              
              Understanding how genetic diversity is engendered and maintained               
              in natural populations is therefore a major goal of conservation               
              biologists.                                                                    
                   This project will focus on the ways in which spatial                      
              heterogeneity can bring about genetic diversification within a                 
              single plant population.  Microgeographic variation due to slope               
              aspect, snow melt, water evaporation, or elevation can force                   
              plants within a single site to flower at different times and can               
              lead to different selective pressures on early and late flowering              
              individuals.  Population genetics theory suggests that these                   
              conditions will lead to the maintenance of high genetic                        
              diversity.                                                                     
                   In this study system, variation in snow melt schedule                     
              imposes variable growth and flowering schedules on the alpine                  
              plant community.  How the temporal and spatial components of this              
              heterogeneity maintain genetic variation within an alpine                      
              population of Ranunculus will be determined.  This research will               
              produce insight into factors that preserve genetic diversity in                
              economically useful plant and animal breeds as well as in                      
              threatened populations.
