Title       : Effects of Predation on Behavior and Life History of Tree Hole Mosquitoes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9006452

Award Number: 9006452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Juliano sajulian@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   By killing their prey, predators have an obvious direct                   
              affect on prey populations.  Predators also have important                     
              indirect effects on prey, and these indirect effects are less                  
              well understood than are the direct effects.  Predation can                    
              effect prey behavior by selectively killing individuals that                   
              engage in activities that increase the chance of capture.  Prey                
              individuals may also modify their behavior by adopting low-risk                
              behaviors when predators are nearby. Prey such as insects that go              
              through distinct larval and adult stages can also alter their                  
              exposure to predation by altering the time and body size at which              
              they transform from larva to adult.  Although all of these                     
              indirect effects of predation are possible, the integration of                 
              all of these behavioral and life history responses to predation                
              is not well understood.                                                        
                   The proposed research tests for fixed (always expressed) and              
              flexible and flexible (expressed only when predators are nearby)               
              behavioral and life history responses to predation in larvae of a              
              tree-hole dwelling mosquito.  Populations known to differ in                   
              exposure to predation, behavior, and vulnerability to predation                
              are compared.  The results of this study will show how fixed and               
              flexible behavioral and life history traits are integrated into                
              an overall life style, and how this life style is related to                   
              predation.  These experiments will provide an explicit test of                 
              the predictions of a mathematical model for the evolution of                   
              life history in response to predation.  Because the bite of this               
              mosquito sometimes transmits LaCrosse encephalitis, understanding              
              how this species responds to predation, and how these responses                
              affect populations of adult mosquitoes, may also be important for              
              understanding the medical impact of this species.
