Title       : Multicultural Comparative Study of Social Control after the California
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1990   
File        : a9006502

Award Number: 9006502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4896               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna F. Kuhl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Kentucky Univ
	      Division of Sponsored Programs
	      Richmond, KY  40475    606/622-3636

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              0310000   Municipal Service                       
              0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              86        Sociology                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Every year earthquakes, hurricanes, and other forms of natural                 
              disaster strike communities with often devastating impact and                  
              without regard to national boundaries or socioeconomic capacity.               
              Media accounts on television, radio, or in print make vivid the                
              extent of physical damage and the most evident consequences to                 
              life and limb.  While word spreads with dispatch both nationally               
              and internationally, lead stories change with almost as much                   
              dispatch.  Often there is mention of crime, altered patterns of                
              victimization, or looting, but the impact of such events on the                
              social fabric of a community is little understood.                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Kuhl seeks to respond to this gap in our knowledge by a                    
              timely, sustained, and systematic study of social control in                   
              three communities affected by the California earthquake.  The                  
              research focuses on crime, victimization, social service, and                  
              social control both prior and subsequent to the earthquake in                  
              communities that differ in terms of cultural, economic, and                    
              social conditions.  Specifically, the study focuses on the                     
              hardest hit communities in San Francisco (primarily upper-middle               
              class, Caucasian areas), Oakland (black, lower-class areas), and               
              Watsonville (lower class areas with migrant and illegal migrant                
              Hispanic residents).  Multiple methods will be used in the                     
              research including agency records, periodicals, crime reports,                 
              and in-depth interviews with private individuals as well as with               
              community leaders, agency workers, and public officials.  This                 
              project will create a unique data set that should be invaluable                
              to understanding how social control systems operate and how                    
              patterns of crime and victimization evolve in crisis situations.
