Title       : Data Structures for Sorting, Searching, Hashing, Computational Geometry and
               Nonprocedural Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9006059

Award Number: 9006059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75773              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan E. Willard dew@cs.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Data structures to accommodate fast retrieval are perhaps the             
              oldest and certainly one of the most fundamental topics in computer            
              science.  This project addresses several open problems of both                 
              pragmatic and theoretical interest.                                            
                   The first group of open questions concerns worst-case algorithms          
              that outperform the information theoretical lower bound.  Recently an          
              O(log N/log log N) worst-case time algorithm for dynamic tree                  
              operations and an accompanying O(N log N/log log N) worst-case time            
              sorting algorithm have been designed.  Both algorithms run on                  
              essentially all digital computers and on all possible data inputs.             
              The new approach to sorting and searching rests on utilizing the power         
              of a digital computer's arithmetic and bitwise logical operations.             
              Numerous open questions arise about what upper and lower bounds for            
              sorting, searching, balance tree operations, and hashing can be                
              demonstrated in this modified mathematical model.                              
                   A second research area focuses on computational geometry.  Many           
              geometric problems, such as Voronoi diagram construction,  have been           
              thought to require at least N log N time because of their reduction            
              to sorting procedures, but all such theoretical lower bounds need to           
              be reconsidered in light of the recent results for sorting and                 
              searching.  There are also several open questions raised by earlier            
              research into  range query theory.  One particular question concerns           
              developing lower bounds that take into account the presence of                 
              subtraction, and a second concerns the time-space tradeoff for                 
              especially reporting queries.                                                  
                   Range query algorithms for batch queries, especially procedures           
              for executing relational calculus and SETL-like expressions, will also         
              be studied.
