Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Increasing Minority Participation in Mathematics at the
               Collegiate Level and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9006453

Award Number: 9006453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Henkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9271,
Abstract    :
                   An expansion of an extensive effort at the University of                  
              California Berkeley to attract, encourage and increase minority                
              participation in the mathematical sciences will be supported by                
              this award.  The genesis of the project lies in the Professional               
              Development Program at the university.  This program was begun in              
              1974 to enrich the mathematics-based professions with minorities               
              and women who could perform at levels of leadership.  Focus up to              
              1989 was on transforming the accomplishments of minority students              
              in freshman calculus from failure to success.  The success of the              
              effort has enabled significant numbers to graduate with majors in              
              engineering, science and mathematics.  This success has led to                 
              similar programs at other institutions such as the Universities                
              of Illinois and Texas.                                                         
              This award is directed toward raising the sights of the PDP to                 
              that of directing promising minority undergraduates into science               
              careers.  At this point, few pursue upper-division mathematics                 
              courses far enough to experience the deductive emphasis which                  
              gives these courses such a different character from the                        
              computationally-oriented lower-division mathematics courses.                   
              The program funded by the award has three parts.  First, is a six              
              week residential research summer school designed to inspire and                
              help prepare minority undergraduates who have excelled in lower                
              division work.  The activity is designed to motivate them to                   
              continue their studies and eventually complete a Ph.D. degree in               
              either mathematics or a closely-related field.  A long-range                   
              research program will be conducted by the PDP staff aimed at                   
              better understanding the factors that lead students to enroll in               
              pivotal mathematics courses, understanding why they continue to                
              study mathematics and why they enter mathematics-related fields.               
              Finally, work will be done to increase the number of faculty                   
              actively working on improving minority student performance and                 
              persistence in mathematics at all levels.  A special focus will                
              be developing a cadre of research mathematicians who can serve as              
              effective mentors and graduate dissertation advisors to alumni of              
              the summer school experiences.                                                 
              Students will be selected nationally through advertisements in                 
              major professional journals, personal contacts, direct mailing to              
              department heads and announcements at national mathematics and                 
              education conferences.  Seminars held during the term of the                   
              summer school will be led by active mathematicians carefully                   
              selected for their strong interest in working with minority                    
              students.  Special colloquium talks will be scheduled regularly.               
              In addition, the strongest student participants will be brought                
              to the national meeting of the Mathematical Association of                     
              America/American Mathematical Society in San Francisco in                      
              January, 1991.
