Title       : Reciprocal Effects of Female Choice and Male Traits in Poecilia Reticulata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9006744

Award Number: 9006744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184973             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Endler endler@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Secondary sexual traits are common in animals, and male                   
              traits are sometimes so strongly developed that they appear                    
              maladaptive.  What causes a particular combination of male traits              
              and female preferences in a given population, and why do                       
              populations evolve different combinations of traits?  The                      
              investigators are addressing this question in the guppy at                     
              several levels: the mechanisms of female choice, the effects of                
              female choice on the evolution of color patterns within                        
              populations, and testing the prediction (from sexual selection                 
              theory) of co-divergence of female choice criteria and male                    
              traits among populations.                                                      
                  This is a collaborative research effort with Anne Houde, New               
              Mexico State University.  They propose to explicitly test two                  
              major predictions from sexual selection theory.  First, they will              
              investigate the reciprocal evolution of male traits and female                 
              choice.  Second, they propose to explore the effects of the                    
              sensory drive process, and how this interacts with the evolution               
              of male traits and female choice.  In order to do this, they                   
              propose to carry out three long-term selection experiments which               
              should lead to long term genetic changes in female preferences                 
              and male traits.  One experiment selects for male traits and                   
              looks for evolution of female preferences.  Another selects for                
              female preferences (via selection on spectral sensitivity) and                 
              looks for evolution of male traits.  The third modifies the                    
              perception of color patterns (to females and predators) by                     
              varying ambient light color and predator color vision, and looks               
              for changes in male traits and female preferences.                             
                   The proposed continuation of the investigators work will                  
              yield an unusually complete understanding of the processes which               
              affect the long term joint genetic change of female choice and                 
              secondary male traits under the influence of sexual selection and              
              predation.
