Title       : Resource Islands: Their Role in the Stability of Desert Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1993   
File        : a9006621

Award Number: 9006621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross A. Virginia   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal addresses the role of resource islands in the               
              desertification of the Jornada basin of southern New Mexico.                   
              Resource islands represent small-scale patches or "hot spots" of               
              biological activity distributed across a heterogeneous desert                  
              landscape.  They can be characterized by the functional and                    
              structural properties of the shrubs that occupy and form the                   
              island, along with the interactions of the shrubs with their                   
              immediate abiotic and biotic environment.  The significance of                 
              these islands to the function and persistence of desert                        
              ecosystems in response to disturbances and environmental change                
              is poorly understood.                                                          
                   This project, conducted by Drs. Virginia and Reynolds, seeks              
              to understand how desert shrubs acquire resources to form these                
              islands.  The investigators are also interested in understanding               
              how the degree of island formation is related to the stability of              
              individual islands, and the role of resource island formation in               
              determining the stability of desert grasslands and shrublands.                 
              These tasks will be accomplished by an integrated field and                    
              modeling research effort that will: 1) examine the degree of                   
              resource island formation associated with the two most successful              
              shrubs (Prosopis glandulosa ?mesquite!, Larrea tridentata                      
              ?creosotebush!) in the recently desertified Jornada landscape; 2)              
              determine if structural changes accompanying island formation                  
              (e.g. plant architecture) result in a positive feedback system of              
              island self-augmentation; 3) determine if the magnitude and                    
              pattern of response of Larrea and Prosopis to an extreme                       
              environmental change (e.g. induced summer drought) is a function               
              of the degree of island formation; and 4) develop landscape                    
              models that can increase our understanding of the stability of                 
              grassland-shrubland systems in a changing environment.                         
                   Drs. Virginia and Reynolds are leading ecosystem ecologists               
              and have outstanding institutional support for this research.
