Title       : ROA: Evolutionary Dynamics of Speciation by Polploidy in Treefrogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9006763

Award Number: 9006763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117388             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Carl Gerhardt gerhardtc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Polyploidy in higher animals is generally rare, but more                  
              than fifteen species of five different families of frogs and                   
              toads have been discovered.  The subjects of this research are                 
              two widely ranging North American gray treefrogs - the polyploid               
              species Hyla versicolor, a tetraploid (2 times normal chromosome               
              number) and its diploid counterpart, h. chrysoscelis.  The main                
              goal is to learn if H. versicolor arose more than once from H.                 
              chrysoscelis or as a hybrid between ancestral h. chrysoscelis and              
              another diploid, h. avivoca.  The multiple-origin hypotheses                   
              will be tested by comparing the nucleotide sequences of                        
              mitochondrial DNA from frogs of all three species from widespread              
              areas through their distribution.  The hypothesis of multiple-                 
              origin will be supported if in an evolutionary tree based on                   
              sequence data, different populations of H. versicolor occupy                   
              different branches.  In other words, the two species in the same               
              area of the range would be more similar to each other than                     
              individuals of the same species from different parts of the                    
              range.  A second goal is to compare differences in the acoustic                
              properties of the mating calls of H. versicolor and H.                         
              chrysoscelis in areas where they occur together (sympatry) with                
              differences between areas where only one species occurs                        
              (allopatry).  Because the frogs use mating calls alone to                      
              identify correct mates, and because mismatings lead to sterile,                
              triploid hybrids, the working hypothesis is that differences                   
              within sympatry will be greater than differences between                       
              allopatric populations.
