Title       : The Effect of Differential Photosynthetic Capacity on Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1990   
File        : a9006882

Award Number: 9006882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Garbutt kgarbutt@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Virginia University
	      
	      Morgantown, WV  26506    304/293-0111

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The herbicide atrazine kills plants by disrupting the                     
              "light" reactions in the photosynthetic pathway.  It works by                  
              blocking the action of a critical protein (QB) in the electron                 
              transport chain of photosystem II.  The resistance takes the form              
              of a modification of the QB protein of photosystem II which                    
              prevents atrazine binding to the QB protein.  An additional                    
              effect of this modification of the QB protein is to reduce                     
              photosynthetic capacity.  This gives us biotypes with high                     
              photosynthetic capacity (atrazine resistant) and low                           
              photosynthetic capacity  (atrazine susceptible).  This project                 
              examines the link between photosynthetic capacity and fitness,                 
              using atrazine resistant and susceptible biotypes of Abutilon                  
              theophrasti, a common invader of agricultural fields in Eastern                
              North America.  Atrazine resistance is confered by a single                    
              nuclear gene in this species.                                                  
                   It has classically been assumed that a reduction of                       
              photosynthetic capacity will translate directly into a decrease                
              in plant fitness; however, this assumption has rarely been                     
              tested.  The fitness consequences of this reduction in                         
              photosynthetic capacity will be investigated in three                          
              experiments, all conducted in the absence of atrazine.  The first              
              will compare resistant and susceptible biotypes of A. theophrasti              
              grown as well spaced individuals, the second will be an intra-                 
              specific competition experiment in which A. theophrasti will be                
              competed with other commonly occurring weedy annual species.  In               
              all three experiment, demographic growth analysis, a non-                      
              destructive indirect method of growth analysis, will be performed              
              in order to provide a mechanistic interpretation of the link                   
              between physiology and fitness.
