Title       : SGER: Resource Assessment, Traditionality, and Catastrophic Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1990      
File        : a9006108

Award Number: 9006108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1990     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5353               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Warner warner@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0312000   Population                              
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Recent work by Dr. Warner has shown, through a series of                  
              experimental manipulations, that the interaction of tradition and              
              resource assessment is a potent force in mating system                         
              determination in a model species, Thalassoma bifasciatum (a coral              
              reef fish).  Mating sites that have been in use for generations                
              change to new locations only when tradition is broken by removing              
              and replacing the entire population.  Under normal circumstances,              
              site usage is constrained by tradition.  The physical attributes               
              of mating site may change over time, but the population has                    
              little opportunity to reset to any new distribution of resources               
              because there is an initial liability in attempting to mate at a               
              nontraditional site.  These results are significant because they               
              challenge current thinking in behavioral ecology: mating systems               
              may not be predictable from measurements of the current                        
              distribution of resources.                                                     
                   This work leads to some predictions about the role of                     
              catastrophic disturbance in this mating system.  If population                 
              traditions are broken by a natural catastrophe, the mating                     
              system which is reestablished should be correlated with existing               
              measurable resources.  Prior to the occurrence of Hurricane Hugo,              
              Dr. Warner had mapped the distribution of mating sites on 19                   
              patch reefs in Teague Bay, St. Croix.  On five of these reefs he               
              had also measured the physical characteristics of these sites as               
              well as other sites that were suitable but were not used.  There               
              were many unused sites that had the same physical characteristics              
              as sites that were used.  If Dr. Warner's published predictions                
              are correct, a new suite of mating sites will arise after the                  
              hurricane, and these will posses physical characteristics that                 
              will clearly distinguish them from other structures on the reef.               
              This is an unprecedented opportunity to test a hypothesis that                 
              referred specifically to the effects of catastrophic events on                 
              mating systems.
