Title       : Efficient Computer Algorithms for Symbolic Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9006077

Award Number: 9006077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich L. Kaltofen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              Several problems on the subject of efficient sequential and parallel           
              algorithm design and development for computer algebra and symbolic             
              mathematics are considered.  The design of a processor-efficient               
              parallel algorithm for solving general and special linear systems over         
              an abstract, possibly modular, domain will be investigated, as well as         
              the design of an efficient sequential algorithm for computing the              
              characteristic polynomial of an implicitly given square matrix by a            
              function that computes the product of this matrix with a vector.  A            
              computer implementation of the Goldwasser-Kilian/Atkin Las Vegas               
              integer primality test will be enhanced by improving several auxiliary         
              number theoretical algorithms used in the test.  An algorithm for              
              factoring multivariate polynomials that are given by black box                 
              programs for their evaluation will also be implemented on a network of         
              workstations.  Furthermore, a search for more effective versions of            
              Hilbert irreducibility-type theorems will continue.                            
                                                                                             
              Research on two new topics that are related to emerging applications           
              of symbolic computation is suggested.  Motivated by geometric design,          
              an algorithm for computing the irreducible components of an algebraic          
              curve or surface given by its polynomial defining implicit equation            
              with floating point coefficients will be developed.  Attacked by               
              computer algebra methods, the problem is to compute the approximate            
              factorization of a rational bivariate polynomial.  Finally, branching          
              out of algebraic arithmetic, the usage of special function, such as            
              squareroots, exponentials, or logarithms, in the straight-line program         
              will be investigated.  In particular, a model of an analytic straight-         
              line program will be formulated, and a transformation theory for this          
              model will be investigated.
