Title       : REU: Systematics and Phylogeny of Madagascan and African Dalechampia
               (Euphorbiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1993   
File        : a9006607

Award Number: 9006607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33172              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Scott Armbruster ffwsa@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dalechampia is a genus of vines of the poinsettia family                  
              (Euphorbiaceae) common throughout the lowland tropics in Asia,                 
              Africa, and the Americas.  Although much is now known about the                
              species diversity, phylogenetic relationships, and pollination                 
              biology of the New World species, in large part because of Dr.                 
              Scott Armbruster's studies over the last ten years, relatively                 
              little is known about Old World species.  Dalechampia is being                 
              employed as a model system for the study of how tropical plants                
              evolve in response to selective pressures generated by                         
              specialized pollinators.  Old World species must be integrated                 
              into these studies to complete a phylogenetic analysis of the                  
              entire genus.  Furthermore, accurate floristic inventories (used               
              in making management and conservation decisions) of tropical                   
              regions of the Old World as well as the New depend on reliable                 
              taxonomic information for common species such as Dalechampia.                  
                   In the Old World, Dalechampia is most diverse in Madagascar               
              and southern Africa.  Dr. Armbruster will collect herbarium                    
              specimens in this region along with liquid-preserved material,                 
              for morphological and biochemical analyses, including analyses of              
              the unusual resins and fragrance compounds produced by the plants              
              and used by pollinating bees.  Observations of the behavior of                 
              pollinating animals will also be made.  Morphological data will                
              be analyzed using cladistic methods to determine likely                        
              phylogenetic trees that show relationships among Old World taxa                
              and between Old and New World groups.  These results will improve              
              the classification system for Dalechampia, indicate likely                     
              migratory pathways in the evolution of Old and New World species,              
              and determine the origins of the various pollination mechanisms                
              found in these plants.
