Title       : Leaf Virus Infection and Shade-Sun Acclimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9006854

Award Number: 9006854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plant pathologists have frequently suggested viruses are                  
              parasites of chloroplasts.  The investigators will integrate                   
              approaches from plant population biology, physiological ecology,               
              and  pathology to test the hypothesis that virus infection in                  
              leaves of herbaceous plants growing in the shade may limit their               
              ability to acclimate to, and to occupy bright light habitats. A                
              field study in which three species from shaded and sunny habitats              
              will be infected with known viruses has been designed to test the              
              significance of virus interactions with photosynthesis under                   
              natural conditions.  The species selected, Solanum dulcamara,                  
              Plantago lanceolata, and Anthoxanthum odoratum, have all been                  
              thought to show ecotypic differentiation with respect to sun and               
              shade, and all are known to carry many viruses under field                     
              conditions.  It is possible that symptoms of terminal                          
              photoinhibition (leaf yellowing in the sun) previously associated              
              with shade ecotypes may reflect the consequences of viral                      
              infection.                                                                     
                   New methods of chlorophyll fluorescence imaging will be                   
              developed which can diagnose impaired photosynthesis in virus                  
              infected leaves prior to symptom expression.  These non-intrusive              
              methods will be used to screen populations of plants for changes               
              in photosynthesis which will be linked to plant growth,                        
              fecundity, and survival following infection.  Such                             
              instrumentation may well find application in horticulture, where               
              virus infection of plants in nursery cultivation is rampant.
