Title       : Molecular Genetics of Shoot Apical Meristems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9006028

Award Number: 9006028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283705             (Estimated)
Investigator: June I. Medford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In plants, development takes place continuously from activities                
              of small groups of pluripotent cells known as meristems. The                   
              entire above ground portion of a plant develops from continuous                
              events in a meristem found in the shoot apex, the shoot apical                 
              meristem. Since it is not uncommon for many plants to live for a               
              century, the continuous activities in shoot apical meristems                   
              describes processes unmatched elsewhere in biology. This study                 
              will focus on how molecular events in the meristem function to                 
              make a plant. Genes with meristematic enriched expression,                     
              designated "meri", will be studied. Expression patterns for                    
              specific cDNAs in hand will be confirmed and localized on a                    
              tissue specific level. Additional meri clones will be isolated.                
              The transcriptional promoter for the most specific clones will be              
              defined, fused to a reporter gene (GUS) and transferred to                     
              Arabidopsis plants. Transgenic plants expressing the chimeric                  
              meri-GUS gene will be analyzed for histological expression to                  
              confirm localization studies and to determine how the meri genes               
              are expressed in the dynamic events in meristems. Furthermore,                 
              the response of the meri genes to physiological cues will be                   
              examined by crossing the 'meri-GUS' plants to a transgenic line                
              capable of heat inducible hormone alterations. These studies will              
              provide insight into how genes within the shoot apical meristem                
              function in development, and hence insight into how the meristem               
              "makes" a plant.
