Title       : Systematic Investigation of the Diatom Genus Tabellaria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1990      
File        : a9006727

Award Number: 9006727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene F. Stoermer stoermer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Diatoms, unicellular algae with silica-rich cell walls that               
              are intricately ornamented, are important ecological indicators                
              of water quality and nutrient status, with individual species                  
              adapted to particular conditions.  Their use as indicators                     
              depends upon a reliable classification of the species, using                   
              stable morphological features of the cell wall.  Diatom cell                   
              walls are easily preserved as fossils, for example in lake-bed                 
              cores, and make possible the analysis of very long-term changes                
              in species composition and abundance, a task again dependent upon              
              reliable taxonomic markers.  Dr. Eugene Stoermer of the                        
              University of Michigan is studying freshwater diatoms of the                   
              genus Tabellaria to assess the limits of morphological                         
              variability within and between species of this group.                          
                   Tabellaria species are found throughout the northern                      
              hemisphere, and about 80 species have been named and described                 
              over the years, mostly briefly and in many cases on the basis of               
              unreliable, environmentally induced variations.  Dr. Stoermer is               
              developing morphometric procedures using Fourier transformations               
              for the rapid measurement, under the light microscope, of cell                 
              outline and other cell-wall features, to delimit those aspects of              
              size and shape that are less prone to modification by transient                
              water conditions, and can thus be used as stable markers of                    
              particular species.  Long-term evolutionary trends among diatom                
              species, with a presumed genetic basis, can then be studied,                   
              uncomplicated by variations locally induced by the environment.                
              The morphometric methods developed for size and shape analysis                 
              should be useful with other groups of diatoms and other                        
              unicellular organisms.
