Title       : Molecular Evolution and Systematic Applications of PGI Sequences in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9006458

Award Number: 9006458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie D. Gottlieb ldgottlieb@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The plant genus Clarkia, of annuals native to California,                 
              has been investigated intensively for its morphology and its                   
              chromosomes to understand how plant species originate and how new              
              morphological and cytological patterns evolve.  More recently Dr.              
              Les Gottlieb of the University of California at Davis has studied              
              biochemical and genomic aspects of these plants to describe the                
              extent of their overall genetic divergence, to account for the                 
              evolution of particular genes, and to learn how to use this                    
              molecular evidence to infer phylogenetic relationships among                   
              species.  Many species of Clarkia have duplicated isozymes of the              
              glycolytic enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI), which catalyzes              
              an essential reaction in intermediary metabolism.  Dr. Gottlieb                
              recently sequenced the nuclear genes encoding these isozymes in                
              species with and without the duplication.  Unexpectedly the genes              
              proved to have two different structures, one with a large number               
              of exons separated by introns of varying lengths and the other                 
              with no introns at all.  The genes without introns are                         
              hypothesized to be descended from a "processed" gene that arose                
              when a copy of the primary messenger RNA transcript of a                       
              structured gene was inserted into the genome in a position and                 
              orientation that permitted it to be expressed.                                 
                   Dr. Gottlieb will continue his analysis of PGI gene                       
              structure in order to identify the taxonomic distribution of the               
              structured and nonstructured PGI genes in Clarkia.  In turn, this              
              will allow determination of the origin(s) of the duplication when              
              compared with the phylogeny of these species determined from                   
              other morphological and molecular evidence.  The studies                       
              constitute one of the first analyses of molecular evolution in                 
              nuclear genes in wild (noncultivated) plants and are directly                  
              relevant to the description of the organization and pattern of                 
              sequence variation, the source of evolutionary change.
