Title       : Management Training and Public Service Education as Correlates of Orientations
               Toward Public Service Professionalism among State Administrators in 50 States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1990  
File        : a9006563

Award Number: 9006563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cassie Osborne, Jr.   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky State University
	      400 East Main Street
	      Frankfort, KY  40601    502/597-6520

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research proposed in this document is a study of the                       
              professional socialization of state public administrators.                     
              Preliminary findings of NSF (1987-1990) supported research                     
              on Kentucky State administrators has suggested that state                      
              government sponsored management training programs                              
              constitute an important correlate of the professional                          
              development of the state administrators in Kentucky.                           
              Considering the diverse program variations in the                              
              management training programs sponsored by various state                        
              governments, these preliminary findings on a single-state                      
              study suggest the need for a comprehensive national                            
              study.  A theorical model was proposed in the earlier                          
              study which has been refined in this proposed national                         
              study.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              A new construct "state administrative culture" has been                        
              posited in the proposed model.  The proposed fifty state                       
              study will focus on the relationships between public                           
              service education/state agency sponsored management                            
              training programs and the orientations of a representative                     
              sample of 25,000 state managers in the fifty states toward                     
              public service professionalism.  The methodology of data                       
              collection will be mail surveys aiming at 50% response                         
              rate generating about 12,500 valid questionnaires for data                     
              analyses.  Four specific hypotheses will be tested about                       
              the relationships between the orientations toward public                       
              service professionalism and public service                                     
              education/management training.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The proposed project will involve Kentucky State                               
              University graduate students, faculty, and professional                        
              staff of the Governmental Services Center.                                     
              Consultants from the Council of State Governments, and                         
              research faculty from the universities of Kentucky and                         
              Louisville will assist the research team.                                      
                                                                                             
              One of the goals of the project is to strengthen the                           
              social science research capability of Kentucky State                           
              University, an historically black higher education                             
              institution.  This will be the first national level                            
              empirical study of the professional socialization of                           
              state administrators with a comprehensive sample.                              
              It is anticipated that the findings of this study will                         
              generate new knowledge about the role of management                            
              training programs as agents of professional                                    
              socialization of state public administrators.
