Title       : Systematics of the 'Glabristyled' Robinieae (Leguminosae): Molecular and
               Traditional Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1990      
File        : a9006001

Award Number: 9006001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew T. Lavin mlavin@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Matt Lavin of Montana State University is beginning                   
              morphological and molecular studies of woody tropical legumes of               
              the Robinieae group, starting with field collecting in the West                
              Indies to amass herbarium specimens and materials for laboratory               
              analyses of chloroplast DNA mutations.  Species boundaries and                 
              relationships are poorly known in this group, and the integration              
              of traditional morphological characters from herbarium studies                 
              with new molecular markers from restriction enzyme analyses                    
              promises to improve taxonomic ordering and help determine                      
              phylogenetic linkages among the taxa.  In turn, these systematic               
              insights will allow tests of various hypotheses proposed for the               
              geological history of the islands of the West Indies and for                   
              theories of plant migrations in the region.                                    
                   Dr. Lavin is a young investigator with an impressive record               
              of taxonomic research on legumes from his doctoral and                         
              postdoctoral periods.  The techniques of restriction enzyme                    
              analysis of chloroplast DNA are powerful ones, uncovering                      
              mutational differences between species that reflect evolutionary               
              divergence since their most recent common ancestor.  The legumes               
              he is studying include some which are used for intercropping in                
              cocoa and coffee plantations, whose wood is used for local                     
              construction and furniture, and herbage used for domestic                      
              animals.  Improved taxonomic knowledge of the species and their                
              geographic distributions should aid in long-range management and               
              conservation of these natural plant resources.
