Title       : Support of International Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9006622

Award Number: 9006622
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $930233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine P. Ailes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI Intl Strat Studies Ct
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22209    /   -

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5939,5951,
Abstract    :
                   During the past decade, science and technology have come                  
              to be regarded as integral to the formulation of international                 
              political and economic policy.  In the Federal Government,                     
              the National Science Foundation plays a significant role in                    
              the support of such policies by planning and implementing                      
              international cooperation in science and technology through                    
              the promotion of activities designed to achieve the highest                    
              possible scientific and engineering benefits for U.S.                          
              science and engineering.  Within NSF, the Division of Inter-                   
              national Programs (INT) is the principal focal point for                       
              facilitating and supporting the agency's international                         
              science and technology initiatives.                                            
                   Important changes occurring in the world suggest that                     
              the development and implementation of effective international                  
              science and technology programs based on strategic information                 
              and careful policy analysis will be increasingly important in                  
              the 1990s.  Examples of pertinent changes include:  the                        
              movement toward economic integration in Western Europe, the                    
              opening of Eastern Europe, the increasing dynamism and                         
              economic cohesion in the Pacific Basin, and the growing                        
              aspirations and science and engineering capabilities of                        
              several major Latin American economies.  Thus, NSF will face                   
              multiple challenges that will require it to design and assess                  
              the efficacy of new initiatives, as well as evaluate the                       
              impacts of on-going programs in the international area.                        
              Planning for these activities will often require special                       
              meetings and conferences with selected U.S. and foreign                        
              experts in specific science and engineering disciplines, in                    
              addition to science policy specialists.  It will also require                  
              special studies on topics such as foreign capabilities in                      
              selected disciplines, or R&D expenditures and personnel                        
              estimates of foreign countries.                                                
                   In order to carry out its responsibilities in the                         
              international area and to develop new program and policy                       
              initiatives to respond to the challenges occasioned by the                     
              worldwide changes, INT requires external analytical and                        
              logistical support from a contractor who can draw on a range                   
              of substantive expertise about the global context for science                  
              and engineering, and who is also knowledgeable about NSF and                   
              INT's specific mission and operating constraints.  The                         
              objective of this contract is to provide for that support on                   
              a continuing basis.
