Title       : Action of Hormones in Plant Development: Hormonal Regulationof Gene Expression
               in Barley Aleurone Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9006591

Award Number: 9006591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tuan-hua D. Ho ho@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Gibberellic acid (GA), a plant hormone, regulates several important            
              physiological and developmental processes such as seed germination,            
              post-germination growth, stem elongation and flower induction.                 
              Together with another hormone, abscisic acid (ABA), GA is known to             
              regulate the synthesis and secretion of several enzymes which are              
              responsible for the utilization of nutrients stored in the seed.  The          
              enzymes are essential for post-germination growth of many cereal               
              grains.  The most abundant of these enzymes is alpha-amylase, which            
              degrades starch.  As part of a long term effort to elucidate the mode          
              of action of GA and ABA this research will focus on gene expression in         
              the aleurone layers of germinating barley seeds.                               
                                                                                             
              Previous research has revealed that hormone-mediated regulation of             
              enzyme expression in the barley-aleurone system is mainly at the level         
              of gene transcription.  The proposed research will investigate specific        
              interactions between specific protein factors with regulatory regions          
              (promoters) of hormone-regulated genes in the barley-aleurone system.          
              Goal for this research include:  (1) determination of specific DNA             
              sequences in the alpha-amylase promoters that interact with protein            
              factors, (2) investigation of the effect of hormonal treatments on the         
              activity of the protein factors, (3) determination of the importance of        
              promoter sequences inside the aleurone cells and (4) investigation of          
              the activity of these factors in genetic mutants with altered                  
              sensitivities to GA and ABA.  Results from this research should improve        
              our understanding of the primary action of GA and ABA, thus revealing          
              new insights into the signal transduction pathway governing hormonal           
              regulation of gene expression in plants.
