Title       : REU: Dynamics of Tropical Forest Seed Banks: Seed Predatorsas Determinants of
               Forest Regeneration Patterns and Plant- frugivore Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1991        
File        : a9006734

Award Number: 9006734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14605              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Gregory Murray gmurray@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Seed dormancy mechanisms are widespread among tropical                    
              plants that colonize small-scale disturbances (e.g.,                           
              treefalls),and presumably evolved because disperses deposit most               
              seeds in inappropriate habitats (i.e., beneath intact forest                   
              canopies).  Most colonists indeed arrive before gap formation,                 
              but the typical "residence time" of seeds in the soil before gap               
              information is unknown.  How long seeds persist in the soil is                 
              dependent upon the rates at which they are "removed," both by                  
              predators and by exceeding inherent limits of viability.  Rates                
              of removal from the soil have profound consequences for such                   
              "pioneer" plants and the communities in which they occur: species              
              composition in patches recovering from natural or anthropogenic                
              disturbance is largely determined by the composition of the seed               
              bank at the time of disturbance.  In addition, seed removal rates              
              mediate the fitness increments associated with different ripening              
              schedules and with dispersal by different animals.  This study                 
              will take advantage of extensive background data on germination                
              requirements, seed dormancy, and bird-generated seed shadows in                
              Costa Rican pioneer plants to evaluate these effects.  Through                 
              several controlled, replicated field experiments, the P.I. will                
              measure rates if seed input to and removal from the soil seed                  
              bank, and then examine the consequences of seed demography for                 
              community structure and the evolution of ripening phenologies and              
              plant-disperser relationships.  This work will have important                  
              implications for analyses of tropical forest dynamics.
