Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research: Population Genetic and Demographic Consequences of
               Seed Dispersal.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9006715

Award Number: 9006715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances M. Hanzawa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   The vast majority of all plants have seeds modified for                   
              dispersal, movement away from the parent plant.  The pattern of                
              seed dispersal has the potential to affect both the survival of                
              individual plants and characteristics of plant populations.                    
              Since plants are immobile once rooted, the quality of the site                 
              into which a plant is dispersed as a seed has a major effect on                
              its survival.  Patterns of seed dispersal also affect the spatial              
              arrangement of genetically related individuals.  This spatial                  
              genetic structure has important consequences for the plant                     
              population.                                                                    
                   The investigators will document the effects of seed                       
              dispersal on plant fate and population genetic structure by                    
              following the movement and subsequent survival of seeds in                     
              natural populations, using the dispersal of seeds of the native                
              wildflower, Trillium grandiflorum, by ants as a model system.                  
              Seeds will be marked with a radio label that will allow them to                
              be relocated after dispersal by ants or other animals.  The                    
              survival and growth of plants resulting from dispersed and                     
              undispersed seeds will be followed for 3 years.  The genetic                   
              identity of plants will be determined using electrophoresis.  In               
              order to document the role of dispersal in the development of                  
              spatial genetic structure, the genetic structure of the study                  
              population will be determined at four stages of the plant life                 
              cycle:  undispersed seeds, dispersed seeds, seedlings, and adult               
              plants.                                                                        
                   The results of this study will be of a value to conservation              
              biologists  involved in the preservation or restoration of                     
              plants in their natural habitats.  An understanding of the                     
              effects of seed dispersal on plant survival is critical to such                
              efforts.  This study will also explore the importance of seed                  
              dispersal by animals in the development of population genetic                  
              structure and in the maintenance of population genetic diversity,              
              two factors that may be important in the long-term conservation                
              of viable populations.
