Title       : Cooperative Research: Oxygen Evolution in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1990 
File        : a9006550

Award Number: 9006550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne M. Erickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is designed to determine how the structure of                    
              photosystem II (PSII) and associated cofactors mediate electron                
              transfer from water to the primary electron donor, P680.  The                  
              focus of this project is on the role of the D1 reaction center                 
              polypetide of PSII in oxygen evolution.  The powerful tools of                 
              molecular genetics are being used to mutagenize the chloroplast                
              gene coding for D1, transform the mutant gene back into the                    
              choroplast of the green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and                   
              characterize the transformants.  In a directed approach, specific              
              amino acid residues are being targeted for change.  In a broader               
              approach, specific portions of the gene are being altered, both                
              by deletion and by random mutagenesis.  These changes in D1 are                
              being characterized to determine their effect on PSII stability,               
              D1 stability, oxygen evolution and fluorescence induction                      
              kinetics.  Transformants with defects in oxygen evolution are                  
              being genetically crossed with specific mutant strains of C.                   
              reinhardtii which are lacking photosynthetic membrane complexes,               
              including Photosystem I (PSI), to produce strains which                        
              facilitate our isolation of relatively pure oxygen-evolving                    
              membrane preparations, free from PSI contamination and suitable                
              for spectroscopic studies of PSII electron transfer.  These                    
              strains are being further characterized in conjuction with Dr.                 
              Bruce Diner (DuPont de Nemours) who is performing detailed                     
              spectroscopic analyses and electron transfer and rates of oxygen               
              evolution in transformants.  EPR analyses are being performed on               
              these strains in conjunction with Dr. Gary Brudvig (Yale                       
              University).  Finally, suppressor mutants of selected                          
              transformant strains in which oxygen evolution is restored as a                
              result of a second mutation are being identified and                           
              characterized.  This technique provides further insight into                   
              inter- and intra-molecular structural relationships critical to                
              PSII function.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Terrestrial, aquatic and marine plants are the primary source of               
              renewable biomass on earth.  Through the process of                            
              photosynthesis plants convert radiant energy received from the                 
              sun into chemical energy.  This energy drives the conversion of                
              atomospheric carbon dioxide into sugars and other compounds, such              
              as fats and proteins, which are essential components of all                    
              living organisms.  Photosynthesis also results in the production               
              of oxygen, and this oxygen is crucial for sustaining all forms of              
              life that rely on respiration in order to provide the energy to                
              keep them alive.  The purpose of this research project is to gain              
              an increased understanding of the biochemical and physical                     
              reactions that take place during photosynthesis by plants,                     
              resulting in the production of oxygen and consumption of carbon                
              dioxide.  Most of this research will be done on a simple                       
              unicellular plant which is well suited to analysis by modern                   
              molecular biology and therefore provides an excellent model                    
              system for study.
