Title       : The Classification of Prokaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9006328

Award Number: 9006328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Woese carl@phylo.life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Carl Woese of the University of Illinois is continuing                
              his pioneering studies on the evolution, phylogeny, and                        
              classification of bacteria, by using nucleotide sequence data                  
              from ribosomal RNA to quantify genetic differences between                     
              bacteria.  By comparing the sequence of ribosomal RNA from a                   
              variety of organisms, a branching pattern of genealogical                      
              affinity can be constructed; few nucleotide differences between                
              species indicate close evolutionary relationship (the sharing of               
              similar genomes from a close common ancestor) whereas greater                  
              gene differences indicate more ancient divergence between                      
              lineages.  Dr. Woese is concentrating on clostridial and                       
              flavobacterial organisms, and other groups traditionally called                
              Gram-positive types.                                                           
                   An added dividend to this phylogenetic analysis of bacteria               
              is the use of ribosomal sequences to design species-diagnostic                 
              oligonucleotide probes.  These probes have been successfully                   
              employed in both medical and ecological studies to identify                    
              bacteria that have otherwise proved difficult or impossible to                 
              culture in the laboratory.  In addition, the phylogenetic                      
              relationships revealed through comparative nucleotide sequences                
              provide an evolutionary framework for interpreting and studying                
              other aspects of the physiology, biochemistry, and ecology of                  
              microbial organisms.
