Title       : REU: Influence of Nest Placement on Ecology of Coexisting Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9006320

Award Number: 9006320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will expand previous work on nest predation and              
              nest placement as influences on habitat selection, coexistence of              
              species, and reproductive investment.  Nest placement and nest                 
              predation have received relatively little attention in such                    
              topics and, thus, can increase our understanding of these topics               
              areas.  Plus, knowledge of ecological constraints on nesting                   
              success in critical to conservation of species because of the                  
              importance of reproductive success to population maintenance.                  
              Data on nesting success and associated habitat for more than 350               
              nest will be collected during two additional years under this                  
              renewal.  These data will be used to test hypotheses and                       
              predictions on nest patch choice and differences among coexisting              
              species.  Artifical nest will be used to conduct experimental                  
              tests of invasibility of communities as a function of evolved                  
              nest placement traits.  Researchers will study Hermit Thrushes                 
              nesting in the same substrate in two different habitats to                     
              examine effects of evolved nest placement on local nesting                     
              success (e.g.. "source - sink" effects).  Variability in nest                  
              placement will be examined within and among years and relative to              
              nest predation.                                                                
              Effects of nest placement on nest attendance by females, feeding               
              and guarding of females by males, and feeding nestlings will be                
              monitored.  Finally, differences among the coexisting species                  
              based on their foraging sites versus nesting sites will be                     
              compared.                                                                      
              Results will contribute to the basic ecology of avian communities              
              and to conservation biology of birds.                                          
                                                                                             
                 //
