Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Advanced Gas Chromatography System with
               Multidimensional Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9006353

Award Number: 9006353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8600               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Miller dmiller@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas P. Cernansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The complex analytical problems of separating the                              
              intermediates and products from the oxidation of fuel-like                     
              hydrocarbons require sophisticated chromatographic techniques.                 
              Two complementary methodologies to provide these capabilities                  
              are capillary columns and computer controlled, programmed                      
              valve switching, also called multi-dimensional or "heart                       
              cutting" analysis.  While capillary columns by themselves                      
              provide increased resolution over packed columns, they have                    
              not been sufficient to separate very complicated mixtures of                   
              alkanes, olefins, and oxygenates.  Therefore to achieve                        
              separation, it is often necessary to use multiple columns                      
              which are switched into and out of the carrier flow during an                  
              analysis.  Further separation is often achieved by holding                     
              selected fractions of the gas sample in a column and                           
              backflushing this partial sample into a second analytical                      
              column.  This technique is called "multi-dimensional" gas                      
              chromatography.  The system specified will allow                               
              implementation of sophisticated separation techniques, which                   
              are required for several ongoing research projects of the                      
              Combustion and Fuels Research Group.                                           
                                                                                             
              An enhanced gas chromatography identification/analysis system                  
              is requested to replace and upgrade existing capabilities for                  
              conducting research in the combustion processes and engine and                 
              fuels technology areas.  The proposed system allows multi-                     
              dimensional analysis capabilities, which are essential in the                  
              analysis of more fuel-like hydrocarbons which have carbon                      
              numbers greater than or equal to five.
