Title       : The Sexual System in Rhodophyta and the Classification of Gigartinales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1990    
File        : a9006490

Award Number: 9006490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max H. Hommersand hommersand@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The red algae (Rhodophyta) are richly represented in marine               
              environments from the tropics to the polar regions.  They are                  
              readily distinguished by their color, the result of a unique                   
              combination of photosynthetic pigments, and by the universal                   
              absence of flagellated cells, an apparently ancestral condition.               
              Most species are capable of sexual reproduction.  The life cycle               
              typically involves three generations or phases: a haploid sexual               
              phase, a diploid phase that grows in a semi-parasitic fashion                  
              directly on the female plant, and a free-living diploid phase.                 
              It has been suggested that the triphasic life cycle and complex                
              patterns of sexual reproduction and spore development that                     
              characterize nearly every family of red algae evolved as                       
              compensation for an inefficient fertilization mechanism in the                 
              absence of motile sperm.  Some of the most elaborate reproductive              
              structures are found in the Gigartinales, a large order currently              
              containing about 40 families.                                                  
                   The Gigartinales, like most red algae, are composed entirely              
              of branched filaments in which the cells are linked by special                 
              structures called pit connections.  These cellular connections                 
              can be specially stained and observed by light microscopy, and                 
              the stages of vegetative and reproductive growth thus followed                 
              cell by cell, event by event.  Dr. Max Hommersand of the                       
              University of North Carolina is making comparative studies of                  
              growth and reproductive development in several problematic groups              
              of Gigartinales, to determine consistent patterns that reflect                 
              taxonomic relationships.  The morphological evidence obtained                  
              will be used to test hypotheses about the multiple origins of                  
              auxiliary cells and connecting filaments in relation to other                  
              taxonomic characters.  Results obtained in this study will be                  
              used in revising the classification of these red algae and to                  
              determine evolutionary lineages among them.
