Title       : Molecular Systematics of Araceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9006749

Award Number: 9006749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139564             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. French   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The plant family Araceae (the aroids) includes food plants                
              (the taros), ornamentals, and ecologically important members of                
              the wet tropical forests of the world such as philodendron,                    
              anthurium, and monstera.  Taxonomic relationships among the                    
              estimated 100 or so genera are poorly known, in part because                   
              morphological features occur in a complex mosaic-like fashion                  
              among these plants.  To acquire an independent dataset for                     
              establishing evolutionary relationships among the aroids, Dr.                  
              James French of Rutgers University is studying mutations in                    
              chloroplast DNA isolated from leaf tissues of representative                   
              species of nearly all known genera of the family.  Chloroplast                 
              DNA is a useful source of genomic data because its structure and               
              function are constrained overall; closely related plants differ                
              by only a few mutations while more anciently diverged groups show              
              greater numbers of mutational differences.                                     
                   By measuring the amounts and kinds of mutational differences              
              in chloroplast DNA among aroid genera, Dr. French is constructing              
              a phylogenetic tree for the family.  This diagram of taxonomic                 
              relationships will help improve the classification of these                    
              plants, organizing related genera into the same tribes and                     
              subfamilies.  With a phylogeny as guide, researchers can study                 
              the evolution of the complex morphology of aroids and the various              
              breeding systems known for members of the family.
