Title       : Structural Organization of Proteins on the Oxidizing Side of Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1992   
File        : a9006552

Award Number: 9006552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry M. Bricker btbric@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project describes the production and preliminary                          
              characterization of mutants bearing lesions in the extrinsic loop              
              region of CPal in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803.  CPal                 
              (encoded by the psbB gene) is an intrinsic membrane protein which              
              is an integral component of the photosynthetic apparatus of                    
              cyanobacteria and higher plants and appears to be required for                 
              photosynthetic oxygen evolution in Photosystem II.  The goal of                
              this project is to determine the function of the large and                     
              unusual extrinsic loop region of this protein.  This region                    
              appears to  interact with the extrinsic 33 kDa protein and                     
              possibly the inorganic cofactors manganese, chloride, or calcium,              
              of all of which are required for oxygen evolution.  Additionally,              
              CPal appears to act as a chlorophyll-a antenna for Photosystem                 
              II.  The extrinsic loop region may interact with other antennae                
              proteins and/or the Photosystem II reaction center.  In vitro                  
              mutagenesis (saturation and oligonucleotide-mediated site-                     
              directed) will be used to produce mutations in the extrinsic loop              
              region.  These mutations will be re-introduced into Synechocystis              
              (along with a closely linked antibiotic resistance marker), and                
              mutants will be isolated by a combination of screening for                     
              antibiotic resistance and loss of photoautotrophic growth.                     
              Additionally, screening for antibiotic resistance and loss of                  
              photoautotrophic growth.  Additionally, screening for temperature              
              sensitive  mutations will be performed.  These mutations will                  
              then be characterized by examination of their electron transport               
              activity 77oK fluorescence emission spectra, manganese and                     
              calcium content of Photosystem II-enriched preparations,                       
              photosynthetic membrane protein composition, and their chloride                
              requirements for the stabilization of manganese.
