Title       : Service Engineering of Human Tele-Queues: Empirically Based Stochastic Analysis
               of Telephone Call Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0223304

Award Number: 0223304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence D. Brown lbrown@stat.wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
PI: Lawrence Brown (Proposal ID: 0223304)
Title: Service Engineering
              of Human Tele-Queues: Empirically Based Stochastic Analysis of Telephone Call
              Centers

A call center is a service network in which agents provide
              
tele-services, here to be interpreted as either telephone-based services or,
              more generally, any online-service with customers and servers being remote from
              each other. Sound scientific principles are prerequisites for sustaining the
              complex socio-technical enterprise of the call center. The overall goal is to
              contribute to the theory that supports these principles and to the creation of
              new ones.

The proposed research builds from an analysis of two unique
              records of call center operations. These contain complete call-by-call data for
              the operation over approximately one year of two call centers of different size
              and operational character. This data will be analyzed in order to understand
              the mathematical queueing and network characteristics of such centers as they
              actually operate. Special attention will be given to developing an
              understanding of the role of scale and efficiency in relation to such
              operations. The operational features of these two call centers will then be
              adapted into realistic mathematical models for their operations. On the basis
              of preliminary work already done, it is expected that these mathematical models
              will differ in important respects from those in current use for analyzing and
              predicting performance of such large-scale service operations. In particular,
              it is expected that new theory will be specifically developed to model the
              queueing characteristics of centers that operate in the high-volume
              high-efficiency domain.

Call centers can be viewed naturally and usefully as
              queueing systems. The most widely used queueing model for a call center is the
              Erlang-C model, also denoted the M/M/S queue. The Erlang-C model is deficient
              as an accurate model of a call center in several respects. One of these is that
              it does not accommodate customers' impatience while waiting. 

The Erlang-C
              model also involves other assumptions such as Poisson arrival times and
              exponential service times. These will be tested against the data, and modified
              theory will be developed as needed. The statistical analysis will be derived
              according to the primitive elements of a call-center: system arrivals, queueing
              behavior, and services. The interactions of these primitives will then be
              analyzed, and alternate queueing models will be examined.

