Title       : Stochastic Models for the Design and Management of Customer Contact Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0223402

Award Number: 0223402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward Whitt wow@research.att.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Perwez Shahabuddin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A contact center is a collection of resources providing an interface 
between a
              service provider and its customers. The classical contact center 
is a call
              center, containing a collection of service representatives (reps) 
who talk to
              customers over the telephone. In a call center, the service reps 
are
              supported by quite elaborate information-and-communication-
technology (ICT)
              equipment, such as a private branch exchange (PBX), an 
interactive voice
              response (IVR) unit, an automatic call distributor (ACD), 
a personal computer
              (PC) and assorted databases. With the rapid growth of 
e-commerce, contact
              between the service provider and its customers is 
often made via e-mail or
              the Internet instead of by telephone.  

The design and management of contact
              centers is important, and worthy of 
research, because contact centers
              comprise a large, growing part of the 
economy and because they are quite
              complicated. Classic call centers are 
complicated because there are often
              many types of calls, requiring 
different service skills, such as knowledge of
              different languages and 
knowledge of different special promotions. The ACD is
              able to respond 
through skill-based routing, but there remains an opportunity
              to determine 
better routing algorithms and more effective methods for
              staffing. The 
difficulties are largely due to uncertainty about future
              arrivals of service 
requests of various kinds and the time and resources that
              will be required 
to respond to those requests.

Given that contact with
              customers no longer need be by telephone, it is 
necessary to consider the
              other media. When service reps perform several 
different kinds of work, there
              is a need to allocate effort to the different 
tasks, which presents
              opportunities for improved efficiency if some of the 
work can be postponed.
              Multimedia also lead to more complicated contact 
experiences.  For example,
              customers might alternate between periods of 
interaction with service reps
              and periods of browsing on the Internet.  

This project aims to respond to
              these challenges by conducting exploratory 
research on stochastic
              (probability) models of contact centers, aiming to 
uncover fundamental
              principles and develop performance-analysis tools 
that will make it possible
              to improve the design and management of 
contact centers. Effort will be made
              to find conditions for resource pooling 
in contact centers, where the
              efficiency of a large single-skill center is 
achieved in a multi-skilled
              center with minimal flexibility. Staffing will be 
studied in each of three
              important time scales: real-time, short-term and 
long-term. Effort will be
              made to understand the contribution of different 
sources of uncertainty:
              model uncertainty, parameter uncertainty and 
process uncertainty.

