Title       : Collaborative Research: Global Ocean Repeat Hydrography, Carbon, and Tracer
               Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0223951

Award Number: 0223951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5486335            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schlosser peters@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Smethie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Visbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A systematic and global re-occupation of select hydrographic sections will be
              conducted with the objective of quantifying changes in storage and transport of
              heat, fresh water, carbon dioxide (CO2) and related parameters. The program is
              in support of the CLImate VARiability and predictability (CLIVAR) and Carbon
              Science Programs, and is a component of a global observing system for the
              physical climate and carbon system. By integrating the scientific needs of the
              carbon and hydrography/tracer communities, major synergies and cost savings
              will be achieved. In addition to efficiency, a coordinated approach will
              produce scientific advances that exceed those of having individual programs.
              These advances will contribute to the following overlapping scientific
              objectives: Data for Model Calibration, Validation and Model Based Synthesis;
              Carbon System Studies; Heat and Freshwater Storage and Flux Studies; Deep and
              Shallow Water Mass and Ventilation Studies; and Calibration of Autonomous
              Sensors. A joint study of the ocean carbon cycle and circulation will help
              identify critical areas where potential changes in ocean circulation could have
              serious consequences for future anthropogenic uptake. Global warming-induced
              changes in the ocean's transport of heat and freshwater, which could affect the
              circulation, can be followed through long-term measurements. The sections
              proposed consist of approximately two meridional and two zonal lines in each
              ocean, for a total of 10 sections over 6 field years. The core measurements
              include hydrography (CTD, salinity, oxygen, nutrients, L/ADCP, Underway T, S,
              pCO2, bathymetry, navigation), carbon system (DIC, pCO2. TAlk, pH, DOC, DON),
              and transient tracers (CFCs, tritium/3He). In addition to the collection of the
              data,  quality control measures will be routinely carried out by providers of
              reference-quality data. Post-cruise data updates, distribution, and archive
              will be managed by groups with separate funding. The field work will be
              integrated with a larger international effort to monitor the ocean's response
              to climate change.

Broader Impacts: The results will be disseminated broadly
              to enhance scientific and technological understanding. The program is based on
              the fundamental concept that data collected belong to the community, and are
              available to the community at large rather than being proprietary for the
              investigators involved in the project. The data policy proposed will be
              stringent and geared towards rapid and open dissemination, and with a clear
              structure for all data to undergo thorough quality control. Such an ambitious
              goal requiring this degree of openness has not been tried on a large scale
              before. The program benefits to society include the collection of a high
              quality data set, and use of the data to assess climate change. The global
              program will provide full water column data of climatically significant
              parameters with decadal coverage. These data will be used to assess climate
              change by quantifying the uptake and storage of anthropogenic CO2 by the ocean,
              and contributing to an understanding and models of the processes that control
              the uptake and transport of CO2 into the ocean's interior. Since these are
              likely to be the only systematic observations below 2000 m, they will be used
              to document long term trends in ocean warming, and heat and freshwater fluxes.
              The data will be a resource for model calibration of the climate system. The
              proposed program will promote training and learning. It will serve as a
              community resource for training and entraining graduate students, postdoctoral
              scientists, and new scientists. Funds are budgeted in the lead proposal for
              graduate students, post-docs, and young, non-seagoing scientists to participate
              in each cruise. 


