Title       : MUSE: Sustainable Infrastucture Materials and Systems: Integration of
               Microstructure Tailoring and Life Cycle Analysis of Engineered Cementitious
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0223971

Award Number: 0223971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Keoleian gregak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor C. Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Kesler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Batterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1689,9146,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The goal for this MUSES exploratory project is to integrate life cycle-based
              environmental, social and economic design criteria and ECC microstructure
              tailoring to enhance the sustainability of infrastructure systems.  Worldwide
              construction of concrete infrastructure such as roads, bridges and pipes
              exceeds 6 billion tons/yr.  The resulting impacts are dramatic and include
              greenhouse gas emissions, land disturbances, air pollution, and
              construction-related traffic congestion and vehicle damage.  Engineered
              cementitious composites (ECC) are a new class of materials being developed to
              improve the performance of infrastructure systems.  ECC formulations are
              designed through microstructure tailoring of inputs including matrix (cement
              and fly ash), fiber (virgin and recycled polymers, and interface elements. 
              While ECC strain capacity is far superior to normal concrete, overall life
              cycle costs and benefits have not yet been evaluated.

Developing these
              criteria is complex due to widely varying scales of analysis (nanometers in
              materials science to kilometers in the geological sciences), the long-term
              nature and consequences of infrastructure systems, and the need to optimize the
              scheduling of large capital investments.  To address this complexity, this
              research will draw upon a multi-disciplinary team from the University of
              Michigan's Advanced Civil Engineering Material Research Lab, Center for
              Sustainable Systems, College of Engineering, School of Public Health, School of
              Natural Resources and Environment, and Department of Geological Sciences. 
              

This project will emphasize student education and research training through
              two graduate student research assistantships; specialized industrial ecology
              curriculum; a field component at a local cement manufacturer; a MUSES seminar
              series; and monthly research team workshops

