Title       : Collection and Analysis of Radio- and Stable Carbon Isotopes along Selected
               CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0223434

Award Number: 0223434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : November 30,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann P. McNichol amcnichol@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
OCE-0223434

DI14C and DI13C samples will be collected and analyzed along
              selected Repeat Hydrography cruises where there has never been radiocarbon
              sampling or where 15-20 years have passed since the last sampling. The isotopic
              data will be promptly provided to the community; and will contribute to the
              establishment of good reference materials for the measurement of both isotopes.
               Radiocarbon in DIC has long been recognized and used as an important tracer in
              studies of ocean processes and, in particular, of the ocean carbon cycle. Data
              collected as part of this study will be used to study mixing, ventilation rates
              and residence times in the deep ocean, air-sea gas exchange, thermocline
              ventilation rates, and to calibrate ocean general circulation models (OGCMs).
              Tracer studies of anthropogenic sources of carbon rely heavily on a precise
              knowledge of the oceanic bomb inventory and its changes over time. This can
              only be done globally with confidence if there are good datasets with good
              spatial representation of the oceans. Direct calculations of the bomb inventory
              penetration depth changes on a global basis are only possible with repeated
              global measurements over time. The sampled locations have been selected to
              reflect both the spatial and the time-series requirements for a successful
              ocean carbon study. DI13C tracks the input of anthropogenic CO2 in a
              complementary fashion to DIC. The d13C of CO2 added from fossil fuel and
              biomass burning (approx. -25 ) is significantly lower than that of atmospheric
              CO2 (approx. -7 , pre-industrial). The atmospheric change can be tracked in the
              surface ocean waters with the precise measurements of DI13C proposed here. The
              samples collected here will allow the modeling community to combine DIC, DI13C
              and DI14C in OGCMs. This will greatly improve the accuracy of the
              reconstructions possible and, consequently, increase confidence in the
              predictions made from these models. One cannot emphasize enough the importance
              of conducting these isotopic measurements in conjunction with the measurement
              of carbon parameters and other transient tracers. The combined amount of
              information possible will be far greater than that available alone.

This
              project is contribution to NSF's Integrated Carbon Cycle Research Program and
              the CLIVAR Program.


