Title       : Analyzing Critical Infrastructure Dependencies: Security and Survivability
               Effects in the Service Sector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0223255

Award Number: 0223255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris T. Hendrickson cth@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Garrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Scott Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Discussions about infrastructure security and survivability require system-wide
              comparisons and interdisciplinary approaches.  Our consideration of
              survivability focuses on large-scale economic implications of attacks or
              vulnerabilities on major infrastructure sectors as defined by the Department of
              Commerce.  We explore the critical connections between core service
              infrastructure sectors (e.g., telecommunications, electricity, and pipelines)
              using a total supply chain analysis model originally developed to estimate
              environmental and energy effects of production in the U.S.

We propose to use
              publicly available data from the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic
              Analysis to show the actual economic dependencies between critical
              infrastructures and the service economy in general.  The input-output tables of
              the U.S. economy detail the economic purchases that result between all 500
              domestic economic sectors.  Specifically, these tables show how much output is
              generated by each of the sectors, and the amounts of product other sectors
              purchase from each sector.  For example, the model can show not only which
              sectors use electricity but also how much dollar value of electricity is used
              to produce goods or services in that sector.  These data are real and tangible
              representations of how dependent service sector businesses are to other
              businesses within the infrastructure sector and the economy in general.

Of
              course, the sectors of most interest to us when discussing vulnerabilities are
              sectors involved with critical infrastructure such as the information sector. 
              Analysis of this kind can lead to new approaches to resource allocation for
              investments to assure infrastructure capabilities.  To this end, we will
              contribute to the national dialogue on pending threats and risks as a result of
              targeted infrastructure attacks by providing a quantitative assessment tool
              that shows the potential connection and failure points present in the
              economy.




