Title       : Coastal Zone Control of Interacting C-N-P Cycles Under Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0223509

Award Number: 0223509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred T. Mackenzie fredm@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham Lerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The area of the global coastal zone, approximated by the continental
              shelves, is about 7% of the surface area of the ocean, and its volume is about
              9% of the volume of the surface ocean layer (3 x 10 km). Despite its relatively
              small size, up to 20% of total oceanic biological production occurs there, at
              least 80% of the mass of terrigenous materials reaching the ocean is deposited
              there, and 30 to 50% of total carbonate and 80% of total organic carbon
              accumulation in the ocean occur in the coastal zone. In addition, coastal zone
              environments are being heavily impacted, disproportionately more than the much
              larger area of the open ocean, by modifications of the biogeochemical dynamics
              and cycles of carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P), three of six of the
              major life-essential elements (the other three being sulfur, oxygen, and
              hydrogen). The coastal zone is strongly affected by the environmental
              biogeochemical changes occurring in its neighboring domains of land, ocean,
              sediments, and atmosphere. Because of both climatic change and human-induced
              forcings on the environment, it is this region of the ocean that is most
              susceptible to anthropogenic fluxes of materials and changes in water quality,
              organic productivity, and biodiversity. Until very recently, little attention
              has been paid to the coastal zone on a global scale and its role in the global
              C-N-P biogeochemical cycles that are important to life on land and in the
              oceans.
In this proposal we address a fundamental scientific problem that is
              also of substantial concern to the human society: the recent past, present, and
              near future behavior of the coupled C-N-P biogeochemical cycles in the coastal
              marine zone that are influenced by climatic change and human activities. The
              time scale of our research is decades to centuries, including the past 300
              years of increasing human perturbations and about a century of the future, as
              based on current projections of the magnitudes of the perturbations. To
              accomplish our goals, we employ a modeling methodology developed by us under
              previous NSF support to analyze environmental change in the global system of
              four do-mains: land, ocean, sediments, and atmosphere. We deal with the
              following research issues: (a) the changing roles of nutrient N and P fluxes to
              the coastal zone from land and from the open ocean as drivers of organic
              productivity and the carbon cycle in general; (b) the changing state of organic
              carbon metabolism in the coastal zone, and the release or uptake of atmospheric
              carbon dioxide by coastal waters, as controlled by the production and storage
              of organic and inorganic carbon (CaCO3 ) in the coastal zone; (c) the effect of
              rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations on the organic and inor-ganic C-N-P
              cycles in the coastal zone, and (d) the effects of possible changes in the
              thermohaline circulation of the ocean and in coastal oceanic circulation
              (upwelling and onwelling) on the C-N-P cycles in the coastal margin and their
              linkages to the land, atmosphere, sediments, and open ocean.
We expect our
              results to show to what extent the coupling between the C-N-P cycles and
              increased nutrient inputs from changes in the land domain have been responsible
              for the biogeochemical dynamics of the coastal zone from the recent past to the
              present. We also expect our results to show that the projected trends of
              environmental change on land, changes in the magnitude of thermohaline
              circulation and coastal upwelling, and global climate are likely to make the
              coastal zone a more active and quantitatively important site in the transfer of
              materials between it and the domains of land, atmosphere, and sediments and
              sub-domain of open ocean in the future. This tentative conclusion has important
              implications to the biogeochemical state of the coastal zone relative to the
              human population that depends on it.

