Title       : Conference: 2002 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Retinal Neurobiology and
               Visual Processing, July 6th to 11th, 2002, Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0223662

Award Number: 0223662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Massey steve.massey@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing

2002 FASEB Summer Research
              Conference
July 6th to 11th, Saxtons River, Vermont
Stephen Massey, Chair,
              and Marla Feller, Vice Chair


This is the sixth in a series of biannual
              conferences devoted specifically to the structure and function of the retina. 
              The presentations will cover many facets of retinal biology including: the
              cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying retinal development; the basis of
              neural signaling; the identification of neural circuits by which the retina
              processes visual input; the code by which retinal output is conveyed to the
              brain; and the resulting abilities and limitations of visual behavior.  

              
This five-day conference will attract approximately 180 participants from
              around the world. Thirty-five internationally recognized experts have agreed to
              present their work in formal talks, which are organized in nine thematic
              sessions, chaired by leaders in each field. Furthermore, emphasis has been
              placed on the contributions of younger scientists in an early career stage. In
              addition, there will be two informal workshops on new technology. Finally, all
              participants are invited to display their latest results during two poster
              sessions. 

The conference format is designed to foster direct scientific
              exchange among participants. Students and post-docs, particularly from
              under-represented minority groups, are strongly encouraged to attend. Many
              young scientists find new positions from contacts made at this meeting.  There
              is ample time for discussion at the end of each presentation, during workshops
              and poster sessions and there is further free time for informal exchange at
              meals, which are communal.

Because this conference attracts most of the
              field's senior investigators, it has been highly successful in disseminating
              results, and has significantly affected the course of retinal research.  
              Furthermore, because the retina is at the forefront of neural circuit analysis
              and development, this conference will have far-reaching effects on the
              neuroscience community at large.  Women are well represented and we have made a
              successful effort to attract under-represented minorities to the conference.
              However, we are particularly proud of our success in featuring young speakers
              and providing travel support for students to attend this meeting.




