Title       : Feasibility Study of Polymer-based MEMS Low-Frequency Sensing Technology for
               Health Monitoring of Civil Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0223050

Award Number: 0223050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei M. Shkel ashkel@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to evaluate existing off-the-shelf sensing
              technologies and launch an exploratory research that will lead to a new class
              of low-cost micro-electro-mechanical sensors uniquely suited for health
              monitoring of civil structures. This one year exploratory project will include
              two phases. In the first phase, we will perform a comprehensive literature
              survey on the available off-the-shelf sensors that could be potentially used
              for health monitoring of civil structures. The comparison will be made against
              sensors' cost, sensitivity, drift, dynamic range, size, weight, etc. This phase
              of research will be carried out in a close collaboration and consultations with
              leading experts in the field of health monitoring of civil structures. The
              result of this study will be a review paper on the state-of-the-art sensor
              technologies for structural health monitoring of civil structures which will be
              prepared and submitted to a journal for publication (the results will be also
              reported at the relevant NSF workshop). In the second phase, we will start
              preliminary development, design, and fabrication of prototype MEMS sensors that
              will meet the identified in Phase 1 performance requirements. Our approach will
              be based on a fundamentally new micro-fabrication technology that utilizes the
              processing of low Young's Modulus polymers, deposition of thin film dielectric
              coating, silicon surface micromachining, silicon bulk micromachining, and
              integration of Febry-Perot interferometeric techniques. The first version of
              the sensor prototype will be attempted by the end of this one year exploratory
              project. The background material gathered during this one year exploratory
              project will be used as a basis for a full three year proposal on development
              of novel sensors uniquely suited for civil engineering applications.     
