Title       : SGER: Selfassembly of Heterogeneous Microsystems on ppNIPAM-Coated Microheater
               Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0223598

Award Number: 0223598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Bohringer karl@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent research has demonstrated that self-assembly of engineered components,
              usually built with silicon micromachining techniques, can be an enabling
              technology in the fabrication of powerful complex microelectronic microsystems
              that incorporate mechanical, optical, and wireless components. Self-assembly
              can produce microsystems containing thousands or millions of parts, eliminating
              the reliance on conventional, sequential pick-and-place approaches.  A
              promising approach towards micro self-assembly is proposed, which employs
              capillary action and interfacial energies as its driving force. Parts and
              substrates with specially designed hydrophobic 'binding sites' will attach to
              each other when immersed in an aqueous medium. The immediate goal of this
              high-risk, high-potential-payoff project is a proof-of-concept demonstration of
              a novel selfassembly technique using a thin-film biomaterial (plasma
              polymerized N-isopropylacrylamide, ppNIPAM, developed at the University of
              Washington Engineered Biomaterials Center,) on silicon microheater arrays. This
              approach exploits a remarkable property of NIPAM, which reversibly switches
              from hydrophilic to hydrophobic at approximately 32C. In this project, ppNIPAM
              will be coated onto micromachined heater arrays, effectively creating a
              'programmable' surface where self-assembly takes place only on selected, heated
              (i.e., hydrophobic) sites. A key point in this project will be the integration
              of a biomaterial into a MEMS device. If successful, this technique will provide
              a radical improvement over currently existing microassembly approaches, and
              could likely set off a larger research effort and numerous practical
              applications, e.g. in the next generation of portable communication devices or
              distributed microsensor networks. In addition to micro self-assembly, arrays of
              ppNIPAM microheaters have other exciting possible applications. In
              collaboration with Prof. Buddy Ratner (UWEB), this work will  explore
              possibilities to create micro arrays for controlled protein adsorption
              ("protein chips"), and films with variable permeability for controlled drug
              release.
