Title       : Using Force Feedback Devices to Train and Assess Recognition of Force Signals as
               a Component of Professional Skill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0223006

Award Number: 0223006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geb Thomas gthomas@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clark Stanford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is intended to develop and evaluate a haptic simulator suitable
              for training people to detect very small features in a physical surface such as
              a human tooth.  A driving force behind the apparent demise of professional
              haptic skill in recent years may simply be a failure to develop and maintain
              sufficiently rigorous standards of skill specification, training and
              assessment.  Haptic information is not readily amenable to either verbal or
              visual clarification, and yet professionals such as dentists, jewelers and
              engravers must learn haptic skills.  Limitations of our language make it
              difficult to accurately describe haptic techniques; our haptic vocabulary
              consists of vague words such as "tough," "spongy," and "sticky."  It is also
              difficult to visually demonstrate or assess haptic skills.  Instructors are
              unable to see exactly how hard a student presses. Unlike visual information,
              instructors are generally unable to share a haptic experience with a student. 
              The salvation of haptic skills may lie with computers, strain gauges and
              motors.  These devices can accurately record, visually display, and endlessly
              reproduce haptic signals.  Together, these technologies present an opportunity
              to reestablish a robust, rewarding culture of haptic skill in the professional
              workplace.  Such a workplace would more productively and thoroughly engage the
              whole scope of human capability. 

Training dentists to elicit and recognize
              force signals is the primary design challenge for the simulator.  It will be
              refined and developed around this simple criterion, placing  force signal
              fidelity above all other competing design criteria including: 1) the geometry
              of the  tooth surface, 2) the visual appearance of the tooth, 3) the precise
              shape and feel of the dental  tool handle, 4) the spatial resolution of the
              simulator device and 5) the simulated hardness of the  tooth itself. 
              Ultimately the project will compare the clinical performance of dentists
              trained with  the simulator against those trained with traditional methods.
              This work will provide an important  contribution to the field of haptic
              simulation by suggesting a method to empirically identify force signals,
              benchmark a simulator's performance for reproducing these signals, and
              demonstrating a  tangible, practical benefit to haptic simulator training.  

