Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Band-Offset and Time-Resolved Nonlinear-Optical Studies of
               Magnetic Heterostructure Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0223704

Award Number: 0223704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunter Luepke luepke@as.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics of the 21st
              Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal focuses on
              spin-dependent transport and magnetic phenomena at interfaces of magnetic
              semiconductor quantum well structures and magnetic tunneling diodes which have
              potent ml applications in spin electronics. As interfaces in these
              heterostructures appear to play an essential role for the device
              characteristics, a detailed study of the electronic and magnetic interface
              properties as well as split transport across the heterojunctions is needed. The
              objective of our experimental program is to resolve fundamental questions
              regarding spin scattering, the magnetic state and the hand alignment at the
              buried heterointerfaces. The effects of compound formation (intermixing),
              roughness, magnetic state and defects will be studied and correlated with
              growth conditions, structural properties and magneto-transport measurements.
              Spin lifetimes and decoherence times will he measured by femtosecondresolved
              pump-probe linear and nonlinear magneto-optical experiments to elucidate spin
              scattering and spin relaxation processes at the buried heterointerfaces. Both
              electrical (via a photoconductive switch) and optical injection (with linear
              and circular-polarized ultrafast pulses) will be used to excite a spin
              population. Internal photoemission experiments (with circular polarization)
              will be employed to map the alignment of the spin-hands at the heterojunctions.
              The magnetization dynamics at the buried interface will be measured using the
              surface-sensitive magnetization-induced second-harmonic generation (MSGH)
              technique. Spectroscopic MSGH studies will he performed to reveal interface
              states, which may act as spin scattering centers at the heterojunctions. These
              measurements will he performed as a function of: temperature, applied magnetic
              field, applied electrical bias, composition, well thickness and/or harrier
              height, built-in strain and growth conditions. The information on the spin-hand
              alignment obtained from these measurements can be used to tune into resonant
              states thereby enhancing the efficiency of the spin-injection process. A major
              focus of our program will be the education of graduate and undergraduate
              students in the nascent field of spin electronics. The students will benefit
              from the proposed research program, providing them with excellent training in
              an interdisciplinary field including optics and electronic materials and
              devices.
