Title       : Genomics of Plant Stress Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0223905

Award Number: 0223905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2561386            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans J. Bohnert bohnerth@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this proposal is to identify and determine the role of all
              the genes involved in a plants response to salt and water stress. Over the last
              decade, it has become clear that responses to water deficit and ion imbalance
              are governed by complex molecular and biochemical signal transduction
              processes, which coordinately act to determine tolerance or sensitivity at the
              whole-plant levet. Within the last five years, however, advances in genomics,
              informatics, and functional genomics have made it technically feasible to gain
              a global understanding of the gene complement or set that becomes integrated to
              effect abiotic stress tolerance. To tackle the genetic basis of this tolerance
              in higher plants in the most efficient, comprehensive, and integrative way
              possible Drs. R. Bressan, P. Hasegawa ( Purdue University), R. Burnap, J.
              Cushman, R. Prade (Oklahoma State University) and H. Bohnert, D. Gaibraith,
              J-K. Zhu (University of Arizona) have formed a consortium. Each participant has
              a documented and extensive experience in this research area with a proven
              record of productivity and in many instances past or present
              collaborations.

This team will employ three distinct, yet complementary
              approaches to isolate, characterize, and assess the function of the core set of
              stress-related genes that provide the basis for the water and salt stress
              tolerance phenotype in plants.

The first approach will encompass the
              functional identification of genes important to stress tolerance by random and
              targeted mutagenesis strategies in well-studied model organisms (Synechocystis
              PCC6803, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus nidulans, and Arabidopsis
              thaliana). For Arabidopsis, they will identify, map and clone genetic Ioci from
              a large set of mutants defective in stress tolerance or signaling. The
              resulting sets of mutants will be used for complementation studies using genes
              from higher plant sources.

The second approach aims to define the core set
              of stress-related transcripts from both sensitive plants (Arabidopsis thaliana
              and rice) and resistant plants (Dunaliella salina and ice plant) using EST
              sequendng and microarray analysis. This approach will focus on the comparative
              study of gene expression patterns in salt and drought sensitive and resistant
              organisms, since recent studies of resistant organisms have revealed the
              existence of mechanisms of stress tolerance not present or not appropriately
              expressed in sensitive organisms.

The third approach will extend the
              functional analysis of stress-related transcripts by monitoring in situ
              Iocalizations by using promoter trapping approaches and gain-of-function
              studies.

These approaches represent logical extensions of ongoing work in
              individual groups within this center. They will foster interaction and
              integration of Consortium activities through daily interactions,
              workshops/meetings and extended work periods in member laboratories for their
              students and postdoctoral fellows to ensure a new generation of researchers
              trained in multi-faceted and interdisciplinary problem solving. The impact of
              abiotic stress on crop productivity is remarkable according to USDA statistics
              and amounts to two-thirds of all yield reductions in agriculture. This proposal
              is exceptionally timely, combines unique expertise, is hypothesis-driven and
              culminates in a dearly defined goal - understanding the number, nature and
              networking of genes and physiological mechanisms that constitute plant abiotic
              stress tolerance.

