Title       : MUSES: Research and Education in Integrated Assessment Methodologies for Product
               Design and Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0223870

Award Number: 0223870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Field furd@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel P. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Oye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1794      BE-Mat Use:Science,Eng&Society
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1689,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use:
              Science, Engineering, & Society (MUSES) project is to establish a research
              framework for developing an assessment tool for product development that
              integrates engineering, economic, regulatory and environmental concerns.  While
              the analytical elements exist for individual consideration of these concerns,
              environmental tools have seen little practical use in product development. 
              This limited application derives from the absence of methods putting the
              environmental analyses into the appropriate engineering, economic and
              regulatory contexts so that consistent strategies can be devised.  This project
              focuses on the automobive industry and the product & process development issues
              arising from the environmental challenges confronting these companies.  The
              intention is to use this area as a testbed for developing general methods of
              tying environmental assessment with engineering, economic and regulatory
              analyses, forming an integrated product assessment tool.

This effort also
              emphasizes two long-range educational objectives.  One objective focuses on
              development of interdisciplinary, case-based courses to demonstrate the use of
              the design tools developed through the proposed research.  The second
              educational objective is the development of the collaborative capabilities of
              faculty from disparate fields, including issues of faculty development in these
              areas.  A key feature of the work is the formation of an interdisciplinary team
              that includes experts in the broad range of fields necessary to treat the
              multidisciplinary problem of refining the product development process in a
              large industrial firm. This planning project is expected to lead to fundamental
              research on design of alternative processes, systems, and product development
              structures that optimize the use of materials throughout their life cycles.	
