Title       : Dynamics of Carbon Export to the Atmosphere and Oceans from Fluvial Systems of
               the Humid Tropics: Southeast Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0223521

Award Number: 0223521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Richey jrichey@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis P. Lettenmaier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The overall question we are addressing in this proposal is, "What
              role does the evasion (outgassing) of CO2 from the river system to the
              atmosphere play relative to fluvial carbon export to the ocean in the carbon
              cycle of the humid tropics?" We have recently demonstrated that outgassing of
              CO2 from rivers and wetlands of the central Amazonian basin is 1.2  0.3 Mg C ha
              -1 y -1 , or, when extrapolated across the entire basin, an order of magnitude
              greater than fluvial export of organic carbon to the oceans. Such a flux would
              be an important loss, as it is approximately equal to lower estimates of carbon
              sequestration in the Amazon. These conclusions lead to the working hypothesis
              for this proposal, that Surface water CO2 evasion is the dominant source of
              carbon loss (exceeding export to the oceans by a factor of 10) in fluvial
              systems of the humid tropics, and in the aggregate reconciles the tropics in
              the global carbon budget. Evasion is driven primarily by in-stream respiration
              of organic carbon translocated in space and time from its terrestrial and
              riparian origins. While estimates are becoming better constrained in the
              Amazon, they are not elsewhere in the tropics, particularly in regions of much
              greater anthropogenic impact.

With this proposal we intend to extend and
              test our Amazon-based working hypothesis to another significant region,
              Southeast Asia. We propose to (1) enhance an existing model with improved water
              routing and inundation, sediments, and carbon modules as a function of
              landscape condition, (2) conduct a field sampling campaign to determine
              region-specific processes and provide data for model validation, and (3) use
              the resulting improved model to analyze questions concerning the dynamics of
              carbon in the fluvial environments of Southeast Asia which will test our
              working hypothesis.

The most significant intellectual merit of our proposal
              is (1) that a significant anomaly in the global carbon cycle is being
              addressed, and (2) the work represents a convergence of historically separate
              lines of earth science into a significant "new" view of the global importance
              of the processes and magnitudes of land-water-atmosphere coupling. The most
              important broader impact of the work will most likely come via improved tools
              and information networks for "sustainability" in a region of multiple
              transboundary environmental pressures.

