Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Electronic and Magneto-Optic Properties of Rare-Earth and
               Transition Metal based Materials for Spintronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0223634

Award Number: 0223634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter R. L. Lambrecht wxl2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF-02-036.  The proposal focuses on
              the study of novel magneto-electronic and magneto-optic materials and the
              computational methods that need to be developed to understand their properties.
                The potential of alternative magnetic semiconductors based on rare-earth (RE)
              compounds such as GdN and Transition metal (TM) and/or RE doped semiconducting
              ScN.  Related metallic compounds, such as Mn-N compounds will also be studied. 
              It is anticipated that the different nature of magnetic couplings of RE and TM
              atoms will enhance the magnetic effects when the two are combined.  The main
              perceived advantage of the class of materials are:  1) full intersolubility
              because of the common rocksalt structure, 2) the complementary character of TM
              and RE exchange interactions and magnetic moments, 3) the possibility of n-type
              based spintronics. 

Heterostructures of these materials with the compatible
              high temperature semiconductor GaN will be studied.
To develop a better
              understanding of the origin of magnetism in these and more traditional magnetic
               semiconductors, a new computational approach is proposed, based on the
              screened exchange method. This 
method will be extended to be capable of
              dealing with both the band gap problem of semiconductors and 
strongly
              correlated narrow band open shell systems and will be implemented within the
              context of the linear muffin-tin orbital band structure method. It will further
              be made compatible with the non-collinear
magnetism approach based on the
              rigid spin approximation within atomic spheres.

The calculations will
              provide information on the  electronic structure and on the origin and the
              nature of the magnetism in the systems under study.  To validate the new
              method, it will first be applied to systems for 
which experimental data are
              available already and subsequently will be used in a predictive character for
              new materials.  To aid in the comparison with experimental data,
              magneto-optical properties will be calculated as well as basic electronic
              structure and magnetic exchange interactions. Extensions of currently available
              optical calculation methods  to incoporate the new screened exchange
              methodology and its application to magneto-optical  properties such as the
              magneto-optical  Kerr effect and the Faraday rotation effect
will be
              developed.

