Title       : Secure Networked Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0223785

Award Number: 0223785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A.L. Narasimha Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Weiping Shi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierce E. Cantrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-23785
Reddy, A.L. Narasimha
Cantrell, Pierce E.; 
Shi, Weiping
Texas
              A & M University (TX Engineering Experimental Station) 

Title:  CISE RR:
              Secure Networked Storage Systems
This proposal, building an experimental
              testbed for research on high performance networked storage systems and the
              resulting issues in network resources management, builds system level software
              support for secure networked storage systems possible through iSCSI type of
              storage devices that directly attach to IP networks. Test applications comprise
              multimedia (i.e., videoserver application) and VLSI CAD (distributed fault
              simulation). An experimental networked implementing partial state architectures
              will be developed. The network element will utilize partial state to provide a
              better handle on networked and end-host traffic by regulating high bandwidth
              flows through individual state while aggregating the rest of the flows (similar
              to how caches are employed in current memory systems). Using realistic VLSI CAD
              and multimedia applications, the work will evaluate an integrated system
              consisting of storage and network elements. The project will employ video
              delivery as an application to evaluate the impact of attaching devices to the
              network, the storage services (i.e., third party transfers and data filtering),
              network centric issues (e.g., QoS, congestion management, and transport
              protocols), and new architectures and mechanisms in protecting storage systems
              against Denial of Service (DOS) attacks. Moreover, the equipment will be used
              for developing the target applications and for staffing DOS attacks against the
              new experimental systems. Specifically the proposed research encompasses:    
              
 Providing third party transfers and
 Network security: QoS regulation for
              mitigating DOS attacks and security enhancement through partial state network
              architectures

The infrastructure is expected to offer students valuable
              training in systems-building, I/O and networked software, parallel and
              distributed programming, performance evaluation of real systems and
              interdisciplinary research.

