Title       : RUI: Carbon Accumulation in the Fens of Boreal, Western Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0223271

Award Number: 0223271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Kelman Wieder Kelman.Wieder@Villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Vitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zicheng Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Boreal and subarctic peatland ecosystems cover about 3-4 % of the earth's land
              surface and store about 1/3 of the world's soil C as peat. Peatlands represent
              a major global C pool, yet it is unclear whether they function as sources or
              sinks of atmospheric C, both today and into the future. Based on a recent
              inventory of peatlands in boreal western Canada (Alberta, Saskatchewan, and
              Manitoba), peatland ecosystems collectively cover 365,157 km 1 of the land
              surface and store 42 Pg (10 15 g) of C as peat. Previous research, including
              our own, has focused on continental bog, permafrost bog, and internal lawn
              (areas of recent permafrost melt) peatland features in boreal western Canada,
              but we now know that 2/3 of the peatland area and C storage are not in these
              types of systems, but rather are in fens, peatlands hydrologically connected to
              surface water and groundwater systems. We propose to use approaches that we
              have used to study bogs in boreal western Canada to compare carbon accumulation
              and carbon cycling between continental bogs, poor fens and rich fens of boreal
              western Canada.

We will address three specific objectives: 1) to
              characterize and compare recent C accumulation through coring, 210Pb-dating and
              modeling; 2) to quantify moss production and decomposition rates and gaseous C
              fluxes, and 3) to characterize the long-term historical development of C
              accumulation through coring, macrofossil analysis, 14C dating and modeling.
              Results will test an overall working hypothesis that net C accumulation is
              greater in continental bogs than in poor or rich fens. High accumulation in
              bogs is attributed to the resistance of Sphagnum fuscum to decomposition,
              despite a relatively thick aerobic acrotelm (upper, aerobic, non-saturated peat
              layer) in bogs. Although poor fens and rich fens also accumulate C, they do so
              at comparatively lesser rates - fen Sphagnum and brown mosses decompose
              comparatively rapidly very near the surface, but because of high water table
              positions, the acrotelm is thin. It is the thin acrotelm that promotes C
              accumulation in fens. Differences in C accumulation rates are determined more
              by differences in decomposition than by differences in NPP. Findings from this
              research will improve our estimate of the extent to which peatland ecosystems
              of boreal western Canada do or do not represent a net sink for atmospheric
              CO2.


