Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Spintronics in Y-junction carbon nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0223943

Award Number: 0223943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy Xu Jimmy_Xu@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Zaslavsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              Century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal focuses on
              spin dependent transport and spintronics functionality in a unique
              nanostructured system - Y-junction Carbon Nanotubes.
The Y-junction nanotubes,
              first fabricated by one of the PIs (JMX)-combine the attractive properties of
              carbon nanotubes (effectively 1D electronic transport with long ballistic mean
              free paths and exceptionally high current densities)with a three-terminal
              geometry and a built-in heterojunction barrier at the Y-branching point. Spin
              transport in ordinary, straight ferromagnetically contacted multi-walled carbon
              nanotubes, first studied by another of the PIs, has yielded excellent
              spin-polarized injection efficiencies and long spin-scattering lengths on the
              order of 0.25 um, making ferromagnet-nanotube hybrids a promising spintronics
              platform. The spin transport in a Y-junction with the built-in heterobarrier is
              already interesting and unexplored. But what makes the proposed devices unique
              is the possibility applying both ferromagnetic and normal metal contacts to the
              three terminals of the Y-junction, as well as using different ferromagnetic
              materials (with separately switchable magnetizations)for contacts to the same
              device.  This unprecedented flexibility will enable us, for example, to clearly
              distinguish spin-mediated injection and extraction of currents from ordinary
              injection, tune the transmission of spin up and spin down electrons by means of
              a control voltage on the third terminal, witch the spin-coherent current from
              one Y-junction arm to another by switching the magnetization with an external
              field, and more generally produce a true three-terminal spintronic
              transistor.
	However great the potential of this new nanostructured system may
              be, a great amount of challenging work, from fabrication of the Y-junction
              nanotubes to fabrication of nano-scale contacts to cryogenic measurements of
              the contacted Y-junctions in the presence of magnetic fields externally
              modulated, will have to done first to prove the concepts.  This NSF project is
              launched for these proof-of-concept explorations, and for paving the pathway to
              this new and exciting field of opportunities. 

