Title       : CAREER: Rapid non-destructive assessment of concrete structures using elastic
               waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0223819

Award Number: 0223819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 2,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110097             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Popovics johnpop@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This proposal offers an approach for rapid and accurate non-destructive
              evaluation (NDE) to assess the in-place condition of concrete structures.
              Sensitive and practical NDE techniques are of great value to agencies that
              govern the infrastructure. However, the time and effort required to perform
              current NDE tests and to analyze the results limit widespread application. This
              proposal aims to develop a rapid and robust method to collect elastic wave data
              from a concrete structure and an approach for imaging structures that
              characterizes the location, type and magnitude of damaged areas. The proposed
              approach makes use of several innovations including (a) use of surface-guided
              waves, (b) sensitive, non-contact wave reception techniques such as air-coupled
              transducers and laser interferometry, (c) one-sided, point source, point
              receiver NDE measurements such as surface wave transmission and velocity scans,
              and (d) an imaging approach that makes use of the developed measurement data.
              An educational plan is closely integrated with the proposed research.  The
              intent of the educational plan is to design an undergraduate and graduate
              engineering curriculum at Drexel University that responds to current needs of
              the infrastructure industry. The plan also includes additional educational
              outreach to encourage inner-city students to pursue a career in
              engineering.


