Title       : Partial Support for a Symposium on the Role of the Public Domain in Scientific
               and Technical Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0223581

Award Number: 0223581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Uhlir puhlir@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1679      INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) will convene a symposium to address the
              role that the public domain plays now and may play in the future in both
              promoting and protecting the exchange of scientific data and information.  The
              symposium will bring together 150 experts on scientific data and information;
              professionals experienced in management of such data and information; and
              scientists, from both the public and private sector.  The symposium will
              evaluate the present role that the public domain plays in support of science,
              including research, and education; identify and quantify the various pressures
              on the public domain; discuss existing and prospective approaches for
              preserving the public domain in the face of such pressures; identify issues in
              these areas that may warrant further study; and recommend ways in which such
              issues might be addressed most effectively.  Increasing legal, economic and
              technological pressures threaten to reduce the flow of scientific data and
              information to the public domain and thus constrain the ability of research
              scientists to draw data and information from the public domain and utilize it
              in their research.  Scientific data and information in the public domain has
              been and remains essential to the conduct of scientific research.  Similarly,
              the release into the public domain of data and information generated in the
              course of such scientific research also is essential to evaluation,
              verification and criticism of the results of such research.  The proceedings of
              the symposium will be made available in both electronic and hard copy formats
              within twelve months of the symposium.

