Title       : Conference: 2002 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Calcium Oxalate in
               Biological Systems; Saxtons River, Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0223095

Award Number: 0223095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Conference FASEB Summer Research Conference on Calcium Oxalate in Biological
              Systems will be held from August 3 - 8, 2002 at the Vermont Academy in Saxtons
              River, Vermont.  The primary goal of this conference is to provide a
              multidisciplinary forum to discuss recent advances and future directions for
              research on all manner of calcium oxalate crystallization that occur in nature.
              More than 100 scientists are expected to attend this conference.  Specific
              objectives of the conference include the following: 1) to promote scientific
              exchange of ideas, information, and methodologies among scientists from diverse
              disciplines whose common focus is calcium oxalate, 2) to discuss areas of
              controversy and to identify new areas requiring investigation in calcium
              oxalate research, 3) to foster cross-fertilization of ideas and facilitate
              interdisciplinary collaborations, 4) to integrate information from diverse
              systems encompassed by the topics and disciplines of conference participants,
              and 5) to promote and encourage entry of young and new investigators into all
              areas of calcium oxalate research.  Special efforts have been made to include
              new young investigators and scientists from underrepresented groups in the
              conference program. Seventeen of the scheduled speakers are new young
              investigators, including nine women, comprising 37% of the total program. In
              addition, the conference program includes a total of fourteen women, including
              two of the three organizers, a substantial increase over the previous
              conference on this topic. Funds requested by this proposal will be applied
              specifically to support the participation of young investigators and
              underrepresented groups. 

