Title       : SPIN ELECTRONICS: Interplay Between Spin Transport and Magnetization Dynamics in
               Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0223568

Award Number: 0223568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shufeng Zhang zhangshu@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036. The proposal focuses on
              the interplay between current-driven magnetization dynamics and the magnetic
              configurational dependence of spin transport in magnetic nanostructures, i.e.,
              to give a holistic approach to the magnetic and transport properties of
              magnetic nanostructures subject to a high current flow. Spin accumulation and
              spin current of non-collinear magnetization configuration will be obtained by
              solving the generalized Boltzmann equation for several magnetic nanostructures,
              including the multilayered pillar structure and the magnetic nanoconstriction.
              Magnetization dynamics in the presence of the spin accumulation and spin
              currents will be investigated by solving Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation
              through micromagnetics codes. Since the spin accumulation and the magnetization
              dynamics are inter-dependent, the equations of motion for the non-equilibrium
              electron distribution and for the local magnetization must be self-consistently
              determined. An extensive comparison between the models developed in the program
              and updated (available and on-going) experimental data on spin-current induced
              magnetization dynamics will be given throughout this research project. The
              project calls for a well-balanced combination of fundamental studies and
              applications of the theory for spintronics devices. The outcome of the proposed
              research will be a general theoretical framework for understanding the
              magnetization dynamics of magnetic nanoconstrictions in a non-equilibrium state
              of conduction electrons. It is likely that the numerical modeling tools
              developed in this research can be widely used for experimentalists and
              engineers to explain, predict, and design for high-speed, high-density
              spintronics and other nanoscale devices. We anticipate a broad impact from this
              program through participation of a graduate student and a post-doc, and through
              partnership with industry. The research results will be integrated into an
              emerging course of the frontier of magnetism and magnetic materials that the PI
              intends to develop.
