Title       : Designing an Optimal Financing Mechanism for Dental Care Among the Elderly:
               Reducing the Costs Associated with Information Assymmetries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0223364

Award Number: 0223364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Swann julie.swann@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we will document costs and health outcomes associated with
              various financing mechanisms for delivering dental care to individuals age 65
              and above.  In addition we will analyze the cost-effectiveness of existing
              financing mechanisms and additional mechanisms developed for this research to
              deliver dental care to the elderly.  Key to evaluation of financing mechanisms
              is an understanding of the roles of information asymmetries, which can drive up
              insurance premiums and result in the less than the socially optimal quantity of
              insurance purchased and utilization of dental services.  The basic framework of
              the project is an optimization model that minimizes the total cost of dental
              services subject to receipt of primary and secondary prevention equaling its
              highest feasible value.  We will use this optimization model to compare
              existing financing mechanisms for dental care as well as hybrid and new
              mechanisms designed in this research.

The delivery of health services in the
              United States is considered by many to be at a crisis point due to both the
              continued rising costs and disparities in the health status and receipt of
              preventive care between the poor and wealthy.    One area of health service for
              the elderly that is often ignored is dental care where the rate of inflation
              has recently outpaced the medical care inflation rate.  Approximately $61
              billion is spent annually on dental care.  In this research we will estimate
              the impact that the lack of dental insurance has on disease, determine how
              effective various forms of health allocation are, develop strategies to improve
              this allocation, and design a framework to analyze costs which may be
              generalized to other areas of health care.  For example, as health care costs
              incurred by the elderly increase, there will be increasing pressure to extend
              Medicare coverage, e.g. prescription drugs.  However, there are unique
              characteristics to the elderly that may make allocation difficult.  Many
              similar issues exist for the low-income population.
