Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Supply Chain Design for Customer Service,
               Robustness and Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0223277

Award Number: 0223277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Daskin daskin@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Inventory management has become a major concern in the service industries. 
              Heightened customer service expectations and reduced product life spans have
              complicated inventory decision-making.  Firms must decide where to stock
              inventory and how much inventory to maintain to satisfy customer demands.  We
              will develop a new integrated facility location and inventory models that will
              allow managers to better decide (1) how many facilities to have, (2) where
              those stocking locations should be, (3) how much inventory to stock at each
              site, (4) how often to reorder inventory, and (5) which customers to assign to
              each site to minimize overall costs while satisfying specified customer service
              requirements.  The research will build on earlier work of the PIs in which we
              have developed an elementary location/inventory model.  We will enhance the
              modeling approach in a number of different ways to allow the model to capture
              actual location/inventory problems more realistically.  In particular, we will
              incorporate (1) capacity restrictions at the distribution centers (DCs) and in
              the various transport channels, (2) more realistic local delivery routing from
              the distribution center(s) to the retailers including less-than-truckload (LTL)
              shipments, (3) multiple shipment modes from suppliers to DCs, and (4) multiple
              classes of inventory and multiple customer types.  We will develop models that
              consider customer service requirements and that optimize service subject to
              resource constraints.  We will then develop multi-objective models that explore
              tradeoffs between service and cost.

Another significant task will be
              incorporating future scenarios in location/inventory models to identify
              solutions that are robust with respect to uncertainty about the future.  We
              also will develop a new class of location models based on concepts of
              reliability.  A solution is deemed reliable if the system can continue to
              function adequately even if parts of the system (e.g., DCs or network links)
              are removed.  Finally, we will explore the incorporation of information sources
              into integrated facility location/inventory models. A variety of solution
              procedures will be employed for the models to be developed including optimal,
              non-linear integer programming based algorithms when possible and heuristic
              procedures when optimal algorithms cannot be devised.


