Title       : An Operating Center Proposal for Renewing an Industry/University Cooperative
               Research Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0223592

Award Number: 0223592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ly James Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Castro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Tomasko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt W. Koelling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony F. Luscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The polymer industry is one of the most dynamic and expanding industries of our
              time.  It is one of the few industries in which the U.S. still holds a strong
              leadership in an extremely competitive global market.

A focused
              collaboration between industry and academia has been underway for nearly five
              years through the activities of the NSF Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite Engineering (CAPCE) at the
              Ohio State University.  CAPCE offers comprehensive and well-organized
              collaboration between application-oriented researchers in industry and
              fundamental-oriented researchers in universities, enhancing commercialization
              of advanced polymer and composites materials.  

The Center will continue to
              emphasize the needs of the more traditional manufacturing sector of the polymer
              and composite industry, since these members dominate the industrial support
              base.  In addition, their efforts will include:

-	Cooperating with industry
              members to translate basic research results from NSF supported research into
              commercial products and processes;
-	Incorporating environmentally-friendly
              technologies in product manufacturing by reducing energy consumption and toxic
              chemicals; reducing the amount of volatile solvents and manufacturing waste;
              and increasing sustainability; and
-	Enabling efficient, low-cost mass
              production of parts for bio-MEMS, sensors, and other applications, using micro
              and nanno-fabrication techniques.

