Title       : MUSES: Biocomplex Dimensions of Industrial Ecology: Decision Analysis and
               Sectoral Trade-Offs in the Management of Toxic Metals Used in the Electronics
               Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0223894

Award Number: 0223894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oladele A. Ogunseitan oaogunse@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew A. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie M. Schoenung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Daniel M. Saphores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1794      BE-Mat Use:Science,Eng&Society
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1689,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for: Materials Use: Science,
              Engineering, and Society (MUSES) project will establish an interdisciplinary
              framework for discovering practical generalizable concepts in the interface of
              biocomplexity and industrial ecology by focusing on a case study of the
              materials cycle of toxic metals such as lead (Pb) used in the electronics
              industry.  The planned activities include preliminary research on alternative
              metal alloys used in the manufacture of solders, and educational workshops in
              industrial ecology and biocomplexity to explore the theoretical foundations of
              synergistic convergence between these concepts.  The educational program will
              facilitate the integration of methods and expertise from faculty and students
              in materials science, engineering, economics, environmental science, and public
              health.  Lead is widely recognized as one of the most pervasive toxic metals
              used in manufacturing products that are widely disseminated in the public
              domain.  The use of Pb-solders in the microelectronics industry is undergoing
              intense scrutiny.  

There is currently no uniform policy at the state,
              national or international levels for regulating Pb for this purpose, and there
              are no specific programs for tracking the fate of Pb after the sale of
              products.  The situation is changing rapidly as international initiatives in
              the European Union and Japan have emerged to limit public exposure to
              Pb-containing products.  These initiatives threaten current manufacturing
              practices in the United States, and they may change the balance of
              international markets for electronics products.  The proposed research will
              develop a framework for decision-making under conditions where multiple
              datasets in different disciplines intersect to predict toxic metal flows in the
              electronics industry and the consequent societal impacts.
