Title       : [KIL-d]: A Novel Epigenetic Regulator of Viral Gene Expression in Yeast.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0223590

Award Number: 0223590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Leibowitz leibowit@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to determine the genetic locus encoding [KIL-d], a
              cytoplasmically-inherited genetic element in yeast that exerts epigenetic
              regulatory effects on the M double-stranded (ds) RNA genomic segment of the
              cytoplasmic killer virus of yeast.  In wild-type yeast cells, M dsRNA confers
              on infected cells the phenotypes of toxin production and toxin resistance, both
              activities of processed products of the virus-encoded preprotoxin protein.  In
              the presence of [KIL-d], the expression of M dsRNA is normal in diploid cells,
              but upon meiosis each haploid progeny clone shows a different mitotically
              stable (variegated) defect in toxin production and/or resistance function. 
              Upon mating of the defective haploids, wild-type virus expression is restored
              (healing), and upon meiosis variegated defective phenotypic expression in each
              haploid progeny reappears (resetting).  The investigator has previously shown
              that the effects of [KIL-d] are exerted on M dsRNA but not on a cDNA clone
              derived from it. [KIL-d] is transmissible to a new strain by cytoplasmic
              transfer, but it does not exert its epigenetic effects on M dsRNA expression
              until the recipient haploid cells have gone through a cycle of mating and
              meiosis, indicating that nuclear functions are involved in the epigenetic
              regulation.  [KIL-d] does not map on the viral M or L-A dsRNA segments,
              mitochondrial DNA or the 2-micron DNA plasmid.   [KIL-d] has a relatively high
              rate of loss (like many plasmids), and an even higher rate of reappearance with
              variegated phenotypic expression in clones that have lost it.  This behavior
              resembles the known prions of yeast, but not any known nucleic acid plasmid. 
              This research will quantify the epigenetic effects of [KIL-d] on M dsRNA by
              determining whether it alters the size or quantity of viral genomic or
              transcript RNA or of the protein products of the virus.  In order to determine
              the molecular nature of [KIL-d], a genomic library from a primary isolate in
              which this element has appeared after mutagenesis (available in this
              laboratory) will be used to generate a genomic DNA library (or a cDNA library),
              that will be screened for genes that can generate [KIL-d] when transferred to
              wild-type recipients.  If [KIL-d] is a prion, then this screen should identify
              the gene(s) encoding the protein that forms the prion.  If the prion model is
              incorrect, this screen should identify the genetic elements involved in this
              virus-specific epigenetic regulatory process, which appears to be the first
              such process to be subjected to molecular genetic analysis.  Further studies
              using the genetic methods available in yeast will allow characterization of the
              genes identified in this library screening procedure.  This research will
              provide a training opportunity for a postdoctoral fellow, graduate student and
              several undergraduate students, who will be trained in the methods of yeast
              molecular genetics.  It will also include a new group summer research
              experience for a group of summer undergraduate students participating in two
              programs run on this campus with support from the NSF and an Initiative for
              Minority Student Development Award from the NIH. 

 Misfolded proteins that
              can cause normal proteins of the same type to misfold are termed prions.  In
              yeast, prions are cytoplasmically-inherited non-nucleic acid genetic elements. 
              [KIL-d] is an unusual genetic element in yeast that alters expression of the
              genes of a viral RNA.  This research will characterize this genetic element and
              determine whether it is a prion. 

