Title       : Studies of Spin-Electronic Materials Using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0223848

Award Number: 0223848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yun-Liang Soo soo@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi-Han Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st
              century Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 02-036.  The proposal focuses on
              x-ray studies of spin-electronic materials using synchrotron radiation. 
              Systematic investigation of short-range-order structure, chemical valency, and
              local magnetic moment around constituent atoms in magnetic semiconductors will
              be carried out using state-of-the-art synchrotron radiation techniques
              including extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), near-edge x-ray
              absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism
              (XMCD).  In addition, interface morphology, compositional intermixing and
              diffusion depth profile of magnetic ions in various heterostructures used in
              spin-injection devices will also be investigated by grazing incidence x-ray
              scattering (GIXS) and angular dependence of x-ray fluorescence (ADXRF)
              techniques.  The nanostructure information obtained from these x-ray
              experiments is important for understanding the mechanisms responsible for the
              special electronic and magnetic properties of innovative spin-electronic
              materials for device applications.  The materials to be studied include digital
              alloys and random alloys of III-V magnetic semiconductors, some have already
              been found with a Curie temperature above the room temperature.  Other magnetic
              compound semiconductors such as II-VI, II-IV-V2, and II-VI2 systems with
              room-temperature ferromagnetism will also be investigated.  These experimental
              approaches are based on this research team's extensive experience in the past
              decade of using x-ray scattering, fluorescence, and absorption techniques for
              nondestructive characterization of III-V magnetic alloy semiconductors and
              heterostructures.  This group makes use of both soft and hard x-rays with both
              linear and circular polarization for materials research.  Not many other x-ray
              research teams are doing experiments in both wavelength regimes with both types
              of polarization.  The nanostructure information obtained in these experiments
              will be used as a feedback to crystal/epilayer growers for nondestructive
              evaluation of the materials, and from which to select more appropriate
              conditions for improving the material characteristics to meet device
              requirements.   For the upcoming fiscal years 2002-2004, this research program
              will emphasize on the following areas: (i) local structures around magnetic
              ions in magnetic alloy semiconductors and magnetic digital alloys, and (ii)
              interface morphology, compositional intermixing and diffusion depth profile of
              magnetic ions in heterostructures of magnetic semiconductors and metals/alloys
              as well as their relation with spin-injection efficiency.  The proposed
              research is expected to make significant contributions to both fundamental
              understanding of layered magnetic semiconductors and applications of the new
              magnetic materials in the exciting field of spin-electronics.




