Title       : ESS/Collaborative Research: A Methodology for Real Time Train Dispatching in
               High-Density Rail Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0223502

Award Number: 0223502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Leachman leachman@dynprod.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Exploratory Research on Engineering the Service Sector (ESS) addresses
              real-time dispatching of heavy-haul trains in a high-density complex railway
              network with multiple-track configurations, multiple priorities and multiple
              speed limits. The research will provide the theory and dynamic control
              algorithms for deadlock-free dispatching with minimal total train delay in
              complex heavy-haul rail networks that are increasingly common in urban areas.
              Determining the optimal dispatch policies that minimizes train delays and
              ensures deadlock-free operations is NP-hard. Therefore, most of the research
              efforts in this direction have focused on developing heuristics as well as
              detailed simulations to plan dispatching policies. Theoretical efforts thus far
              have only addressed trackage configurations like single, double, and partially
              double rail lines. However complicating entities in a rail system like
              junctions, crossovers, sidings, speed limits and goods priorities need to be
              considered in order to extend the current theory to large-scale urban rail
              networks. To address this need, the research will consist of the following
              tasks: (1) theoretical studies focusing on developing a network representation
              of this complicated physical system, and characterization of the nonlinear and
              stochastic dynamics underlying the operations for laying the foundations of
              developing effective dispatching algorithms, (2) development of deadlock-free
              and near-optimal algorithms for the real-time dispatching of trains operating
              in complex general rail networks, and (3) development of a simulation
              methodology to model complicated rail networks akin to Southern California rail
              networks, and validate the performance of algorithms and theory using this
              simulation model.

As global trade continues to increase, cargo traffic at
              the nation's ports continues to increase at dramatic levels.  For example, the
              Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach are among the busiest ports in America.
              Booming trade with Pacific Rim nations has seen the annual trade in the two
              ports exceed 100 million tons. The total volume that these ports handle is
              evenly divided between transcontinental and local shipments.  Furthermore, a
              large portion of the local shipments are packaged and sorted at local
              facilities for shipment across the continent. Railways form the major means to
              transcontinentally move these goods. Forecasts show that volume growth of
              high-value containerized freight is set to triple in the next 25 years. The
              main impact of the research will have a significant bearing on real-world urban
              rail operations, many of whose pertinent complexities have been ignored in
              theoretical studies thus far. 
