Title       : Hecke Algebras, Buldings and Harmonic Analysis on p-adic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0223829

Award Number: 0223829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julee Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970454

This project concerns problems in representation theory.  Recent
              progress in the theory of "Types" suggests that the Harmonic analysis on p-adic
              groups can be completely understood via harmonic analysis on the associated
              Hecke algebras.  Moreover these Hecke algebras are expected to be generalized
              affine Hecke algebras and so should be easier to analyze.  Dr. Kim will try to
              establish the fact that many of the classical groups defined over p-adic fields
              give rise to algebras that are generalized affine Hecke algebras.  Further she
              intends to study the relation between buildings of the classical groups and
              buildings of the general linear group.  Finally she intends to consider how
              base changes relate to the representations of Hecke algebras.

Representation
              theory is a major mathematical technique for exploiting the presence of
              symmetry.  For example, the structure of the hydrogen atom, one of the
              fundamental computations in quantum mechanics, is controlled by representation
              theory.  Another way of thinking about representation theory is as a
              generalization of the theory of eigenvalues and matrices that many people see
              in a college course on basic linear algebra.  This project addresses two
              important questions in representation theory. One potentially has important
              applications to number theory.  The other concerns a generalization of the 
              theory of angular momentum in quantum mechanics.  It will help describe how 
              pair  of interacting quantum  mechanical systems of a rather general type 
              breaks up into simpler systems.


