Title       : Modulation of Airflow Within Complex Terrain by Moist Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  2002   
File        : a0223798

Award Number: 0223798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Steiner msteiner@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to better understand and quantify the physical processes
              involved in the newly proposed concept of wet drainage flow in major river
              valleys under sustained rainfall.  The suggested mechanism behind this
              phenomenon is air subsiding as a result of cooling from melting and evaporation
              of precipitation particles.  The subsiding air concentrates in river valleys,
              which act as air drainage.  The resulting down-valley flow can develop
              underneath an opposite-directed flow of moist air that is lifted onto the
              topographic barrier in which precipitation is formed.

The analyses to be
              carried out during this project are focused on (a) in-depth evaluation of
              ground-based and airborne Doppler radar and thermodynamic data collected in
              major river valleys on the south side of the European Alps during the Mesoscale
              Alpine Program (MAP), and (b) numerical simulation of the wet drainage flow
              phenomenon and numerical experimentation to delineate the conditions under
              which this occurs and evaluate a potential feedback to orographic precipitation
              formation mechanisms.

This research is focused on the effect of moist
              processes on the flow of air within valleys, complementing substantial work
              performed on airflow in valleys under dry (clear sky) conditions.  The proposed
              analyses will help to better define the new concept of wet drainage flow and
              assess the relevance of this flow phenomenon to dynamic and microphysical
              processes ranging from the local (valley) scale to the topographic barrier and
              larger scales.  The research is tightly knitted to MAP, which is focused on
              exploring the mesoscale effects of complex topography on precipitation
              formation and flooding.  MAP is conceived as an integrated program of basic
              research with direct applications in the realm of numerical mesoscale weather
              prediction.  Orographic precipitation mechanisms in the Alpine region, as well
              as many other major mountain ranges around the world, are an important element
              of flooding, landslide and debris flow hazards.
