Title       : Minority Research Opportunities in Science and Engineering at the Naval Research
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0223772

Award Number: 0223772
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Spector spector@cbmse.nrl.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Navy Naval Res Lab
	      4555 Overlook Avenue, SW
	      Washington, DC  203755328    202/404-7339

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mark S. Spector, Naval Research Laboratory

"Minority Research Opportunities
              in Science and Engineering at the Naval Research Laboratory"

Due to cultural
              and historic barriers, minorities continue to be underrepresented in science,
              mathematics, and engineering. Despite some growth in the number of minorities
              receiving undergraduate degrees in science and engineering, there has been
              little increase in the number of minorities at the doctoral level. It is
              essential for the scientific  community to provide training opportunities and
              role models for promising young students in order to encourage them to pursue
              advanced degrees in science, mathematics, and engineering and careers in
              research. The Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering (CBMSE) at the
              Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) has developed a summer internship program for
              minority students that give the interns the opportunity to experience
              professional laboratory research first hand. Participation is essentially
              focused on undergraduates at the nation's Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities, Minority Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and Universities
              (HBCU/MI/TCU's). While there are several programs that provide support for
              students pursuing careers in health care, this program focuses uniquely on
              training future scientists and engineers.

Based upon previous success, it is
              proposed to renew the program. It is proposes to increase the number of summer
              internships to approximately fifteen per year by placing interns in the NRL's
              Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering, Physical Metallurgy Branch,
              and Surface Modification Branch and increasing our recruiting effort to pursue
              students at additional HBCU/MI/TCU's. It is also proposed to support up to five
              students per year to continue their research at their home institute during the
              following school year as part of a collaborative effort between NRL scientists
              and faculty members at HCBU/MI/TCU's.

The broader impact of this activity is
              highlighted by the accomplishments already made. During the first ten years of
              the program, ninety-three outstanding students have spent ten weeks working at
              the Naval Research Laboratory on exciting projects at the leading edge of
              science and technology. This has included 48 women and 45 men from a variety of
              scientific disciplines: Biology, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering,
              Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
              Of the students who have completed their undergraduate degrees, many have gone
              on to receive master's degrees and approximately twenty are currently in
              doctoral programs. 

