Title       : Da Niao and Big Bird Look at the Sky -- A Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0223584

Award Number: 0223584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Schneider joel.schneider@sesameworkshop.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sesame Workshop
	      
	      New York, NY  10023    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Sesame Workshop, in collaboration with the Adler Planetarium & Astronomy Museum
              and the Beijing Planetarium, is planning a planetarium show and complementary
              materials for preschool-age children and their families, teachers and other
              caregivers.  The planetarium show will be designed for use in the United States
              and China and will have the following goals:

-- promoting positive attitudes
              among young children towards science;
-- providing age-appropriate information
              about astronomy in an engaging, entertaining format; and
-- fostering am
              understanding of one another among children in the two countries.

During the
              planning phase, there will be three face-to-face meetings among the principals:
              at the Beijing Planetarium, at Sesame Workshop in New York, and at the Adler
              Planetarium in Chicago.  The purpose of these meetings will be to
              determine:

-- What is the appropriate educational content for the show and
              complementary materials and what does research with children say about it?
--
              How does this type of project best reach preschool audiences?
-- Is there a
              need or opportunity for producing alternative language or dialect versions of
              either the English or Mandarin versions of the show and complementary
              materials?  
-- What issues or problems affect the design of the show and
              complementary materials?
-- What are the implementation issues?

Particular
              attention will be given to exploring how the project might include
              cross-cultural information in the show and complementary materials, and how the
              cross-over characters (Da Naio appearing in the English version; Big Bird in
              the Mandarin version) might be included in the design.


