Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Clovis Technological Organization,
               Understanding Technological Strategies through Cached Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0223570

Award Number: 0223570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce B. Huckell bhuckell@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Bruce Huckell and David Kilby
              will investigate caches of artifacts made by Clovis hunter-gatherers.  The
              Clovis culture, best known for its large fluted projectile points found in
              association with extinct mammals such as mammoth and giant bison, occurs
              extensively in North America, perhaps over the entire continent.  Reliable
              dates from Clovis sites cluster tightly between 13,500 and 13,000 calendar
              years B.P.  Clovis lithic tool assemblages commonly include fluted projectile
              (spear) points, large stone bifaces and bifacial cores, blades and blade cores,
              and a limited variety of smaller tools made on flakes and blades.  Bone and
              mammoth ivory tools are less common, but equally geographically widespread
              components of Clovis assemblages.  Clovis caches have been found throughout
              many areas of the United States Plains and Rocky Mountains, as well as the
              Great Lakes area and currently reside in museums and private collections around
              the United States.

The goal of this research is to provide a comprehensive
              view of the organization of Clovis lithic technology.  Most of what is known
              about Clovis technology is derived from artifacts at the end of their useful
              lives that have been discarded or abandoned at kill or camp sites.  Current
              models of Clovis toolkits are largely reconstructed from these discarded
              portions of tools and waste material.  Caches of Clovis artifacts, however,
              provide a unique window into Clovis technology that is not found in other
              Clovis assemblages, because artifacts from caches appear to have entered the
              archaeological record at some point before their usefulness was depleted. 
              Thus, they may more directly represent the components and form of the working
              toolkit carried by Clovis people.  By systemically linking artifacts from
              caches to those from kill and camp sites, we can address traditional issues of
              primary artifact production, artifact use, and discard, as well as issues
              concerning maintenance and storage strategies in between.  

Over 20 Clovis
              caches have been identified and reported; however, this designation obscures
              considerable variability.  It is unlikely that all caches served the same
              purpose.  Their functions may have included, among other things, artifact and
              raw material storage, and ritual abandonment. Deducing the general function of
              individual caches is a necessary step in relating them to abandoned artifacts
              from non-cache sites.  Thus, in addition to understanding technology, this
              research will investigate caching as a behavior, and evaluate possible roles
              that it played in Clovis technological organization and land use. 

Caches
              are discrete assemblages that provide a snapshot of artifact form at some point
              along a continuum of stone tool reduction subsequent to raw material
              acquisition and previous to discard.  Approaching cached assemblages from this
              perspective can potentially fill a critical gap in the available data
              concerning Clovis lithic technology.  In the process we will gather and make
              available data that are not easily accessed due to inadequate publication,
              dispersed locations, and, in many cases, private ownership.  

Despite
              roughly six decades of intensive investigation, there remains significant
              uncertainty concerning even the most general aspects of Clovis adaptations. 
              The results of this research will provide insight into the technology,
              subsistence, mobility, and ideology of these people who were arguably the first
              inhabitants of the New World.  More specifically, this research stands to
              define and evaluate the role of material caching in the adaptations of Clovis
              people, the results of which may be applicable to a better understanding of all
              hunter-gatherer groups.

