Title       : Geoarchaeological Contexts of Human Occupation During Lower Palaeolithic
               Eurasia: A Micromorphological Study of Sediments from 'Ubeidiya , Dmanisi and
               Gran Dolina-TD10
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0223739

Award Number: 0223739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9330               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support graduate student Carolina Mallol will
              conduct the analytic stage of her dissertation research, which comprises a
              geoarchaeological study of three different Lower Paleolithic sites. As the main
              focus of the research, the technique of soil micromorphology (the microscopic
              analysis of soils/sediments) will be applied to examine the nature of hominid
              occupations in the Old World at, Dmanisi (Republic of Georgia) 1.7 million
              years ago, and 'Ubeidiya (Israel) 1.4 million years ago, and Atapuerca-TD10
              (Spain) 0.3 million years ago. The goal of this work is to identify
              anthropogenic remains such as the residues of prehistoric fires, to
              characterize them at a high level of accuracy and to associate them with
              activities that might have been performed by hominids at these sites. The
              research is integrated with the ongoing archaeological projects at each of the
              above-mentioned sites and exemplifies a form of successful multidisciplinary
              effort given that existing analytic results by other team members from other
              subdisciplines such as zooarchaeology and lithic technology are being
              considered complementary to this work. Soil micromorphology has been
              successfully applied to several prehistoric sites, revealing details of
              activities and interpretations that escaped field observation and laboratory
              analysis.  In a geo-archaeological study of this kind, the first stage entails
              how the prehistoric deposits accumulated and under what kind of environmental
              conditions, followed by their analysis from an archaeological perspective using
              data available from the recovered remains. The high degree of resolution that
              can be accomplished by this technique will facilitate testing the currently
              debated hypotheses in the context of early hominid behavior, such as the use of
              fire. Conclusions obtained about the precise nature of the occupational
              contexts from 'Ubeidiya, Dmanisi and Atapuerca will represent a solid
              background on which to base further interpretations of early hominid behavior.
              Particularly significant is the fact that these three major archaeological
              sites represent the earliest hominid occupations of Eurasia containing
              well-documented lithic, faunal, and paleoanthropological assemblages. The first
              migrations out of the African continent, the colonization of temperate regions
              of Eurasia, and settlement in habitats where humankind was unprecedented, are
              phenomenal events that encompass morphological and behavioral implications for
              the hominid populations in question. While paleoanthropology and archaeology
              can reveal features of these events to us, search for archaeological evidence
              beyond the visibility of the naked eye, through soil micromorphology can
              provide reliable information concerning the natural and anthropogenic contexts.
              


