Title       : Collaborative Research: The Cognitive Neuroscience of Category Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0223910

Award Number: 0223910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Gluck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cognitive Neuroscience of Category Learning

Abstract

With National Science
              Foundation support, Drs. Gluck and Poldrack and colleagues will conduct a
              three-year investigation to test two hypotheses about the roles of the basal
              ganglia and medial temporal lobe, and their interaction, in human category
              learning.  They will test these hypotheses using a combination of functional
              magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and studies of patients with damage to either
              the basal ganglia (due to Parkinson's disease) or to the medial temporal lobe
              (due to anoxia or other causes). The first hypothesis to be tested is that the
              basal ganglia are particularly important for learning based on trial-by-trial
              feedback, whereas the medial temporal lobe is more important for observational
              learning in the absence of feedback.  The second hypothesis is that the
              engagement of these two regions during category learning is modulated by the
              structure of the category that is being learned.  For example, some categories
              are largely determined by single features; for example, most animals with a
              beak are classified as birds.  Other kinds of categories require integration of
              information across multiple features.  We will test the hypothesis that the
              medial temporal lobe is crucial for learning categories based on combinations
              of features, whereas the basal ganglia are important for learning categories
              based on single features.
The topic studied in this project is categorization,
              oneof the most important acts of human cognition.  Categorization is the
              recognition that various individual objects can be classified into larger
              groups that resemble each other in some way.  Research in cognitive psychology
              has provided a set of sophisticated models for how humans learn new categories.
               However, little is currently known about how these operations are achieved in
              the brain.  Most of our current knowledge comes from studies of patients with
              brain disorders.  In particular, patients with Parkinson's and Huntington's
              diseases have trouble learning some kinds of new categories, though they are
              able to learn other kinds of categories.  These diseases affect a set of deep
              brain structures known as the basal ganglia, and their impairment on some
              category learning tasks suggests that the basal ganglia may be critical for
              category learning. However, the exact role of the basal ganglia is unknown. 
              Whereas patients with Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases are severely
              impaired at learning some new categories, patients with amnesia following
              damage to the medial temporal lobe (including the hippocampus) are only subtly
              impaired at category learning.  Initial neuroimaging studies have shown that
              this region is deactivated when normal individuals are learning new categories,
              suggesting that it is not involved.  Furthermore, imaging studies have shown
              that that activity in the medial temporal lobe and basal ganglia during
              category learning is negatively related: Individuals with more activity in one
              region tend to have less activity in the other.  These findings suggest that
              these two regions may interact during learning, but the nature of this
              interaction is unclear at present.
These studies have important implications,
              both for the basic understanding of category learning and for the understanding
              of the brain systems involved in such common disorders as Parkinson's and
              Alzheimer's diseases.  Most importantly, the results of these studies will
              provide stronger constraints on theories of human category learning that are
              currently possible using behavioral measures alone.  

