Title       : Operational-Level Dynamic Price Competition in the Service Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0223314

Award Number: 0223314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle Lin kylin@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project studies the dynamic price competition of service products
              such as airline seats, hotel rooms, Internet bandwidth, and concert/sport event
              tickets, etc.  These service products are considered perishable because (a) the
              quantity is fixed; (b) the inventory can neither be replenished nor stored; and
              (c) unsold products have little salvage value.  Due to the perishable nature of
              these products, a service retailer often has a strong incentive to dynamically
              adjust product prices based on the current inventory and the remaining time of
              sale.  This approach allows the retailer to best meet the demand with the
              limited supply and to maximize profit.  The competition aspect of dynamic
              pricing is especially relevant to the emerging e-commerce.  The electronic
              market not only allows service retailers to update prices in real-time with
              minimal cost, but also allows consumers to compare easily the quality and
              prices of similar products.  Motivated by these characteristics, this project
              proposes to study a set of quantitative models of dynamic pricing in an
              oligopolistic environment. In each of these models, the investigator will study
              the optimal policy, the Nash equilibrium, and heuristic policies.

The goals
              of this project are: (a) providing tools that would help service retailers to
              maximize the profit by dynamically updating product prices in real-time; (b)
              exploring the market equilibrium in the dynamic pricing environment; and (c)
              providing commercial technologies that would improve market efficiency and
              increase overall social welfare. In addition, this project provides funding for
              training Ph.D. students in a new and rapidly expanding area of critical
              technology and commerce, and for enriching undergraduate and graduate education
              through course-work of research results.

