Title       : CCR: The First Annual Conference on Verification, Model Checking and Abstract
               Interpretation 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0223760

Award Number: 0223760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenore D. Zuck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Embedded software is playing an important role in economy, government, and
              military. Since such software is often deployed in safety critical
              applications, correctness and reliability have become issues of utmost
              importance. Techniques for verification and validation traditionally fall into
              two main categories. One is formal verification, i.e., model checking and proof
              methodology. The other is abstract interpretation and static analysis. The goal
              of formal Verification is to prove that designs meet their specifications.
              Model Checking an automatic approach to verification, mainly useful when
              dealing with finite-state systems. Abstract Interpretation is a method for
              designing and comparing semantics of programs. It has been successfully used to
              infer run-time program properties that are instrumental for program
              optimization purposes.
There are no clear dividing lines in between these
              different methodologies. In fact, they can be combined. An example is the
              exciting new research direction that combines abstraction (of infinite-state
              programs into finite-state ones) with model checking (of the finite-state
              system), that had produced formal and automatic verification of many complex
              systems. There is a growing conviction in the research community that hybrid
              methodologies are imperative for the process of formally verifying analyzing
              full-fledged reactive systems.

