Title       : Subsurface Exploration of Deep-Sea Archaeological Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0223686

Award Number: 0223686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Ballard rballard@ife.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl A. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrik T. Hiebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Stager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sea Research Foundation
	      55 Coogan Boulevard
	      Mystic, CT  063551997    860/572-5955

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The abrupt flooding of the Black Sea in 5700 BC submerged wide coastal areas
              and human settlements.  This catastrophic event and the environmental changes
              it would have caused must have influenced the progress of the agricultural
              revolution in the Near East and Europe.  Apparently well-preserved
              archaeological sites pre-dating this flooding have recently been identified
              along the submerged ancient coast of the Black Sea.  These underwater sites
              could shed new light on economic transformations of human society at the time
              of the spread of agriculture into Europe.  
Geologic evidence of the rapid
              infilling of the Black Sea basin received support when an ancient beachline was
              found during our deep water archaeological survey near Sinop, Turkey in 1999. 
              Bathymetry of the Black Sea floor off the Turkish coast identified a rolling
              river valley along a 12 mile wide submerged coastal plain.  One hundred sonar
              anomalies (called targets) on the sea floor were identified by sonar and
              examined by remote video.  Of these, four were ancient or historic shipwrecks. 
              One sonar target (no. 82) was identified as a potential site of human
              habitation on the basis of its distinctive outline and size. 
Site 82, located
              under 95 m of water, is composed of large (1 x 1 m) slabs of limestone in a
              regular rectangular outline in an area 15 x 6 m.  Preliminary testing in 2000
              indicated that the surface of Site 82 is covered with approximately 7 cm of
              modern sediment.  A sediment sample taken from the site had charcoal, seeds,
              and an elevated phosphate content consistent with submerged archaeological
              sites found in other areas of the world.  Archaeological investigations are
              being coordinated at the University of Pennsylvania. 
	The Turkish authorities
              have granted a permit to further investigate this site in 2003.  A grant from
              the National Science Foundation will allow mapping, sampling and archaeological
              excavations at this site, well below the depths at which divers can work.  The
              methodologies for robotic excavation are experimental and are being developed
              in a collaboration between archaeologists, engineers and oceanographers
              expressly for this project.  A new ROV which will have the capabilities to
              carry out archaeological investigations robotically is being built at the Woods
              Hole Oceanographic Institute.  Approximately two weeks will be spent on-site
              aboard the NSF ship USS Knorr, which is scheduled to be in the Black Sea in
              July, 2003.  The proposed research at Site 82 will include: 1) fine scale
              mapping (to a resolution of 1 cm),  2) core sampling of sediments on- and
              off-site,  3) small scale excavation using the robotic vehicle, and 4)
              conservation of the site and of samples recovered.  
	The submerged Black Sea
              coast appears to be a uniquely well-preserved Neolithic landscape, unmodified
              by any subsequent human occupation.  Site 82 in its geographic setting offers
              us unusual potential for understanding the key relationship between human
              history and environmental change.  Results of the investigation at Site 82
              should provide detailed information about the ancient economy and culture of
              the Black Sea region prior to the flooding, The associated oceanographic
              studies should provide answers to questions concerning the nature and rapidity
              of environmental change at a critical period in the transformation of societies
              of the Near East and Europe.  The robotic research tools being developed for
              this investigation will open new possibilities for the study of submerged
              surfaces, applicable in any shallow or deep water environment.

