Title       : The Physical and Chemical Mechanisms Responsible for Carbon Sequestration in
               Soil Microaggregates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0223279

Award Number: 0223279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. McCarthy jmccart1@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie D. Jastrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund Perfect  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The dynamics of soil aggregate formation and stability have profound
              implications to understanding and enhancing C sequestration in soil. Soil
              microaggregates are particularly crucial to long-term sequestration because
              they protect C against decomposition, resulting in much longer residence times
              for C. However, the reasons why organic carbon in soil microaggregates has such
              long residence times is not well understood. The goal of this research is to
              determine the structural and chemical bases of soil microaggregate formation
              and stability. This goal will be accomplished by investigating the internal
              surface morphology of microaggregates and the distribution of C within
              microaggregates, as well as the nanoscale organomineral associations underlying
              microaggregate structure and stability. The evolution of these features will be
              examined in a series of soils representing agronomic management systems that
              affect C accumulation (till versus no-till, conventional versus organic), as
              well as land-use options for enhanced C storage (prairie restoration, forage
              management systems).

This proposal focuses on microaggregates; however, the
              value and significance of the proposed research will be leveraged by
              collaborations with several investigators who are working on the evolution of
              soil aggregates at the same field sites. Their participation links the results
              of our study to quantitative and qualitative changes in carbon storage, as
              affected by management practices. Conversely, our process-level insights will
              provide a mechanistic explanation for the changes they observe in accumulation
              or loss of soil carbon under different agronomic systems or land use
              options.

Hypotheses relating aggregate structure to C accumulation and
              management practices will be tested using multiple state-of-science techniques
              including (1) N2 adsorption to determine the accessible surface area within
              microaggregates and assess whether exposed surfaces are organic or inorganic,
              (2) Small Angle Neutron and X-Ray Scattering to characterize the surface area
              and size distribution of the total porosity, and, using contrast matching
              techniques, determine the accessibility of internal porosity to microbes,
              exocellular enzymes, and nutrients, (3) Scanning Electron Microscopy to
              visualize intact microaggregates and help interpret N2 adsorption and
              scattering data, and (4) Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy that allows for
              collection of X-ray spectral data to evaluate the chemical composition of
              intra-aggregate OM and identify the presence of inherently recalcitrant
              molecules, or show preservation of labile compounds. Data from all four
              techniques will be interpreted in the context of a fractal model of pore space
              geometries.

By comparing differences in the mechanisms influencing
              microaggregate formation and stability, coupled with information from
              collaborators on the size and dynamics of soil carbon pools, the emerging
              patterns will be broadly relevant to identifying major mechanisms controlling
              rates of carbon transfer in soils. This enhanced understanding will provide a
              scientific basis for developing effective management strategies to enhance C
              sequestration in terrestrial systems, which is one of the major goals of the
              Carbon Cycle Science Plan. Specifically, the proposal focuses on process-level
              studies to define and quantify key mechanisms for carbon transformation and
              retention in soil.
The project will integrate research and education through
              participation of a student and postdoctoral fellow. Their scientific
              perspectives will be further broadened and enhanced by their interactions with
              our diverse group of collaborators. The students' experiences in this project
              will position them to be leaders who will make major contributions to the
              long-term effort to understand the global carbon cycle.

