Title       : Collaborative Research: Advanced High Dielectric Constant Gate Materials for
               CMOS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0223109

Award Number: 0223109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shubhra Gangopadhyay shubhra.gangopadhyay@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Temkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0223109
Gangopadhyay

The project between Texas Tech University (TTU) and
              Lehigh University (LU) is a 'collaborative' program to conduct experimental and
              theoretical research in the area of advanced, ultra-thin, high dielectric
              constant (high-K) gate materials for CMOS devices. This project is motivated by
              the drive for advanced CMOS integrated circuits with sub-micron feature sizes
              and the need to scale the gate dielectric, while preventing quantum mechanical
              gate current between the silicon inversion layer and the overlying gate
              electrode. The Si02 gate dielectric will be replaced with a single or dual
              -dielectric film consisting of one or more monolayers of SiO2 to form the
              interfacial transition region covered with a high dielectric constant (high-K)
              insulator. The rationale for a collaborative proposal effort lies in the
              capabilities of the two universities with Texas Tech University expertise in
              high-K gate materials and Lehigh University integrating these materials into an
              advanced gate insulator for CMOS devices. Texas Tech University will form
              high-K, Hf02 or ZrO2 gate dielectrics with a custom electron-beam deposition
              system to be incorporated into advanced CMOS devices and test structures
              fabricated at Lehigh University. The collaborative project will employ the
              combined and complementary analytical techniques at both universities, such as
              reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and low energy electron
              diffraction (LEED) at TTU combined with angle resolved photoelectron
              spectroscopy (ARXPS) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
              (HRTEM) at LU. Electrical characterization will be performed with unique test
              structures and measurement techniques to determine carrier trapping in the
              high-K dielectrics. The PI's multidisciplinary faculty will bring together
              students from different departments and universities in a project to foster a
              broad research and educational experience. The project is enhanced with close
              collaboration and outreach to industry.



