Title       : Microbial Community Ecology of Tick-Borne Human Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0223813

Award Number: 0223813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Clay CLAY@Indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to characterize the microbial communities of
              several common  tick species using DNA sequence-based techniques, analyze
              patterns of co-occurrence among microbial taxa, and mathematically model the
              consequences of those patterns on epidemiological dynamics of tick-borne
              pathogens.  In particular, tick-borne microbial communities will be analyzed
              for evidence of competitive exclusion or mutual facilitation among species. 
              Ecological interactions among species are one of the most important factors
              shaping community structure.  Much research has demonstrated that ticks may
              simultaneously harbor multiple bacterial species, including symbionts
              transmitted through eggs and pathogens transmitted through bites.  Habitat
              alteration, expanding ranges of tick vectors, and increased populations of
              shared animal hosts make the movement of pathogenic microorganisms among tick
              species more likely.  

On a worldwide basis, ticks serve as vectors for more
              human pathogens than any other arthropod.  In the United States, the large
              majority of cases of vector-borne disease arise from tick bites (e.g. Lyme
              Disease), and new tick-borne pathogens are regularly being discovered.  This
              research will contribute to our basic understanding of microbial communities of
              arthropods and the epidemiology of pathogen transmission.  Further, this
              research will have a practical impact on management of tick-borne diseases and
              our understanding of the relationship between invasion of tick vectors and the
              emergence of novel, or more highly virulent, human pathogens. 

