Title       : Diffusion-Based Approaches to Unsupervised Learning and Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0223052

Award Number: 0223052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Javier R. Movellan movellan@inc.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to investigate a new class of stochastic
              probabilistic models, that make inferences and extract high-order dependencies
              from high-dimensional data. This research builds upon work that recasts
              existing unsupervised algorithms such as factor analysis, principle component
              analysis, and independent component analysis as energy-based feedback models.
              The diffusion network perspective investigated in this project affords new
              nonlinear generalizations of existing models, generalizations which are easily
              extended to overcomplete and undercomplete cases, and in which inference is
              relatively simple. Learning in diffusion based approaches is efficient and
              neurally plausible, making them good candidates for engineering applications
              and for modeling of neural and cognitive processes.

The new models will be
              explored using a synergistic combination of theoretical work and computer
              simulations. Their practicality will be tested by applying them to a variety of
              exciting and difficult machine perception tasks, including efficient
              representation of natural scenes, person identification and facial expression
              recognition, and reconstructing three-dimensionally transformed faces from 2-D
              video.

Because of their unique capabilities to model high-dimensional data
              in a nonlinear fashion, the diffusion networks studied in this project are
              likely to be important in a diverse group of fields including data mining,
              computer vision, and computational neuroscience, and could outperform existing
              algorithms in a wide variety of applications, including human computer
              interaction, image processing, and law enforcement.

