Title       : SGER: Vasotiinergic Mechanisms Associated with the Control of Social Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0223655

Award Number: 0223655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82491              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richmond R. Thompson rthompso@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 There are two closely related peptide hormones called arginine vasotocin
              
(AVT) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) that have been implicated in several
              
vertebrates as modulators of social behavior, including courtship,
              pair-bonding, 
parenting, and aggression.  The mechanisms by which these
              molecules act in 
the brain to produce these behavioral effects remain
              unclear, but their 
widespread distribution suggests they are evolutionarily
              conserved.  It has been 
suggested that AVT/AVP may affect the processing of
              species-typical social 
releasing stimuli such as courtship calls, visual
              displays, or chemical signals.  It is 
important to take a comparative
              approach to this question, to determine whether 
or not AVT/AVP can
              selectively influence behavioral and brain responses to the 
specific
              releasing stimuli that have evolved in different groups of animals for 
social
              communication.  This project is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to
              
test this hypothesis directly using goldfish, because the exact chemical
              stimuli 
important for courtship and aggressive communication signals in this
              species are 
uniquely identified and can be delivered quantitatively.  The
              project is exploratory 
because it is not yet clear whether AVT will influence
              social behavior in goldfish, 
although AVT effects on social behavior have
              been shown in other teleost fish, 
and some AVT/AVP effects are known for
              diverse other vertebrates.  
Experiments manipulating AVT levels in the brain
              will measure effects on 
courtship and aggressive behaviors in male goldfish
              during responses to 
particular chemosensory social stimuli that release those
              behaviors.
    This is a high-impact/high-risk project because the outcome is
              not clear, but 
the potential impact of success is wide-ranging.  If
              successful, the results will 
lead to further studies on social regulatory
              functions of hormones, will have an 
impact beyond behavioral
              neuroendocrinology to brain neurochemistry, animal 
behavior, and evolutionary
              neuroscience, and could have an impact on 
applications in aquaculture and
              fisheries industries.


