Title       : Collaborative Research: High-Performance Computational Methods for
               Continuous-Time Markov Processes in Financial Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0223374

Award Number: 0223374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Marcozzi marcozzi@unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project focuses on the development of high-performance computational 
tools
              for financial engineering. The goal is to develop computational 
methods to
              evaluate complex financial products used to manage foreign 
exchange, interest
              rate, equity, commodity and energy price risks and credit 
risk, and manage
              large portfolios of assets. The methodology is based on 
extensions to
              financial engineering of finite-element methods successfully 
used in diverse
              branches of engineering to solve numerically multi-
dimensional partial
              differential and integral equations. Partial integro-
differential equations
              arise in the study of Markov jump-diffusion processes 
and associated optimal
              stopping and stochastic control problems in financial 
engineering. The aim of
              the present proposal is to develop both the 
necessary mathematical theory to
              extend finite element methods to jump-
diffusion processes and develop
              high-performance computational tools 
based on these methods that can be
              effectively implemented and used by 
industry practitioners in the financial
              services, as well as researchers in 
financial engineering, applied
              probability and branches of operations 
research that use continuous-time
              Markov processes. Specific challenges in 
financial engineering to be
              addressed in the project include high 
dimensionality and
              jumps.

Methodologies developed in this project will help financial
              institutions, 
corporate treasuries and energy companies accurately value
              complex 
financial instruments, efficiently manage risk of financial
              transactions, and 
dynamically manage portfolios of assets. In addition to
              financial 
engineering, we anticipate that this project will have a broader
              impact on 
research and application areas that use continuous-time Markov
              processes as 
a modeling framework. Constructive approximations and
              computational 
algorithms for jump-diffusion processes developed in this
              project should 
prove useful for diverse areas of application that use
              jump-diffusion 
processes. This proposal will support the new Ph.D. major in
              financial 
engineering at Northwestern University. This new Ph.D. major will
              result in 
training of highly qualified researchers in financial engineering.
              This project 
is a part of the long-term development effort at Northwestern
              University in 
the area of financial engineering. This project will also help
              the Department 
of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Nevada Las Vegas
              establish a 
research program in financial mathematics.

