Title       : Designing Dynamic Service Networks Effectively through Information Management:
               Case Studies on Construction Project Management and Crisis Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0223283

Award Number: 0223283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Burcu Akinci bakinci@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Itir Karaesmen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Designing Dynamic Service Networks Effectively through Information
              Management: Case Studies on Construction Project Management and Crisis
              Management

The service industry now dominates the US economy with over 67%
              of the labor force and 58% of the output. Taking manufacturing as the model,
              the service industry increasingly decentralized its operations and outsourced
              its activities, even their "back office operations." This has resulted in a
              network of services that, in order to provide customer satisfaction, require
              effective designed, management, and control.  Current approaches for service
              network design focus on maximizing the productivity, reliability, and quality
              at the individual service unit level; they neglect issues associated with the
              network that ties these units. 

Information dependencies are an important
              link betwee service units, often forming the backbone of the service network.
              Identification and management of information dependencies between different
              service units within a network is thus tantamount to designing and managing an
              effective service network.

This research will develop formalisms for the
              design of effective service networks by modeling and management of information
              dependencies between service units. The development effort will target
              construction project management and crisis management services since the need
              for effective service design tends to be emphasized in these types of
              short-lived (discontinuous) services that are composed of dynamic networks of
              service providers. Additionally, the unique characteristics of these service
              will provide an opportunity to explore and formalize less-studied areas of the
              service management field.

Within the context of construction and crisis
              management, the research will explore and identify important design parameters,
              performance metrics, and project requirements needed to design a framework for
              service networks. Information flows and management requirements of the networks
              based on these factors will be characterized. Information and communications
              technology will be investigated as ways to meet those requirements. Existing
              information and communications technology tools/platforms will be evaluated as
              enablers of coordination and enhancers of performance for project-specific
              services. Existing operations/engineering modeling tools for designing robust
              and dynamic project-specific service networks will be analyzed and evaluated.
              Finally, case studies and a service network design simulation game will be
              developed to educate business and engineering students as well as industry and
              academic leaders about the challenges of designing service network
              organizations and the role of information technology.

This research will
              significantly contribute in terms of a list of common network design parameters
              of short-lived dynamic service networks, assessment of the role of current
              information and communications technologies within service networks, an initial
              formalism designing service networks, and a simulation game on service network
              design. This formalism will help define the gaps in our knowledge and frame a
              research agenda for refining a framework for service network design,
              construction management and crisis management. 

