Title       : MUSES: Disposable and Reusable Textile Materials in Healthcare Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0223987

Award Number: 0223987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Sun gysun@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Rucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1794      BE-Mat Use:Science,Eng&Society
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1689,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE) for Materials Use: Science,
              Engineering, and Society (MUSES) incubation activity will investigate the
              physical, sociological, and economic impacts of disposable and reusable
              textiles used in healthcare facilities. Exploratory research conducted by an
              interdisciplinary team consisting of a polymer chemist, a marketing expert and
              a social psychologist, intends to address questions raised about textile
              materials currently being used in healthcare facilities and to reassess
              economic and environmental consequences of using the materials. The analysis of
              the acceptance and potential impacts of new materials and technologies that are
              environmentally benign in the healthcare arena is the longer-term objective.
              Protective clothing and textiles in the medical sphere include surgical gowns,
              gloves, drapes, wraps, sheets, covers, and facemasks; these are composed of two
              different textile materials--disposable and reusable fabrics-that serve
              primarily to impede the transmission of pathogens in healthcare facilities.
              Disposables, also called non-woven fabrics, are mostly produced from
              polyethylene, polypropylene, and their blends.  After usage, they should be
              immediately disposed of as bio-hazardous materials. In contrast, reusable
              textiles, such as those comprised of pure cotton fibers and certain polyesters,
              can be repeatedly used in healthcare facilities. 

Specific research tasks
              include:  (1) to determine the most effective, multi-functional (biocidal and
              water-repellent) materials for medical applications; (2) to assess the economic
              and environmental impact of using reusable biocidal textiles in the healthcare
              industry; (3) to determine the social and psychological factors affecting the
              acceptance of the new technology by healthcare workers. Educational activities
              include a) involving undergraduate and graduate student in the research and to
              incorporate the research results into a senior undergraduate course; b)
              providing educational materials to workers in healthcare community and other
              hazardous Cupertino as was as to manufacturers of textile materials; c)
              educating the public about the environmental and economic impacts as well as
              protective properties of the different textile materials in healthcare
              facilities.   The results of this research will be used to make recommendations
              regarding materials that are environmentally benign, protect against pathogens
              and are acceptable to healthcare workers.
