Title       : Life History Trait Plasticity and Adaptations to Stochastic Environmental
               Divergences: High Arctic Charr
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0223685

Award Number: 0223685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke rradtke@seaofdreams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sea of Dreams
	      2738A Hipawai Place
	      Honolulu, HI  96822-182    808/988-1784

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project represents an interdisciplinary study to test the hypothesis
              that stochastic climate and habitat variation play a decisive role in the
              development of life history traits, adaptation mechanisms and population
              composition in Arctic charr (Salvelinus alpinus) in high Arctic freshwater
              systems. The study combines geophysical observations with ecological,
              retrospective and genetic studies. The circumpolar Arctic charr is ideal for
              the study of how environmental factors affect life history, population
              structure and diversity in fishes.  Charr populations demonstrate a tremendous
              ecological plasticity and adaptations to harsh environments. Arctic charr is
              the only freshwater fish in the high Arctic and, as elsewhere, has a broad
              range of life-history strategies including anadromous, resident and landlocked
              populations. In lake systems with migrating charr, the population may consist
              of a mixture of parr, postsmolt and adult migratory individuals, as well as
              small-sized resident, large-sized resident and large formerly resident
              individuals transformed to anadromy.  Determination of the effect of the
              environment upon phenotype, genotype and life history relies upon detailed
              information about environmental conditions, developmental rates, genetic
              information, migration rates and mortality in extreme conditions. In this study
              charr populations from lake systems from the Thule, Disko, Nuuk and
              Julianehaab, Greenland and Ellesmere Island, Canada  areas will be compared.
              


Charr in all systems experience highly stochastic environments.  Whereas
              
adaptive, genetic and behavioral mechanisms associated with migration are
              
well known for salmonid fish at lower latitudes, knowledge about such
              
mechanisms in anadromous charr inhabiting high latitude environments are
              
still fragmentary. In general, mechanisms associated with seasonal events
              
must be pre-adaptive. How such pre-adaptive mechanisms are timed with, and
              
influenced by, the unpredictable physical conditions allowing for charr
              
migration in high Arctic systems will be the main topic of this
              propject.





