Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Production and Use of Ground and
               Polished Stone Tools in Lianchengzhen, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0223692

Award Number: 0223692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Hole Frank.Hole@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne P. Underhill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the National Science Foundation, Geoffrey Cunnar will
              conduct his dissertation research on the Liangchengzhen site, one of the
              largest known Longshan Period (2,600-1,900 BC) archaeological sites on the east
              coast of Shandong Province, China.  The Longshan period existed just before the
              rise of Xia and Shang dynasties when numerous types of Longshan groups spread
              throughout a vast area of eastern China and appear to have consisted of well
              stratified, competitive, territorial polities, which often engaged in regional
              exchange of wealth items and warfare.  Specialized production and exchange of
              ceramics, jade and other wealth items, along with the appearance of large
              towns, proto-writing and incipient bronze metallurgy are seen as hallmarks of
              the period.  Seven years of collaborative systematic survey in the eastern
              Shandong region and three seasons of collaborative excavations (1999-2001),
              supported by the National Science Foundation and directed by Dr. Anne Underhill
              and Dr. Gary Feinman and their colleagues at Shandong University, have
              identified Liangchengzhen as the center of a multi-tiered settlement hierarchy.
               The excavation team has uncovered numerous important finds from the Late
              Neolithic period including houses, burial remains, and finely made craft goods.
                Analysis of these finds will enable the project to achieve their goal of
              understanding the origins and development of civilization in the region. 
              

Mr. Cunnar's dissertation work focuses on the production and use of ground
              and polished stone tools. By the Late Neolithic period in China, ground and
              polished stone tools appear to have become the dominant form of stone tools. In
              an effort to better understand the role of stone tools in Longshan society, Mr.
              Cunnar's research will focus on three questions: 1. How were stone tools used? 
              2. Where were stone tools made and what type of stone were they made from? 3. 
              What was the organization of production?  Mr. Cunnar will replicate and then
              use many of the ancient tool forms.  The use of the tools will be guided in
              part by ethnographic observations of modern Chinese farmers in the region and
              their use of contemporary hand tools.  The microscarring and polish formation
              on the edges of the replicated tools will be compared to that present on the
              ancient tools.  Such a systematic study will aid in determining the use of
              ancient tools and elucidating the ancient manufacturing methods.  A number of
              studies have proposed that elite control over economic systems is a major
              causal factor in the development of complex societies. Typically, "elites" hold
              the highest valued positions from which they control significant portions of
              the economy serving to bolster their own status, prestige and authority.  Mr.
              Cunnar's research will explore what control, if any, the elite population might
              have exerted of the production of stone tools such as ritual battle-axes.  The
              recent excavations systematically employed the use of screens and the
              collection of numerous soil samples.  These procedures have resulted in the
              recovery of a very large amount of stone tools and tool fragments, a first for
              Shandong archaeology.  Typological and contextual analysis of the several
              thousand stone tools will help understand where tools were being manufactured,
              what types of tools were made, and who was making them.  The stone raw
              materials will be identified.  These data can be correlated with the materials
              corresponding source location and frequency of use to understand the relative
              importance and role of the various stone types in the Longshan economy. 
              Collaborative research projects are in their infancy in China.  The results of
              this research will provide data of interest to many scholars studying the
              development of complex society in China.





