Title       : MUSE: The Industrial Ecology of Particulate Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0223958

Award Number: 0223958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Considine cpw@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Silsbee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many knowledge intensive products require the manufacturing of particulate
              materials, such as ferroelectrics, ceramics, powdered metals, cements, and
              pharmaceuticals. These materials often have their largest environmental impact
              during the particulate stage when they are the most soluble. Particulate
              production commonly involves the consolidation of individual particles.
              Moreover, these materials often play a pivotal role in new technologies that
              enable society to achieve greater energy and economic efficiency. Many
              scientists recognize the unique contributions of these materials but lack the
              information and analytical tools to consider the economic, social, and
              environmental impacts of their process and product design decisions.  The
              objective of this MUSES project is to develop a research agenda to meet this
              need. 

To achieve this goal, an interdisciplinary team at Penn State,
              representing materials, economics, business and the environmental fields; will
              work with several participating material science centers to organize a one-day
              symposium for students and young researchers in the field and a two-day
              international workshop on the industrial ecology of particulate materials. The
              workshop will address the following key questions:
What spatial and temporal
              detail is possible for particulate material balances?
What are the
              determinants of particulate material flows?
What modeling approaches are best
              suited to represent these determinants?
How could these models guide process
              and product design decisions? And
What material technologies could improve
              environmental quality?
In addressing these questions, our inquiry will lay the
              foundation for a conceptual framework to identify and develop a research agenda
              in this emerging field.  

