Title       : CaRTE Workshop: Carbon Respiration from Terrestrial Ecosystems - Reducing
               Uncertainties in the role played by respiration in the global carbon cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0223312

Award Number: 0223312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72277              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Trumbore setrumbo@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

This is a proposal to conduct a workshop that will synthesize and
              advance understanding of terrestrial ecosystem respiration. Carbon enters
              ecosystems through a single process, photosynthesis, and nearly all is returned
              to the atmosphere through respiration. Respiration spans the activity of many
              organisms, from the plants that fixed the carbon to soil fauna decomposing
              plant tissue residues, and the time carbon spends in an ecosystem can vary from
              minutes to millennia. While the major processes affecting plant metabolic
              (autotrophic) respiration and decomposition rates (heterotrophic respiration)
              are known, our ability to predict the variation in soil respiration in space
              and time is limited. - a major uncertainty in the current and future carbon
              cycle. To reduce this uncertainty this workshop will bring up to 50 ecosystem,
              soil, and carbon cycle scientists together to 1) identify the current
              disparities and limitations in various measurement methods, 2) identify the key
              processes controlling autotrophic and heterotrophic that should be incorporated
              in models, 3) plan new observational, experimental, and modeling activities
              based on the new questions that emerge from a synthesis of our current
              understanding. This workshop will produce a group of synthesis papers that will
              constitute a journal special feature on trends and uncertainties in
              understanding and predicting ecosystem respiration. Recent advances in
              methodology and modeling have focused research in terrestrial ecosystem
              respiration on a few key topics, which are the ones this workshop will
              address:
What factors control how total ecosystem respiration partitioned into
              (a) aboveground and belowground components and (b) autotrophic versus
              heterotrophic sources in a range of space and time scales? How do the different
              fractions of organic matter that contribute to heterotrophic respiration change
              with factors like temperature and moisture and how will these potentially
              provide feedbacks to climate change? What is the role of time lags and site
              history in determining the magnitude and variability of fluxes on seasonal,
              interannual and decadal timescales?
Intellectual Merit. Terrestrial ecosystem
              respiration remains one of the key elements of the global carbon cycle that
              limits our ability to predict future CO2 concentrations. This workshop will
              provide a plan for the community to resolve current areas of controversy, such
              as the potential for increased heterotrophic respiration to act as a feedback
              to global warming.
Broader Impact. By producing a series of papers on this
              topic in a peer-reviewed journal special issue, the workshop will have broad
              impact and influence future research planned in this area. The workshop will
              provide a venue for international exchange of ideas, and student participation
              in the workshop will be encouraged.

