Title       : Engineering of Project-based Production Systems for the Delivery of
               Engineered-to-order Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0223576

Award Number: 0223576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris D. Tommelein tommelein@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. G. Ballard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Project-based production (PBP) systems are dedicated to designing and making
              artifacts that provide value to project stakeholders. Their delivery is a type
              of service when the artifacts are engineered-to-order (ETO). Delivery of custom
              products that enable realization of customer purposes, while being responsive
              to the needs of multiple users and various life-cycle requirements, pushes PBP
              systems and ETO products firmly into the service category.

Numerous services
              are delivered through PBP systems and produce ETO products. Examples of
              services belonging to this class of problems are health care (e.g., patient
              diagnosis and treatment), construction services, film and theatrical
              productions, software engineering, oil field development, consumer product
              development, custom ship building, and work orders (e.g., job shops). Learning
              how to design, control, and systematically improve the delivery of ETO products
              can be understood as a topic of importance to many-if not most-service
              functions.

The objective of this research is to determine how to reduce lead
              times for one type of ETO product in the engineering and detailing phases of
              delivery using industry-practice data, computer-based simulation, and
              computer-based as well as practice-based experimentation. Taking one step
              towards the PI's larger objective, this exploratory research focuses on one
              type of ETO product, in one type of service function, namely the delivery of
              steel reinforcing bars used in pre-cast or cast-in-place concrete. What is
              learned from this project will be cast in a theoretical framework and applied
              to delivery processes for other ETO products in various service sectors, in an
              effort to establish one component of a general methodology for the design,
              control, and continuous improvement of project-based ETO product
              delivery.

The working hypotheses are that (1) Traditional ETO delivery is
              characterized by sequential processing, with each participating company  or
              department sub-optimizing total system performance; (2) Rework in engineering
              and detailing exceeds 10%; (3) The ratio of idle time to total time spent by an
              ETO product as it moves from engineering through fabrication and delivery
              exceeds 20 to 1; and (4) The ration of fabrication shop cycle time to
              fabrication lead time exceeds 10 to 1. The research will aim to reject these.
              Should findings, however, reinforce these hypotheses, then opportunities for
              radical improvement in the ETO delivery process abound. A research agenda will
              then be staked out, and, time permitting under this 18 month grant, selected
              improvements will be implemented and tested.

