Title       : Exploratory Research On Engineering The Service Sector: Towards A Decision
               Informatics Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0223380

Award Number: 0223380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Tien tienj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This study  will pursue opportunities for extending engineering- and
              science-oriented tools and approaches to newly emerging types of service
              enterprises." Consistent with this purpose, the study, after considering the
              scope, size and unique features of the U.S. service sector, identifies
              characteristics of emerging services from an engineering perspective, which, in
              turn, augur for a decision informatics paradigm for enhancing the production
              and delivery of services. Within the framework of this new and critical
              paradigm, the study is focused on the real-time fusion and analysis of multiple
              non-homogeneous data sources.

The intellectual merit of the study is
              underscored from two critical perspectives.  First, it is problem-driven, not
              solution-driven.  Thus, it is the engineering-related characteristics of
              emerging services that have clearly identified a need for decision informatics,
              which represents a paradigm shift towards real-time, information-driven
              decision making.  Second, it will add significantly to the body of knowledge on
              the real-time analysis and fusion of multiple data sources.  While there is
              considerable literature on data mining and pattern analysis, tools for
              undertaking real-time data analysis are lacking.  For example, from a real-time
              decision perspective, it is critical to know whether the most recently received
              data point is part of the historical distribution of data points or an outlier
              that is, in effect, the beginning of a new phenomenon -- thus, adaptive,
              real-time decision making is not only affected by data input but also by the
              sequence of that input.  Additionally, while there is considerable literature
              on the fusion of data from multiple, homogenous -- mostly quantitative --
              sources, tools for undertaking real-time fusion of data from multiple,
              non-homogeneous (i.e., quantitative and qualitative) sources are lacking. 
              Moreover, the coincident real-time fusion and analysis of multiple,
              non-homogeneous data sources represents an area that has eluded investigation;
              yet, emerging services -- especially e(lectronic)-services -- require such
              tools to enhance their production and delivery.  It should also be noted that
              the study seeks to have the broadest impact, especially in regard to the
              integration of research and education.  First, it constitutes the basis for a
              doctoral dissertation effort. Second, the developed, real-time data fusion and
              analysis tools will be applied to an existing service problem, employing real
              data from multiple, non-homogeneous sources.  Third, the results will be
              presented and published in a number of venues.  Fourth, the results will be
              appropriately structured and integrated into two existing courses being taught
              by the Principal Investigator; a graduate course, entitled "Evaluation Methods
              for Decision Making," and an undergraduate course entitled "Decision-Focused
              Systems Engineering."  Fifth, consistent with the exploratory nature of the
              study, additional research needs will be identified to further underpin the
              decision informatics approach, similar to the continuing development of
              bioinformatics.
