Title       : Quorum-Sensing and Growth Control in Rhizobium sp. NGR234
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0223724

Award Number: 0223724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Fuqua cfuqua@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Gram-negative bacteria within the Proteobacteria group commonly use acylated
              homoserine lactones (acyl-HSLs) as molecular signals in the process of quorum
              sensing (QS).  Quorum-sensing bacteria release diffusible signal molecules that
              accumulate with increasing cell number, eventually triggering adaptive
              responses.  Regulatory proteins of the LuxI and LuxR families are usually
              required for synthesis of, and response to acyl-HSLs, respectively.  Diffuse
              populations of cells generally produce a constant, low level of acyl-HSLs, and
              these rapidly diffuse out of cells down their concentration gradient.  Elevated
              population density increases the relative acyl-HSL concentration, eventually
              fostering interaction of the signals with LuxR-type proteins, which in turn,
              control the transcription of target genes.  Although this basic mechanism is
              well conserved, the context of QS regulation and the cellular functions under
              its control are highly variable among different bacteria.  This project focuses
              on the regulatory context of a LuxI-LuxR-type QS system employed by the
              nitrogen-fixing plant symbiont Rhizobium sp. NGR234, its mechanism of action,
              and its effect on cellular growth rate.  NGR234 incites the formation of
              nitrogen-fixing, symbiotic nodules on the roots of a wide range of leguminous
              plants.  The molecular basis of this promiscuous host interaction has been
              extensively studied.  Many of the functions that orchestrate the plant
              interaction are carried on the 536 kb pNGR234a plasmid.  The pNGR234a plasmid
              also carries a large cluster of genes homologous to plasmid replication (rep)
              and conjugal transfer (trb/tra) genes from other bacteria.  The rep/trb/tra
              cluster includes a LuxI-LuxR-type regulatory pair, TraI and TraR, and the
              additional QS regulator TraM.  TraI synthesizes 3-oxo-octanoyl-L-homoserine
              lactone and TraR interacts with this acyl HSL to regulate tra/trb and rep
              operon expression.  TraM acts to inhibit TraR through formation of an
              anti-activation complex.  A molecular genetic approach is being employed to
              study the QS mechanism in NGR234.  The regulatory signals and pathways that
              control traR expression will be investigated to determine the conditions that
              foster QS.  Based on analogous systems, the host plant is likely to play a role
              in this regulation.  The QS-regulated pNGR234a genes under TraR control will be
              identified and the mechanism by which TraR controls their expression
              elucidated.  Lastly, control of cellular growth rate by QS, a common QS
              regulatory target among several Rhizobium species, will be examined.  Findings
              generated from the research project will provide fundamental information on
              cell-to-cell communication in an important plant symbiont, and the role of this
              communication in its highly plastic host interactions.  More generally, these
              studies will add to the understanding of how cell-to-cell communication
              directly and indirectly influences interactions with host organisms, and
              enables quorum-sensing microbes to balance their physiological activity with
              the host environment.

The bacterium Rhizobium sp. NGR234 uses cell-to-cell
              communication during its symbiotic relationships with higher plants.  The
              research project examines the biochemical and genetic mechanisms underlying
              this intercellular communication, and its influence on the interaction of this
              bacterium and host plants.  The findings generated from this work will provide
              fundamental knowledge required to take advantage of these bacterial
              communication systems, for combating infectious disease in plants and animals,
              as well as promoting beneficial microbial interactions.   		

