Title       : Continental drying and carbon sequestration along a subambient to elevated CO2
               gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0223340

Award Number: 0223340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Jackson jackson@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere has increased dramatically since the
              last glacial maximum. A major focus of ongoing research is the current and
              future role of terrestrial ecosystems in sequestering CO2. In grasslands, which
              are North America 's largest potential vegetation type, the interactions of
              water availability with increased CO2 can be as important as the direct effects
              of CO2 in shaping primary production, decomposition, and C storage. The
              proposed research and modeling synthesis is a collaboration among Duke
              (Jackson, Maherali), Colorado State (Parton), and Kansas State (Owensby)
              Universities and the USDA-ARS (Polley, Johnson) to predict the consequences of
              increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations and climate change (increased summer
              drought) for the Southern Great Plains region of the U.S.
The field experiment
              in an intact C3/C4 grassland in central Texas is unique in providing a
              continuous gradient of Ca from 200 to 550 umol mol -1, allowing the examination
              of critical threshold and nonlinear responses to past, present, and future
              atmospheric CO2. Nested within the CO2 gradient is a replicated factorial water
              manipulation of ambient and 60% ambient precipitation, the latter consistent
              with the summer droughts predicted for the central U.S. by general circulation
              models (GCMs) in the coming century and similar to an extended historical
              drought from the 1950s in the region. The experiments described in this
              proposal will permit rigorous accounting of CO2 effects on carbon sequestration
              and the soil water balance, a factor that has emerged from previous studies as
              critical in explaining the integrated effects of CO2 enrichment on
              grasslands.
Key hypotheses to be addressed include:
H-1 Ecosystems respond
              nonlinearly to atmospheric CO2, with less carbon sequestration at future CO2
              concentrations than observed in the recent past.
H-2 Although the stimulation
              of plant production with increasing CO2 will be greater under the summer
              droughts predicted by GCMs for the central U.S., carbon storage will ultimately
              depend on the balance of soil water availability and decomposition.
H-3 Water
              availability plays a key role in grassland carbon sequestration with CO2
              through interactions with soil N availability.
The DAYCENT ecosystem model
              will be used to evaluate the potential long-term impact of increasing
              atmospheric CO2 and climate change for grasslands in the Southern Great Plains.
              A substantial amount of data is already available to describe the potential
              impact of increasing atmospheric CO2 on grassland ecosystems in the Southern
              Great Plains from long-term CO2 experiments in Texas, Colorado, and Kansas. The
              impact of different environmental conditions and climate change will be
              evaluated for above-and belowground plant production, soil C and N levels, and
              net ecosystem production. Therefore, the proposed research and modeling
              integration directly addresses the ability of ecosystems to continue as carbon
              sinks in the coming century.
The proposed project is relevant to three of the
              five goals outlined in the U.S. Carbon Cycle Science Plan (CCSP): 1) Improve
              projections of future atmospheric concentrations of CO2 through a combination
              of manipulative experiments and model development, 2) Establish accurate
              estimates of the impact of historical and current land use patterns and trends
              on the evolving C budget, and 3) Establish accurate estimates of the potential
              Northern Hemisphere terrestrial C sink and the underlying mechanisms that
              regulate it. The proposed research also contributes to the Global Change and
              Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) and Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle
              (BAHC) core projects of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme
              (IGBP).

