Title       : BE/MUSE: Towards a Sustainable Potable Water Infrastructure- Ecology, Aesthetics
               and Economics of Corrosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0223992

Award Number: 0223992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Edwards edwardsm@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell J. Bosch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. V. Loganathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Dietrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1689,9146,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0223992  Edwards  This MUSES project will build an interdisciplinary team to
              comprehensively address drinking water infrastructure corrosion, which is a
              multi-billion dollar world-wide problem plaguing water suppliers and home
              owners.  Corrosion is devastating due to the economic burden of replacing
              plumbing, potential adverse health effects of corrosion by-products, and
              unwanted and fear-producing aesthetic problems including discolored water and
              off tastes and odors.  The interdisciplinary team will synthesize a better
              understanding of corrosion through discussions of: chemical and biological
              causes of corrosion in pipes; economic models that assess costs of
              infrastructure damage and replacement; sensory properties of metals and sensory
              evaluation methods; health, consumer, and regulatory issues related to drinking
              water.  The participating research professionals and students represent six
              disciplines (Civil and Environmental Engineering, Economics, Food and Sensory
              Science, Public Health, Regulatory Affairs, Water Treatment and Supply), three
              countries, six different national agencies and associations, and three
              universities.  Participation of these diverse groups will produce the
              scientific and engineering insights necessary for improving safe water in a
              manner that is tempered by societal and regulatory needs.
The project's
              impacts will be broader than just its technical discoveries.  The participants
              are committed to scientific and public dissemination of their knowledge.  Two
              white papers will be submitted for publication in scientific journals.  The
              public will be directly served by involving a citizen's group in discussions,
              preparing public interest out-reach materials for a consumer-based website, and
              other non-technical articles will appear in Op-Flow (a widely read water
              industry publication for utility workers).

