Title       : ESS: Dynamic and Stochastic Network Flow Models for Robust Revenue Optimization
               in Hotel Service Sector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0223492

Award Number: 0223492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karthik Srinivasan karthik.k.srinivasan@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sankaran Mahadevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research from this project is expected to produce significant methodological
              contributions to enhance revenue management practices through reservations
              control, in hotels and other service industries.  In particular, to increase
              revenue potential, this project investigates the possibility of bridging the
              revenue gap between ideal revenue solution (if all requests were known ahead of
              time) and the current practice of maximizing expected revenue. To enhance the
              realism of demand assumptions, a statistical framework for modeling customer
              reservation decisions (consumption, cancellation, and duration) will be
              proposed. The project will also develop robust initial solutions by determining
              ideal revenue solutions for several demand request scenarios. Further, this
              optimal apriori solution will be updated over time as current reservation
              requests are revealed, thus accounting for discrepancies between forecasted and
              actual demands. The research findings and models will ultimately lead to the
              development of significantly improved and more robust revenue optimization
              practices in a variety of service industry networks, by synthesizing
              interdisciplinary principles from networks, reliability, algorithms,
              simulation, and forecasting to develop new models and tools for reservations
              control in the hotel industry.  Benefits to various segments of the society
              include:  (1) decision support tools for reservations managers; (2) improved
              revenues and revenue reliability for hotels and airlines; (3) health care
              service planning; and  (3) reservations control for special events (e.g.
              concerts). 

In service sector industries such as airlines, hotels and rental
              car agencies, simple heuristic and empirical tools have been applied for
              reservations control.  These current models are too restrictive in their
              assumptions, and do not account for the complexity of the revenue management
              problem. This project aims to develop methods for realistic modeling of the
              reservations problem, thus leading to increased revenue potential and
              robustness, through a network flow-based approach. To achieve these objectives,
              this project aims to:  (1) develop a disaggregate framework to model the demand
              for reservations over time; (2) propose dynamic network models to obtain robust
              optimal solutions to the real-time reservations control problem; and (3)
              develop network-based models to maximize the robustness of revenues under
              uncertain arc costs (due to cancellation, no shows etc.).  A graduate level
              course on 'Reliability and Optimization of Dynamic and Stochastic
              Infrastructure and Service Networks' will be developed to prepare leaders in
              research and practice in various service and infrastructure industries
              operating complex physical and/or virtual networks. The project will also
              aggressively recruit female and minority students to enhance the diversity of
              engineers in the service sector.



