Title       : MUSE: Industrial Solvents and Working Fluids-Industrial Ecology of Organic
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0223670

Award Number: 0223670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Overcash overcash@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicole M. Darnall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Handfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1403,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This one-year MUSES pilot study of industrial ecology is designed to define a
              workable framework for the analysis of new or environmentally beneficial
              solvents, considering the life cycle of industrial solvents and working fluids,
              the supply chain implications, and the factors that influence organizations'
              decisions to adopt new solvent technologies that improve the environment. In
              contrast to many organics, which are reacted, formed, or consumed in
              manufacturing, industrial solvents and working fluids are generally recycled
              within a process, and therefore have a clear, extended life cycle. Over this
              life cycle, the influences on human and ecological systems occur from chemical
              losses and from energy emissions, and are both local and global. Economic
              influences are also manifested over the entire life cycle supply chain and
              affect decisions regarding particular solvents and working fluids. 

This
              planning project will 1) evaluate specific tools that are available or need to
              be developed in order to determine the environmental emissions and energy
              requirements for the five subsystems of the manufacturing industrial ecology
              system, 2) establish a set of chemical, material, or technology alternatives
              that have environmental benefits for a case facility's product, 3) identify
              pivotal factors that influence organizational decisions regarding the use of
              environmentally friendly inputs. With respect to these organizational
              decisions, we will consider how various factors influence organizations to
              green their supply chains and improve human and ecological environment,
              assessing how environmental information is used over the supply chain to
              achieve economic improvement. Educational planning includes cross-training of
              students in this interdisciplinary topic.

