Title       : A Game Theoretical Pricing Scheme to Allocate the Cost of Empty Railcars to
               Participating Rail Companies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0223158

Award Number: 0223158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei H. Lin weilin@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The railroad industry played an important role in industrialization in the
              nineteenth century. The industry is characterized by high fixed costs but
              relatively low variable costs. Today, with the increased level of congestion on
              national highways and the rapid development in automation and computerization,
              the potential of the railroad industry is growing again in the service sector
              of the United States economy.  While research on railcar management, such as
              minimization of the total empty car miles, is very extensive, allocation of the
              cost incurred from empty miles to a loaded trip, which is an important pricing
              problem in freight transportation, has not received adequate attention.  The
              existing cost distribution schemes to allocate empty miles to loaded trips do
              not seem to explicitly take into account the gain and loss incurred in
              cooperation and, as a result, do not ensure the fairness in all situations.
              With the rapid development in information technologies in recent years,
              cooperation at various levels has already become a key factor to success for
              many service sectors. 

The objective of this research is to develop a
              cost-allocation scheme of empty car movements for a large-scale network with
              many participants.  In specific, the cost-allocation scheme to be developed
              will reflect the level of participation in cooperation, the costs generated
              before and after cooperation, and the benefits obtained by each participant due
              to cooperation. The specific research approach adopted in this study is based
              on game theory.  We will also incorporate the network flow theory of vehicular
              traffic into the study to characterize the costs incurred at various level of
              cooperation participated by a subset of participants. The advantage and
              disadvantage of the proposed pricing scheme will be studied under different
              operation settings, strategies and objectives.  Though the proposed research is
              conducted in the context of the railroad industry, the cost-allocation scheme
              developed in this study can be applied, with some modifications, to other
              service sectors such as commercial fleet management, supply chains, and public
              transportation systems with timed-transfer between different modes. 

