Title       : Shape from Shading Without Regularization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9113690

Award Number: 9113690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Oliensis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              Shape from shading is a central, difficult problem of machine                  
              vision.  Although its formulation is precise, its solution has                 
              usually been considered ill-posed, possible only with additional               
              assumptions.  In recent papers, however, the PIs gave the first                
              proof that shape form shading is not only well-posed but solvable              
              uniquely, for general objects, when the illumination is from the               
              direction of the camera.  For general illumination direction, it               
              was shown that the solution is determined effectively up to a                  
              finite ambiguity.  Thus, regularization the standard technique                 
              for selecting a single `physically reasonable' surface solution                
              by imposing additional requirements such as smoothness is                      
              generally unnecessary.  The aim of the proposed research is to                 
              develop and implement algorithms for surface reconstruction                    
              without regularization, which, unlike previous algorithms, will                
              explicitly utilize the strong constraints on the surface                       
              solutions that make shape from shading well posed.  Through                    
              exploiting these constraints, the algorithms may be fast and                   
              robust.  Two of the four algorithms proposed are non-variational               
              unlike most previous ones, and are based on the novel                          
              mathematical techniques of the viscosity solution, and dynamical               
              systems theory.  The long term aim is to combine shape from                    
              shading algorithms with techniques using other information, such               
              as sparse depth data, for robust surface reconstruction from                   
              shaded images.//
