Title       : Collaborative Research on International and Domestic Determinants Legal and
               Institutional Change in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1991   
File        : a9113755

Award Number: 9113755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11166              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Mark Ramseyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the way that the legal and institutional               
              structure of government in Japan shapes policymaking and                       
              enforcement.  The analytic approach is guided by a rational-choice             
              principal-agent perspective.  Undertaking both theoretical and                 
              empirical work, the research challenges "culturalist" theories                 
              holding that Japanese bureaucracy, and more specifically Japanese              
              bureaucratic culture, has a singular and salient effect on Japanese            
              policy-making.  A working hypothesis in the study is that "culture"            
              is a less effective explanatory variable than particular rational              
              concerns explored under the rubric of "principal-agent" theory.                
              Based on time-series analyses over four decades, the study examines            
              the impact that changes in international trade and domestic                    
              elections have had on budget patterns, regulatory policies, court              
              decisions, and bureaucratic and judicial career paths.                         
                                                                                             
              By clarifying the institutional structure of politics and testing              
              the impact that this structure has on Japanese domestic and                    
              international policies, the study will identify the determinants               
              of Japanese policymaking and enforcement and how those change under            
              foreign pressure.  It will also move principal-agent theory beyond             
              its U.S.-based roots to a more global model.  As such, it will                 
              uncover new ways of understanding the role of party leaders, new               
              forms of principal-agent monitoring, and new implications that such            
              monitoring poses for judicial independence.
