Title       : Conference on Transnational Aspects of Legal Pluralism in Southeast Asia -
               Winter 1992, Chiangmai, Thailand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1991    
File        : a9113838

Award Number: 9113838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane F. Collier   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Engel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Yngvesson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Law & Society Assoc
	      University of Massachusetts
	      Amherst, MA  010030001    413/545-4617

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
              Sociolegal scholars have come to recognize that understanding                  
              interrelations between legal and social processes requires an                  
              appreciation of global interactions.  There has been an imbalance              
              in transnational information flows in analyzing global processes               
              particularly in areas commonly classified as peripheral to                     
              modernized and industrialized countries.  The Law and Society                  
              Association, in an attempt to start correcting this imbalance, is              
              sponsoring a conference in Southeast Asia in the winter of 1991-92             
              with approximately 25 scholars, mostly Southeast Asians.                       
                                                                                             
              The conference will be held in Chiangmai, Thailand and will focus              
              on transnational dimensions of legal pluralism.  The conference                
              has three purposes: (1) to build an intellectual foundation for                
              future collaborative research between Southeast Asian and Western              
              sociolegal scholars by developing shared conceptual frameworks that            
              will enable scholars from different research traditions to                     
              appreciate and use each other's approaches, methods, and findings;             
              (2) to contribute to a developing globalist perspective on legal               
              pluralism by using a dual lens that considers both the influence               
              of transnational processes on local politics and epistemologies,               
              and the ways that local interpretive contexts reshape transnational            
              influences; and (3) to advance knowledge about transnational                   
              sociolegal processes in Southeast Asia by analyzing how various                
              groups in the region have influenced each other in developing legal            
              responses to religious movements, demands for human rights, and                
              international feminism.                                                        
                                                                                             
              By bringing transnational issues more explicitly to the forefront,             
              conference discussions will contribute toward developing a better              
              understanding of the origins and meanings of pluralism in Southeast            
              Asia and of the various interpretive contexts in which Southeast               
              Asian law and society can be viewed.  Conference papers and                    
              introductory essays will be published in an edited volume which                
              will include a discussion of the theoretical issues involved in                
              developing a globalist perspective on legal pluralism.  In addition            
              to contributing to our understanding of transnational sociolegal               
              issues, the conference will help to build and strengthen a                     
              community of international scholars.
