Title       : Anti-Predatory Vigilance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1991   
File        : a9113111

Award Number: 9113111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Lima lslima@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Virtually all animals are both predators and potential prey for                
              other animals.  Inherent in this truism are behavioral                         
              "conflicts" such as active feeding vs. minimizing exposure to                  
              predators.  Behavioral research focused on understanding these                 
              conflicts has revealed much about the nature of decision-making                
              by animals.  Research on anti-predatory behavior has also yielded              
              considerable insight into the evolution of interactions among                  
              species and the workings of large-scale ecological systems.  It                
              also promises to shed some light on human behavior, a perspective              
              deserving more attention from researchers.                                     
                                                                                             
              Dr. Lima is studying anti-predatory behavior in a social context.              
              Specifically, his research examines the (very common) group-based              
              systems for the early detection of predatory attack, and the                   
              problems that their very existence poses for evolutionary                      
              explanations of cooperative behavior.  Predator-detection systems              
              based upon the alertness (or vigilance) of individual group                    
              members suggest levels of cooperation that would not be expected               
              in supposedly selfish animals.  Nevertheless, such behavior is                 
              indeed observed.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Using a well-characterized bird species, the dark-eyed junco, Dr.              
              Lima will investigate a key, untested assumption underlying                    
              current attempts to explain this cooperation:  that group members              
              are in some way aware of the vigilance levels of their                         
              groupmates.  Examining this simple assumption will require a                   
              series of behavioral experiments performed under controlled                    
              environmental conditions.  Preliminary observations suggest that               
              these birds are actually not monitoring the behavior of their                  
              flockmates.  Should these observations be confirmed                            
              experimentally, then a major reassessment of our current                       
              understanding of widespread group-based predator-detection                     
              systems may well be in order.
