Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Charge-Transfer Complexesin Zeolite
               Supercages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9113071

Award Number: 9113071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay K. Kochi jkochi@pop.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1940,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Jay K. Kochi,                          
              Department of Chemistry, University of Houston,                                
              University Park, to pursue with Dr. Kyungbyung Yoon,                           
              Department of Chemistry, Sogang University, Seoul,                             
              Korea, for a period of 24 months, research on charge-                          
              transfer complexes in zeolite supercages.  Zeolites,                           
              which are often used as catalysts, are crystalline                             
              aluminosilicates with small uniform microcrystalline                           
              cavities and pores.  Internal catalytic sites are                              
              available only to molecules whose dimensions are less                          
              than pore size and only molecules which can leave                              
              through the pores can appear as final products.  Thus,                         
              zeolites can serve as shape-selective catalysts.  Shape                        
              selectivity will be examined by employing various                              
              reactivity probes specifically designed for a parallel                         
              study of the access to and mobility of substrates                              
              within the zeolite supercage.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The PI and his Korean collaborator are ideally suited                          
              to combine their talents for mutual benefit.  Dr.                              
              Yoon's laboratory is better able to carry out the                              
              difficult synthesis of doped zeolites which are                                
              essential to the proposed research and which otherwise                         
              would be unavailable to Dr. Kochi.  Dr. Kochi's                                
              laboratory, on the other hand, has developed the laser-                        
              based spectroscopic instrumentation which is essential                         
              for making the measurements described in proposal.                             
              Drs. Kochi and Yoon are highly respected chemists who                          
              have collaborated successfully in the past and have                            
              published extensively in the field of this project.                            
              The present project will allow them to combine their                           
              talents and the resources of their respective                                  
              laboratories in cooperative research on a problem of                           
              mutual interest and potential benefit to the United                            
              States and Korea.  This project is relevant to the                             
              objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science                               
              Program which seeks to increase the level of                                   
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and                             
              engineers through the exchange of scientific                                   
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through                         
              collaboration on problems of mutual interest and                               
              benefit.  Dr. Yoon's participation in the project is                           
              supported by the Korea Science and Engineering                                 
              Foundation (KOSEF).
