Title       : Group-Travel Grant to Enable Junior Women Faculty to Attend the Joint ACSP/AESOP
               Congress; Oxford, England; July 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9113379

Award Number: 9113379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6932               (Estimated)
Investigator: Margot W. Garcia mgarcia@hsc.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Although much of the basic research in geography and regional science       
              is conducted by faculty members in disciplinary-oriented departments           
              within colleges and universities, many faculty members in professional         
              planning schools also engage in high-quality basic research.  For              
              faculty in these programs, the annual meeting of the Association of            
              Collegiate Schools of Planning (ACSP) is one of the foremost settings at       
              which to hear the latest research results, plan future research and            
              educational collaborations, and discuss other matters of mutual                
              interest.  In July 1991, the ACSP annual meeting will be held jointly          
              with the annual meeting of the Association of European Schools of              
              Planning (AOESP) in Oxford, England.  This meeting will be one of the          
              first opportunities for large-scale direct contact between Americans and       
              European with common planning-related research interests.  This proposal       
              provides group-travel support to enable at least eight women who hold          
              junior faculty positions at American universities to attend the joint          
              ACSP/AOESP meeting in Oxford.  All travel-grant recipients will be             
              required to seek out and explore possibilities for research                    
              collaboration with at least one European scholar.  Travel-grant                
              recipients will report on their activities at the joint conference and         
              on their efforts to establish collaborations after the meeting.                
              Recipients also will be required to secure matching funds to support           
              their attendance at the meeting.                                               
                 Through this award, American participation in this important                
              international meeting will be expanded.  At least eight young women will       
              be given opportunities to broaden their exposure to current knowledge          
              and to expand their networks of international contacts.  Long-term             
              benefits of this activity ultimately will include development of               
              collaborative international research projects and stimulation of the           
              careers of productive young women scientists.
