Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Colloids and Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9113312

Award Number: 9113312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Meyer MEYER@BRANDEIS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth Fraden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 5914      WESTERN EUROPE, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors Robert Meyer and Seth Fraden and                
              some graduate students of Brandeis University to collaborate                   
              in studies of colloids and liquid crystals with Professor H. N.                
              W. Lekkerkerker and his group of the Chemistry Department of the               
              University of Utrecht, the Netherlands.  The two groups have                   
              complementary expertise in the field of liquid crystals (U.S.                  
              side) and colloids (Dutch side) and have overlapping interests                 
              in the area of colloids which form liquid crystals.  Joint                     
              research will be carried out on specialized materials on which                 
              each of the laboratories is expert, in order to advance                        
              understanding of these important systems.  For example, the                    
              Brandeis group has been working recently on filamentous                        
              bacteriophage viruses that are susceptible to magnetic field                   
              induced ordering.  The Utrecht group has been able to synthesize               
              rod-like colloidal particles of the crystal Boehmite, and has                  
              developed expertise in preparing colloidal particles with                      
              specialized organic coatings.  These lines of research come                    
              together in the current collaboration in studies of rod-like                   
              colloidal particles which form ordered states in suspension in                 
              a liquid.  The collaborators will experimentally control the                   
              properties of the colloidal particles and their interaction, and               
              will make a detailed theoretical analysis of the systems.                      
                                                                                             
              The topic of colloids and liquid crystals is one of increasing                 
              importance, as the field of complex fluids and their                           
              applications grow.  As well as being interesting in their own                  
              right, and the basis of many important applications in                         
              technology and industry, these colloidal systems serve as model                
              systems for testing fundamental ideas about many other important               
              physical systems.
