Title       : Research Training Group in Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9113287

Award Number: 9113287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1367759            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Marler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin L. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1115,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds for a Research Training Group in Animal              
              Behavior that will be initiated in conjunction with a new Center               
              for Animal Behavior at the Davis Campus of the University of                   
              California.  The faculty group consists of 15 junior and senior                
              investigators from the Departments of Zoology and Psychology and               
              from the Regional Primate Center in Davis.  The funds awarded                  
              will provide stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral                   
              trainees, will support research during the summer by                           
              undergraduates, and will defray part of the cost of the trainees'              
              research.  In addition, funds will be used to purchase                         
              specialized research equipment to be used by trainees and to                   
              bring investigators from other research and academic institutions              
              to the campus for seminars and, in particular, for an intensive                
              workshop to be held at the time of spring break each year.                     
                                                                                             
              The study of animal behavior both requires and provides new                    
              insights into the study of animals as organisms.  Increasingly,                
              multidisciplinary approaches that recognize the interaction of                 
              genetic, developmental, physiological and environmental                        
              determinants are playing an important role in the analysis of                  
              behavior.  Among the research topics represented by the training               
              group's faculty are the development and neurophysiology of animal              
              communication, the analysis of the evolution of behavior using                 
              invertebrate models, physiological sources and consequences of                 
              social dynamics and reproduction, and proximate mechanisms in                  
              social behavior and socioecology.  These varied research                       
              activities, coupled with an intensive program of seminars by                   
              resident and invited faculty will expose trainees to the newest                
              techniques and ideas while equipping them with a solid foundation              
              in established methodologies and concepts.
