Title       : Heterogeneous Reactions of NO2 in Dispersed Aqueous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9113635

Award Number: 9113635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tihomir Novakov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Berkeley Lab
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/486-4000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Gas-liquid drop interactions are usually not viewed as                    
              surface chemical reactions but considered as a sequence of mass                
              transport processes followed by aqueous-phase homogeneous                      
              reactions.  The mechanisms and rate equations used to describe                 
              the aqueous reactions are those obtained from bulk solution                    
              measurements that are assumed to assumed to be directly                        
              applicable to dispersed systems such as clouds and fogs.  This                 
              project addresses the question of bulk vs. dispersed state                     
              chemistry in aqueous reactions of nitrogen dioxide in laboratory               
              clouds.  Its objective is to evaluate experimentally two working               
              hypotheses formulated to explain our previous results, which are               
              inconsistent with the conventional picture of nitrogen dioxide                 
              chemistry.  Our main findings are: (1) Nitrate forms rapidly when              
              nitrogen dioxide reacts with a laboratory cloud. (2) The nitrate               
              concentrations associated with subsaturated sodium chloride                    
              aerosol and especially with cloud drops substantially exceeds the              
              maximum level expected from scavenging the nitric acid impurity                
              present in the nitrogen dioxide supply, i.e. there is a net                    
              production of aerosol or cloud water nitrate.  (3) The                         
              composition of cloud drops exposed to nitrogen dioxide is                      
              radically different from bulk water exposed to nitrogen dioxide                
              from the same source.                                                          
                   The first of our two hypotheses is that the observed vs.                  
              bulk differences are due to an intrinsic, possibly surface                     
              chemical, property of high surface-to-volume aqueous systems.                  
              The second is that the uptake of nitrogen dioxide and its                      
              conversion to nitrate ion in a dispersed aqueous system is                     
              strongly enhanced by trace amounts of nitric acid adsorbed on                  
              subsaturated aerosols, cloud drops, or aerosol particles that                  
              serve as cloud condensation nuclei.
