Title       : Allegheny College's Program to Help Minority Students Develop Scientific
               Research Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9113373

Award Number: 9113373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89002              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Reynders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 9132,
Abstract    :
                Allegheny College requests $332,736 from the National                        
              Science Foundation to support a program to encourage minority                  
              students to enroll at Allegheny and to pursue a degree in the                  
              natural sciences or mathematics.  Allegheny is a private                       
              undergraduate liberal arts institution with an enrollment of                   
              1750 men and women students.  Located in the extreme                           
              northwestern corner of Pennsylvania, Allegheny enrolls                         
              students primarily from Pennsylvania, New York and Ohio.                       
              Allegheny has established a reputation for being the best                      
              liberal arts college in the region and is also well-known for                  
              its exceptionally strong science and mathematics departments.                  
              Each year, from 25 to 30% of our students graduate with                        
              degrees in the natural sciences and mathematics.  When                         
              Behavioral Science is added to this total, the percentage                      
              increases to 37.                                                               
                To capitalize on this traditional strength and to increase                   
              the percentage of minority students on this campus, Allegheny                  
              is proposing a program that will increase the likelihood of                    
              these students pursuing a degree in the sciences and,                          
              eventually, scientific careers.  Through a four-year, multi-                   
              disciplinary program, Allegheny will provide students (up to                   
              eight a year) with the attention to their academic and study                   
              skills, career goals, and scientific research skills that will                 
              ensure their success in the sciences.                                          
                Students' research skills will be developed through a                        
              faculty mentoring relationship.  Each student will be paired                   
              with a faculty mentor in his area of scientific interest and                   
              together they will work on research that will culminate in the                 
              requires Senior Comprehensive Project.  Working                                
              collaboratively, many of these students will produce work that                 
              they can present at national conferences or that can be                        
              published.  Our science faculty's history of such joint                        
              presentations and publications and publications demonstrates                   
              that high-quality projects can be achieved through                             
              "apprenticeships."                                                             
                Mr. John C. Reynders will director our "Research Careers for                 
              Minority Students" program Mr. Reynders is special assistant                   
              to the provost and director of the Educational Enhancement                     
              Program at Allegheny.  He will work with a group of at least                   
              eight faculty mentors, chosen from all of the science and                      
              mathematics departments.  Faculty and administrators will                      
              report regularly to Provost Andrew T. Ford.  Provost Ford                      
              fully supports implementing this special program.  At the end                  
              of the proposed five-year cycle for this program, the provost                  
              and the president of the College, Dr. Daniel F. Sullivan, will                 
              decide whether to continue our program.
