Title       : Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9113261

Award Number: 9113261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $767000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Bergman pgates@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program provides continued support for research by Dr. Robert                  
              G. Bergman of the Chemistry Department, University of                          
              California at Berkeley in the area of organometallic chemistry.                
              Synthesis and reactions of heterobimetallic compounds composed                 
              of early-late transition metals linked by a variety of bridging                
              groups will be studied.  One of the investigations concerns                    
              soluble compounds with bridging methylene and alkylidene                       
              ligands and metals centers of tantalum and platinum or tantalum                
              and cobalt, which have been found to act as catalysts for the                  
              hydrogenation, isomerization, and hydrosilation of alkenes, as                 
              well as for the coversion of carbon monoxide and hydrogen to                   
              methane and the conversion of methanol and carbon monoxide to                  
              acetic acid.  The mechanism of these catalytic processes will                  
              be determined, particuarly with regard to stereochemistry, and                 
              the effectiveness of other combinations of metals tested.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              The goal of the project is to develop methods for the                          
              systematic synthesis of new molecules containing two transition                
              metal centers and to explore the details of their reactions                    
              with organic molecules.  The two metals will be an early (e.g.,                
              Zr or Ta) and a late (e.g., Ir or Co) transition metal, and                    
              will have different electronic properties.  They are connected                 
              by bridging groups containing carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and                    
              sulfur, which can react with organic molecules in novel ways                   
              because of the influence of the bimetallic environment.  The                   
              findings of this research are relevant to reactions in                         
              complicated multi-metal systems such as catalytic surfaces.
