Title       : Research Mentoring in Physics and Meterology at Jackson State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9113356

Award Number: 9113356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $827447             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdul K. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Johnson  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Jackson State University (JSU) is unique among Historically                  
              Black Colleges and Universities in its undergraduate                           
              meteorology program.  The physics program too is turning out                   
              highly-qualified students.  Through the two programs, the                      
              Department of Physics and Atmospheric Sciences has made                        
              significant contributions is preparing minorities for the work                 
              forces and for graduate programs.  The maine goal of this                      
              proposed project is to prepare and motivate minority                           
              undergraduates to pursue advanced degrees and/or professional                  
              careers in physics and atmospheric sciences.  The project                      
              objectives include the following components:  (1) the offering                 
              to high ability undergraduate students early research                          
              experience by working with dedicated mentors and role models                   
              during the academic year at JSU; (2) the development of                        
              academic enrichment activities which will maintain and enhance                 
              the interest of the students in physics and atmospheric                        
              sciences' (3) the provision of opportunities for students to                   
              participate in off-campus research during the summer months,                   
              and (4) the production of graduates in physics and atmospheric                 
              science who will be prepared to pursue graduate studies in                     
              these fields.                                                                  
                Students will be required to take special courses which will                 
              consist of supervised research projects, and formalized                        
              training in technical writing and literature survey as well as                 
              laboratory experimentation.  Besides written reports, students                 
              will make at least one oral presentation of their research.                    
              Students will travel to at least one conference or meeting                     
              related to their research experiences, and will be encouraged                  
              to present papers where possible and appropriate.  Field                       
              trips, seminars, etc. will be organized.  Participating                        
              faculty mentors will be expected to accompany students to                      
              conferences and professional meetings.
