Title       : Dissertation Research: The Dynamics of Grinding Technology and Prehistoric
               Mogollon Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1991    
File        : a9113517

Award Number: 9113517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8365               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenny L. Adams  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1391,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Raymond Thompson, Ms Jenny Adams will               
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation in Anthropology.  She               
              will continue her study of prehistoric ground stone implements to              
              gain insight into the functions which they served.  Employing                  
              concepts derived from tribology she will replicated tools used by              
              prehistoric Southwestern U.S. groups and employ them in different              
              tasks such as grinding corn, seeds and bone.  These will be                    
              repeated with different types of lithic raw material.  The polish              
              and abrasion which results on the stone surfaces will be examined              
              with both macro and microscopic techniques in an attempt to match              
              use with wear type.  Preliminary work with sandstone implements                
              has yielded positive results.  In conjunction with this research,              
              Ms Adams will review the ethnographic literature to determine the              
              range of uses to which ground stone implements have been put.                  
              She will also use the experimental results to analyze a large                  
              series of prehistoric tools recovered in archaeological                        
              excavations of the Point of Pines site.                                        
                                                                                             
              Over the last several decades, archaeologists have made great                  
              strides in the analysis of flaked stone artifacts.  Through study              
              of edge damage and experimental replication, they have determined              
              the uses to which many prehistoric tools were put and these                    
              insights have permitted more detailed reconstructions of                       
              technology and lifestyle.  Almost no work, however, has been done              
              on ground stone even though such artifacts are routinely                       
              recovered in many parts of the world.  Ms Adam's project will                  
              help to fill this gap.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will develop               
              a methodological tool which will be used by archaeologists in                  
              many different situations.  It will provide new insight into                   
              prehistoric Southwest adaptations and will assist in the training              
              of a promising young scientist.
