Title       : A New Concept for Refining Molten Metals and Recovering Metals from Slags
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9113480

Award Number: 9113480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Uday B. Pal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The research involves a novel approach for refining metals.               
              It will utilize the oxygen ion conducting properties of yttria                 
              stabilized zirconia (YSZ) solid electrolyte to rapidly remove                  
              oxygen from molten metals and slags.  Typically, one side of the               
              YSZ electrolyte will be in contact with the melt and the other side            
              with a reducing gas without letting the gas and the melt come in               
              direct contact with each other.  This arrangement resembles an                 
              oxygen concentration cell, and therefore oxygen may be removed by              
              passing an electric current through the electrolyte.  This can be              
              accomplished without the application of external potential by                  
              externally connecting (short circuiting) the electrodes on two                 
              sides of the electrolyte.  The oxygen flux under this (short                   
              circuit) condition can be sufficiently high to rapidly deoxidize               
              (refine) the melt.  In order to efficiently remove oxygen by this              
              technique, the YSZ electrolyte must be thin, and the electrodes                
              must be porous and should cover the entire electrolyte surface for             
              charge transfer.                                                               
                   This novel refining device will be constructed and used as                
              described above to study the kinetics of oxygen removal from                   
              copper, low carbon iron and lead oxide-silica melts.  Based on the             
              study the principal investigator will determine the rate-                      
              controlling step for oxygen removal in these systems and establish             
              conditions for efficient refining.  This new process for refining              
              metals is environmentally sound, can use hydrogen and carbon                   
              containing reducing gases without running the risk of increasing               
              hydrogen and carbon content of the melt, and is also rapid.
