Title       : U.S.-Italy Research on Methylmercury
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1992       
File        : a9113676

Award Number: 9113676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4616               (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Weber jim.weber@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between James                   
              Weber, University of New Hampshire, and Dr. Michael Bernhard,                  
              Centro Richerche Energia Ambiente (ENEA), in La Spezia, Italy.                 
              ENEA is leading a major Swedish, German, and Italian study on                  
              environmental methylmercury concentrations.  Weber will work                   
              with Bernhard on the methylation and demethylation of mercury                  
              compounds in sediments.  The research will emphasize addition of               
              labeled inorganic mercury and methylmercury to sediment                        
              microcosms with the goal of understanding biotic and abiotic                   
              mercury methylation processes.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The results of the collaboration should provide increased                      
              understanding of mechanisms of mercury transformations, and of                 
              the sources and quantities of methylmercury in sediments, and their            
              transfer into the water and biota.  This knowledge could allow for             
              assessment of potential environmental hazards associated with                  
              methylmercury in biota.  In addition, this project would be an                 
              important initial step toward establishing a basis for estimating              
              methylmercury production and establishing environmental quality                
              criteria for it.  Studies will be conducted under a variety of                 
              conditions including:  1) addition or no addition of mercury                   
              compounds, 2) inhibition or stimulation of certain bacteria, 3)                
              aerobic or anaerobic conditions, and 4) addition or no addition of             
              potential methyl donors.  Weber will contribute to the project                 
              fundamental knowledge of chemical mechanisms involving                         
              organometallic compounds and experience in developing techniques               
              for determining low nanogram and picogram amounts of methyl-                   
              and butylin compounds in a wide variety of environmental samples.              
              ENEA personnel will contribute general knowledge of formation                  
              and demethylation of methylmercury in the Gulf of Genoa and the                
              Ligurian Sea and rivers draining into them, expertise on biological            
              aspects of the processes, and considerable experience with use of              
              radioactive isotopes, and equipment for measuring them.
