Title       : RIMI: Fast Detection of Flaws and Residual Stresses in Composite Materials by a
               Real-Time Nondestructive Laser Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1992    
File        : a9113297

Award Number: 9113297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed A. Seif   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1710,
Abstract    :
                Fiber reinforced organic matrix composites are being used                    
              or proposed as primary and secondary structures for numerous                   
              military and commercial applications.  The presence of flaws                   
              and residual stresses in these composites are often caused                     
              by the fabrication and/or installation process.  Moreover,                     
              the structural behavior of these advanced materials is known                   
              to be affected by in-service environmental conditions                          
              (humidity, temperature, pressure, impact, etc.).  These                        
              conditions induce residual stresses and microcracking in the                   
              composite, and can irreversibly degrade the fiber/matrix                       
              interface.                                                                     
                The proposed research is designed to develop and demonstrate                 
              a novel automated NDE technique, laser speckle shearing                        
              interferometry, capable of rapidly determining the residual                    
              stresses and locating flaws in composites.  By allowing                        
              fundamental real-time measurements to be made in situ, the                     
              development of engineering models can be attained, and thus                    
              will contribute to improved basic studies of composite                         
              materials under various operational conditions.  The                           
              technique is viable and suitable for operation in a                            
              manufacturing environment or dept/repair facility and in the                   
              field.  Two minority undergraduate students and one graduate                   
              student of engineering will assist the principal                               
              investigator in the proposed research.
