Title       : Research Training Group in Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9113595

Award Number: 9113595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1367435            (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip G. Haydon pghaydon@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Signal Transduction at Iowa State University.                
              The faculty group is a mixture of outstanding senior and junior                
              investigators who come from a variety of disciplinary                          
              backgrounds, but share a common interest in intra- and                         
              extracellular signal transduction.  The funds will provide                     
              stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees, will                 
              support research participation by undergraduate students and will              
              defray part of the cost of the trainees' research.  In addition,               
              funds will be used to purchase specialized research equipment to               
              be used by trainees and to bring investigators from other                      
              research and academic institutions to the campus for seminars and              
              symposia.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Signal transduction within and between cells is fundamental to                 
              all types of cells and plays a crucial role in normal cell                     
              development and function.  Examples of signal transduction might               
              include the cell-cell interactions involved in development and                 
              function of the nervous system, and the molecular mechanisms by                
              which extracellular signals effect temporary or permanent changes              
              in the metabolism and gene expression within individual cells.                 
              Typically, studies of signal transduction are directed at any of               
              a number of levels of cell organization, from the atomic to the                
              organismal.  The faculty participating in this training group                  
              study cells from a variety of organisms using a variety of                     
              biophyisical and molecular biological techniques.  By integrating              
              their research programs and training activities in these various               
              areas, the group will promote a cross fertilization of                         
              intellectual and experimental approaches that should provide a                 
              superb experience for faculty and students alike.
