Title       : Dynamics of Policing Across National Borders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1991  
File        : a9113880

Award Number: 9113880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45701              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary T. Marx   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1372,5914,5980,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In an increasingly interdependent world, current social, economic,             
              and technical changes are weakening, blurring, or eliminating                  
              legal, spacial and temporal borders.  In recent years, there has               
              been an acceleration of the internationalization of crime and                  
              mechanisms for its control.  Yet, little is known about the social             
              structures and processes involved in law enforcement across                    
              international borders.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on the organizational dynamics, interactions,             
              and dependencies involved in international policing.  Systematic               
              studies will be conducted in cooperation with European scholars in             
              England, Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands.  Rather                
              than taking the nation-state as the static unit of analysis, the               
              project focuses on dynamic interdependencies involving                         
              organizational behavior, and process aspects of cross-national                 
              policing.  The six case studies involve (1) new cross-border                   
              policing organizations and the weakening of borders; (2) the                   
              import-export of democratic policing; (3) social control technology            
              across borders; (4) legal mobilization such as enforcing EEC rules             
              against fraud; (5) private police organizations across borders; (6)            
              order-maintenance and international groups.  The methods of                    
              investigation involve observation, interviews, and the analysis of             
              documentary data in all of the countries involved.  Through these              
              studies, concepts and hypotheses required for understanding cross-             
              border policing will be developed.                                             
                                                                                             
              This project has considerable potential to yield knowledge about               
              the organizational, behavioral, and process aspects of formal                  
              social control systems and the structure of nation-states                      
              themselves as they change and adapt to an increasingly global                  
              context.  Not only can awareness of cross-border influences help               
              in understanding the dynamic nature of crime and enforcement                   
              patterns, but also the research will call attention to the systemic            
              aspects of many forms of law-related behavior across juridical                 
              borders.
