Title       : Investigation of Metal-Semiconductor and Heterojunction Devices at Tarahertz
               Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9113123

Award Number: 9113123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Crowe twc8u@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Mattauch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research program will investigate electron                                
              transport in heterostructure devices with the goal of                          
              improving the performance of terahertz-frequency                               
              semiconductor devices.  Three specific types of two-                           
              terminal devices will be investigated; metal                                   
              semiconductor junctions, heterojunction barrier                                
              diodes, and a high-electron mobility diode.  Metal-                            
              semiconductor junctions have been the workhorse                                
              device in millimeter and submillimeter wavelength                              
              applications for many years, and continue to yield                             
              state-of-the-art performance at THz frequencies.                               
              The goals of our continued work on these devices                               
              will be to increase the operating frequency to the                             
              10 THz range and determine the fundamental limit                               
              to their maximum operating frequency.  The                                     
              heterojunction barrier devices will use the barrier                            
              between two III-V semiconductor materials to                                   
              control the current flow perpendicular to the                                  
              interface.  Since the composition and doping of the                            
              semiconductor materials can be varied over a wide                              
              range, the properties of the barrier can, to a                                 
              degree, be tailored to yield the desired device                                
              characteristics for specific applications.  The                                
              heterojunction barrier varactor which is a novel                               
              device that promises to greatly improve the                                    
              maximum frequency and output power of frequency                                
              multipliers, will be extensively investigated.  As time                        
              permits, the effect of a heterojunction barrier on a                           
              metal-semiconductor junction will also be                                      
              investigated, by varying the design of the                                     
              heterojunction, the important properties of the                                
              diode can be controlled, leading to greatly increased                          
              design flexibility and improved performance.  The                              
              high electron mobility diode is a fundamentally new                            
              two-terminal device in which the electron                                      
              conduction is in a two dimensional electron gas at                             
              the heterojunction interface.  Our previous NSF                                
              grant led to the investigation of a prototype high-                            
              electron mobility varactor diode that exhibited                                
              strongly non-linear capacitance-voltage                                        
              characteristics and large reverse breakdown voltage.                           
              Research on each device investigated in this grant                             
              will have three specific components; the                                       
              investigation of fundamental device physics, the                               
              study of the feasibility of the proposed device for                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   (2)                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              scientific applications and the fabrication of                                 
              prototype devices to evaluate the theoretical                                  
              predictions.
