Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: The Species-Area Relationship for the Land Birds
               of the Ryukyu Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1993    
File        : a9113016

Award Number: 9113016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153188             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Quinn jfquinn@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Beckon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 1182,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will include a twelve month long-term visit by Dr.                  
              William N. Beckon of the Division of Environmental Studies at the              
              University of California, Davis, to Japan for a cooperative                    
              research project with Professors Makoto Tsuchiya and Hidetoshi                 
              Ota of the Department of Biology at the University of the Ryukyus              
              in Okinawa.  Dr. Beckon will be obtaining scientific data to                   
              determine the number of species that can inhabit any given area                
              of islands or habitat.  He has recently completed a database of                
              unprecedented scope on the distribution of land birds in the Fiji              
              Archipelago and on larger land masses around the world.  He will               
              expand his survey to the Japanese Ryukyu Islands.  This data                   
              combined with the Fiji Island data will provide the broad base                 
              needed for a comprehensive theory of species-area relations.  It               
              is expected that the research will be among the most important                 
              long-term studies in island biogeography                                       
                                                                                             
              Results of the research on species-area relations are important                
              to community ecology and may prove valuable in framing of policy               
              guidelines for conserving biological diversity.  Professor                     
              Tsuchiya specializes in marine and island ecology and Professor                
              Ota has traveled widely around the Ryukyu Islands undertaking                  
              reptile studies.  Both of these researchers are anxious to                     
              cooperate in the island biogeographical project.  Dr. Beckon is                
              an excellent field naturalist-ornithologist with impressive field              
              experience.  He is considered the primary American authority on                
              the vertebrate fauna of the Fiji Islands.  This collaboration                  
              should provide important scientific results.  It is likely that                
              these researchers will continue their research exchanges even                  
              after the award has terminated.
