Title       : U. S.-Germany Cooperative Investigation of Interfacial Mass Transport in a
               Biofilm System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9113412

Award Number: 9113412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9640               (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir W. Hermanowicz hermanowicz@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0512204   Nondestructive Measurement              
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a long term visit by                   
              Professor Slawomir W. Hermanowicz, University of California                    
              at Berkeley, to the Institute for Water Quality Control and                    
              Waste Management of the Technical University of Munich,                        
              Germany.  There he will collaborate with Dr. Peter A.                          
              Wilderer in the area of mass transfer and hydrodynamics in                     
              biofilm systems.  Dr. Hermanowicz has been investigating                       
              microbial attachment to and growth on surfaces, with a                         
              primary emphasis on dilute systems.  His goal is to develop                    
              a novel method for assessing biological growth in dilute                       
              systems such as drinking water distribution networks.  This                    
              research will be greatly enhanced by a capability to measure                   
              fluid hydrodynamics near the surface and the effects of                        
              surface topography on mass transport of particles such as                      
              bacteria.  Dr. Wilderer is a world expert in biofilms, with                    
              particular expertise in biofilm structure and ecology.  He is                  
              currently researching the effects of biofilm surface                           
              morphology on mass transfer.  During this long-term visit,                     
              Dr. Hermanowicz will benefit from this expertise and will                      
              gain experience in the application of Laser Doppler                            
              Anemometry to the measurement of interfacial transport                         
              properties in biofilms.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Biofilms are formed by microorganisms which attach to                          
              surfaces.  They are ubiquitous in many natural and engineered                  
              environments, such as groundwater aquifers, tooth surfaces,                    
              drinking water pipelines and ship hulls.  The role played by                   
              the dissolved and particulate components in these systems is                   
              poorly understood. A better understanding of the growth and                    
              stability of these films would have applications in                            
              industrial processes, environmental research and any field                     
              which adhesion of cells or particles is important.
