Title       : A Global Perspective on Illegal Immigration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1991    
File        : a9113739

Award Number: 9113739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne A. Cornelius   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
              Since the early 1980s, unauthorized immigration has increased in               
              the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, a function of renewed            
              economic growth coupled with severe restrictions on new legal                  
              immigration.  Millions of illegal aliens have migrated to these                
              countries.  In Western Europe, international labor migration is                
              largely unregulated.  In the United States, the 1986 U.S.                      
              Immigration Reform and Control Act has not only failed to deter                
              much new unauthorized immigration and to increase the propensity               
              of illegal aliens already in the country to depart, but has also               
              stimulated additional illegal immigration.  The European Economic              
              Community have characterized immigration as "the big issue of the              
              1990s."                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project is a comparative assessment of recent immigration                 
              flows, public policies to reduce unauthorized immigration, and the             
              outcomes of these policies in advanced industrial or post-                     
              industrial societies.  A systematic examination of the experiences             
              of advanced industrial nations (United States, Canada, France,                 
              Belgium, Italy, Germany, and Japan) in attempting to gain control              
              over illegal immigration from less developed countries and regions             
              (primarily Mexicao, North Africa, Turkey, Eastern Europe, the                  
              Philippines and Bangladesh) will be conducted.  Alternative                    
              theories and explanations for the persistence of low-skilled                   
              immigration and for the limited efficacy of immigration control                
              measures in labor-importing countries will be evaluated.                       
              Activities will include the formation of a multidisciplinary                   
              research group consisting of seven immigration specialists                     
              (representing sociology, economics, political science,                         
              anthropology, and history) from various universities who will                  
              conduct primary data collection.  These researchers and other                  
              leading immigration specialists from other industrialized countries            
              will meet in 1993 for a workshop to discuss the work.                          
                                                                                             
              The results of this study will have significant value for                      
              scientific and policy analyses of international labor migration.               
              In addition, the research has both transnational and international             
              theoretical implications relating to other issues in the sociolegal            
              field such as the limits of law as a regulatory mechanism, the                 
              problems of implementation, and the relationship of public                     
              attitudes to legal outcomes and effectiveness.
