Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Acoustic Optimization of Composite
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1992     
File        : a9113294

Award Number: 9113294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8180               (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Lamancusa jslme@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1442,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides partial support for a long term visit by                   
              Professor John Lamancusa of Pennsylvania State University to the               
              University of Siegen, Germany, where he will collaborate with                  
              Professor Hans Eschenauer of the Research Laboratory for                       
              Structural Optimization.  The objective of their research is to                
              develop methods and computational tools for designing quiet                    
              mechanical structures constructed of advanced composite materials.             
              Dr. Lamancusa and his research group bring to the collaboration                
              expertise in the fields of acoustic propagation, prediction and                
              structural vibrations.  This is complemented by the German group's             
              multidisciplinary expertise in optimization.  They have developed              
              innovative methods for shape optimization of large, composite                  
              structures with static and dynamic performance criteria.  The long             
              term cooperative research visit by Dr. Lamancusa will facilitate a             
              sharing of expertise in structural acoustics and the science of                
              optimization between two of the premier international institutions in          
              those fields.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in structural and acoustic analysis techniques now             
              make it possible to predict the acoustic performance of complicated            
              structures before fabrication.  Meanwhile, improved computing                  
              resources and optimization methods have made structural                        
              optimization feasible for complex structures with many variables.              
              These techniques have not been applied yet to the acoustical design            
              of structures of non-traditional materials.  This project will address         
              the feasibility and special problems inherent in the optimal design            
              of composite material structures for acoustical performance.
