Title       : Research Training Group on the Role of Cognition in Collective Political
               Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9113599

Award Number: 9113599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1248463            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret G. Hermann   (Principal Investigator current)
              James Voss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Billings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,1115,1180,1371,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in the Role of Cognition in Collective Political                
              Decision Making.  The faculty group is a mixture of Political                  
              Scientists and Psychologists at Ohio State University and at a                 
              number of other institutions throughout the country who will form              
              an "Invisible College" for the purpose of this training effort.                
              The centerpiece of the RTG will be an annual workshop to be held               
              each summer for 6 weeks at Ohio State University.  The workshop                
              will explore the role of cognition and politics in the definition              
              and development of solutions to societal problems.  The funds                  
              will provide stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral                   
              trainees, will defray part of the cost of the trainees' research,              
              and to defray the costs of participation in the summer workshops               
              by investigators from other research and academic institutions.                
              Institutional commitments will pay student tuition at Ohio State,              
              allow the faculty to devote time to organization of the summer                 
              workshop, will defray a portion of the cost of the workshop and                
              will insure continuation of some trainee positions after the                   
              termination of NSF support.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Although many political decisions are made by groups,                          
              psychologists trying to understand the decision-making process                 
              have traditionally focussed on the definition of problems and                  
              solutions by individuals, while political scientists have                      
              focussed on the role of power and control rather than that of                  
              cognition.  This  training group will explore this relatively                  
              neglected interface between these two approaches.  Examples of                 
              relevant research being pursued by the Ohio State faculty include              
              investigation of the role of creativity in foreign policy                      
              decision making, of adjustments of outcome expectation in                      
              decision making, and of how individual agendas become group                    
              agendas in the decision making by community health boards.                     
              Additional research topics and expertise will come from the                    
              outside membership of the summer workshop faculty.
