Title       : Histocompatibility Complex and Inbreeding Avoidance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1991  
File        : a9113304

Award Number: 9113304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerram L. Brown JLB81@cnsvax.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a complex of genes               
              located close together on a single chromosome.  The MHC, or a                  
              complex much like it, is found in probably all vertebrates.  An                
              extraordinary feature of the MHC in humans and mice and possibly               
              many other species is that it is by far the most variable part of              
              the entire genome.  This extreme genetic diversity among                       
              individuals reflects the role of the MHC in controlling the                    
              immune system.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Research by Yamazaki and his colleagues shows that the MHC may                 
              function in behavior in ways that strongly affect the frequency                
              of various MHC genes in populations.  Male mice of certain inbred              
              strains tend to avoid mating with other mice carrying the same                 
              MHC genes as their own, a phenomenon known as disassortative                   
              mating.  Because close relatives tend to carry the same genes,                 
              disassortative mating would tend to favor unrelated individuals                
              as mates.  These MHC preferences of males are learned and can be               
              reversed by rearing pups with an appropriate foster mother.                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Brown's research is concerned with understanding how the MHC               
              affects behavior and populations at a behavioral level.                        
              Preliminary work in his laboratory using other strains of mice                 
              confirms disassortative mating based on MHC genes, but with                    
              female choice and not male choice of mates.  In this project, he               
              will determine if wild mice can employ MHC-coded odors in                      
              choosing a mate, and if these mice learn their preferences for                 
              MHC types from their rearing associates, primarily the nursing                 
              mother.  Other work suggests that wild mice are more choosy in                 
              mating that the inbred mice used by Yamazaki and by Brown; Brown               
              will measure the difference in choosiness between wild and inbred              
              strains.  This research project will help to estimate how strong               
              a role is played by the MHC in avoiding inbreeding in wild mice.               
              In general, the project will help to explain both genetic and                  
              environmental determinants of mating preference in mammals.
