Title       : Microvoltammetric Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1993   
File        : a9113212

Award Number: 9113212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313400             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Wightman rmw@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Support for Wightman's research in the development and use of                  
              ultramicroelectrodes has been renewed by the Analytical and                    
              Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.  Study                    
              will focus in three areas: mechanisms of electrochemically                     
              generated chemiluminescence (ECL), ultra-high speed cyclic                     
              voltammetry (UHS-CV), and electrochemical detection of species                 
              in supercritical fluids (SCF).  Extension of Wightman's                        
              previous work in UHS-CV will lead to electrochemical methods                   
              nearly as fast as optical (laser) time-resolved methods,                       
              permitting redox chemistry to be studied by complementary                      
              techniques for the first time.  ECL experiments require this                   
              high speed for elucidation of branching of excited redox                       
              species into various decay paths.  Few techniques for detecting                
              solutes in SCF exist, so Wightman's efforts in this area                       
              promise to provide an important, species selective method for                  
              detecting reactive solutes.                                                    
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research, supported by the Analytical and Surface                         
              Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, continues                         
              development of ultramicroelectordes for electrochemical                        
              detection of oxidizable or reducable species.  Small size                      
              allows very rapid experiments to be done, so that observation                  
              of reactions which occur on a time scale of nanoseconds becomes                
              possible.  Among the applications of this novel technology are                 
              studies of species which emit light as a consequence of                        
              electrochemical reaction (electrically generated                               
              chemiluminescence) and detection of species dissolved in                       
              supercritical fluids (fluids which are gases at room                           
              temperature unless highly compressed).
