Title       : Collaborative Research on Global Corporate Structures and Attributions of
               Responsibility and Wrongdoing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1991   
File        : a9113967

Award Number: 9113967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114482             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Lee Hamilton LEE@BSS1.UMD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,
Abstract    :
              Many of the most serious misdeeds in modern societies are committed            
              not by individuals acting for personal gain, but by members of                 
              organizations obeying orders from authority.  These acts are                   
              sometimes called "crimes of obedience" and globally seem to be a               
              consequence of the growth of bureaucracy.  While we surmise that               
              within organizations there are differing and even changing                     
              conceptions of responsibility, corporate crime, and what should be             
              done in the face of such wrongdoing, there is little known about               
              these attitudes and the conditions that lead to accountability.                
                                                                                             
              The study being undertaken by Hamilton and Sanders directly                    
              examines such issues.  The research explores how responsibility and            
              sanctions for wrongdoing in organizations are affected by the                  
              global dispersal of corporate forms.  Three different cultures,                
              U.S., Japanese, and Soviet, representing contrasting legal and                 
              economic environments (marked capitalism, corporate capitalism, and            
              socialism) are the sites for assessing the impact of different                 
              organizational forms on individual behavior.  Based on a survey                
              design that systematically varies vignettes according to key                   
              characteristics of organizational structure, the study examines                
              perceptions of individual and corporate responsibility as separate             
              matters, yet within the context of three contrasting economic                  
              systems.  This design allows for the isolation of political,                   
              economic, and cultural influences and the effects of global changes            
              in organizations on attributions of responsibility, perceptions of             
              wrongdoing, and attitudes toward social control.  The research has             
              considerable potential to yield important knowledge not only about             
              attribution theories but also about organizational compliance,                 
              regulation, and social control in a transnational context.
