Title       : Macroeconomics Complementaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9113767

Award Number: 9113767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project continues research on the dynamic behavior of model               
              economies with complementarities.  The key to these models is                  
              that the "activity" of one agent is an increasing function of the              
              aggregate level of activity in the economy.  For example, in such              
              models production by individual firms or search for jobs by the                
              unemployed for jobs depends on the overall level of economic                   
              activity.  These models have been able to provide insights into a              
              variety of phenomena important to understanding business cycles,               
              growth and financial interactions.  The multiplicity of                        
              equilibria that arise in these models creates the possibility of               
              coordination failures in that the economy can become "stuck" at                
              an inferior equilibrium.  No single agent, acting alone, can move              
              the economy to a preferred equilibrium outcome.  This is                       
              consistent with observed, prolonged periods of low activity, such              
              as the Great Depression, where it appears that the economy                     
              shifted to an alternative low activity equilibrium.                            
                                                                                             
              This grant permits the investigator to extend past theoretical                 
              and empirical work to focus on machine replacement and changes in              
              the seasonal pattern of production in the automobile and related               
              sectors during the 1920s and 1930s.  The most interesting aspect               
              of the automobile producers experience during this period was an               
              effort by the Roosevelt Administration and the Automobile                      
              Manufacturers Association, in the early 1930s to move the                      
              shutdown period for retooling from the end of the year to the                  
              late summer.  This could be an example of a coordination failure.              
              Automobile producers all synchronized retooling in December, but               
              retooling earlier in the year would permit greater production                  
              smoothing.  The project will also study the importance of entry                
              and exit over the course of business cycles in imperfectly                     
              competitive economies.  The last area of work concerns the study               
              of the aggregate implications of bank runs and the problem of                  
              designing optimal deposit insurance schemes.
