Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Study of the Development of Fijian
               Sociopolitical Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9113499

Award Number: 9113499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Earle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the guidance of Dr. Timothy Earle, Mr. Robert Rechtman will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will radiocarbon               
              date samples of bone and charcoal collected during archaeological              
              fieldwork in the Fiji Islands.  In all, 35 samples will be dated.              
              During fieldwork on Wakaya Island in central Fiji, Mr. Rechtman                
              conducted a complete survey and located ten substantial fortified              
              sites.  Two of these, Korolevu with a ring'ditch wall and Delaini              
              with a different stone wall system of defence were excavated.  In              
              the process, Mr. Rechtman collected extensive ceramic, floral and              
              faunal remains as well as human burial material.  His most                     
              immediate goal is to reconstruct the cultural sequence for this                
              area which is poorly archaeologically known.  In conjunction with              
              ceramic seriation, the radiocarbon dates should provide the                    
              necessary ordering.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The Fiji Islands, together with the rest of Polynesia, are of                  
              great interest to anthropologists because of the complex highly                
              organized chiefly societies which arose there.  Because the                    
              Polynesian islands were originally populated by a single group of              
              people and because different islands exhibit distinctive kinds of              
              social organization, anthropologists look for cross-island                     
              similarities and differences in environment and history in an                  
              attempt to explain social variation.  Fiji is known for the                    
              development of two fort types and several scenarios have been                  
              proposed for how they emerged.  Some anthropologists posit that                
              sequential waves of migrants are responsible for differences -                 
              and for the development of warfare - while others believe that                 
              strictly internal forces played a dominant role.  The problem is               
              that few sites have been excavated and those which have received               
              archaeological attention have not been securely placed in time.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Mr. Rechtman's research is important for several reasons.  It                  
              will produce a cultural sequence of interest to many                           
              archaeologists.  It will shed light on the emergence of warfare                
              and its role in the development of social complexity.  It will                 
              also further the training of a promising young scientist.
