Title       : Lee Cyclogenesis: Its Role in Tropical Storm Development in the Eastern Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1993  
File        : a9113128

Award Number: 9113128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Zehnder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A small area of the eastern Pacific, to the west of the Sierra            
              Madre Mountains of Mexico, is a favored location for tropical cy-              
              clogenesis. Currently accepted theories of tropical cyclone form-              
              ation involve the preexistence of a cyclonic disturbance in the                
              prevailing easterly tropical flow, over an adequately warm sea sur-            
              face, as a necessary (but not sufficent) condition for the incep-              
              tion of hurricanes. Zehnder and Gall propose to continue to explore            
              their hypothesis that flow over the mountains of central Mexico                
              provides, under suitable angles of attack, cyclonic distortion of              
              the flow downstream of the orographic obstacle . Their previous                
              research has shown that certain standing and slowly traveling                  
              waves, interacting with the topography, are more active in years               
              with above average numbers of tropical cyclones in this region.                
              They have also demonstrated theoretically that such planetary-scale            
              waves can generate a steady lee-side trough of realistically small             
              scale and trains of secondary traveling synoptic-scale waves which             
              may serve as the initial locations of tropical cyclones. They                  
              propose to employ numerical model simulations as well as further               
              analyses of observational data sets, including one to be obtained              
              in the area during the summer of 1991, in their continuation of the            
              research. The question as to why tropical cyclones like to form off            
              the west coast of Mexico is not only interesting for its own sake.             
              Its answer should also shed light on tropical cyclogenesis in                  
              general, and could lead to improvements in hurricane forecasting.
