Title       : U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research in the Study of Alkyl Propargyl Biradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9113203

Award Number: 9113203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8950               (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Agosta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1940,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor William C. Agosta of the                         
              Rockefeller University for continued collaboration in organic                  
              chemistry with Professor Paul Margaretha of the Instiute for                   
              Organic Chemistry of the University of Hamburg, Germany.  Their                
              joint research focuses on three problems in the chemistry of alkyl             
              propargyl biradicals.  One is a mechanistic study of the influence             
              of spin state on the behavior of vinyl carbene intermediates.                  
              Another is an extension of their recently discovered (3+2) reaction            
              between alkenes and 3-alkynyl-2-cycloalkenones to intramolecular               
              systems.  The final is an exploration of the photochemical                     
              cycloaddition of 2-alkynyl-2-cycloalkenones with alkenes, both                 
              inter- and intra-molecularly.  The two laboratories have                       
              complementary strengths and characteristics.  Professor Agosta's               
              interests are in the design and synthesis of particular substrates to          
              probe mechanisms and to search for new processes.  His small                   
              group at The Rockefeller University is composed of postdoctoral                
              workers.  Professor Margaretha has particular expertise in chemical            
              theory and radical theory.  His research group in Hamburg is much              
              larger than Professor Agosta's and is composed of doctoral                     
              students, which makes it better able to carry out studies requiring            
              greater manpower.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The long term goals of the above research are to understand better             
              the conditions under which alkyl propargyl biradicals are formed               
              and to define the mechanism of conversion of these biradicals to               
              vinyl carbenes and from them to stable products.  Professors                   
              Agosta and Margaretha discovered alkyl propargyl biradicals in                 
              1981.  Their current and proposed work all involve either new                  
              chemistry or novel mechanistic studies in this general area.
