Title       : Rujm el-Hiri: A Megalithic Monument from the Southern Levant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1991      
File        : a9113006

Award Number: 9113006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11989              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky Karlovsk.Husc4.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. C.C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Mr. Yonathan                
              Mizrachi will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He                  
              will conduct archaeological excavations at the site of Rujm el-                
              Hiri, a megalithic monument located in northern Israel.  The site              
              consists of a massive carefully constructed central cairn ca 20                
              m. in diameter encircled by several concentric stone circles.                  
              These concentric walls have two monumental entryways and are                   
              connected in some spots by radial walls.  The area immediately                 
              surrounding the site is dotted with hundreds of smaller cairns,                
              dolmens (free standing stones) and stone walls.  The complex,                  
              which is unique, probably dates to the Bronze Age, ca. the 3rd                 
              millenium B.C.  With National Science Foundation support, Mr.                  
              Mizrachi will continue his excavation of the site.  His goals are              
              to reconstruct the chronology, stratigraphy and overall cultural               
              sequence and to identify the primary and secondary functions of                
              the complex.  He also hopes to clarify the relationship between                
              the core of the complex and features in its immediate periphery.               
                                                                                             
              In last season's work, Mr. Mizrachi conducted a radar survey of                
              the central cairn and located several burial chambers, the first               
              of which he excavated.  He will direct a more detailed radar                   
              survey and excavate additional chambers.  He will also conduct                 
              excavations in selected areas around the cairn in an attempt to                
              determine how different portions of the site were used and to                  
              learn whether they were occupied simultaneously.                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  The Near East                 
              marks one of the cradles of civilization.  Within this region,                 
              one can trace the origins of plant and animal domestication and                
              the development of increasing social complexity.  The Bronze Age               
              marks a stage of this process. Using archaeological data and                   
              adopting a dichronic perspective one can gain insight into how                 
              complex societies function.  Excavation at Rujm el-Hiri will                   
              provide unique information relevant to this goal.  The project                 
              will also assist in the training of an extremely promising young               
              scientist.
