Title       : Neurochemical Organization of Feeding Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9113118

Award Number: 9113118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Walter Wilczynski                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In certain invertebrate model systems which contain large,                     
              recognizable nerve cells, the individual nerve cells are known to              
              control behavior by the release of specific neurochemical                      
              transmitters. In one of these model systems, the brain of the                  
              leech, the neurotransmitter serotonin directly activates the organs            
              of ingestion. These effector neurons which regulate feeding                    
              behavior are in turn controlled by the activity of two classes of              
              sensory cells. Sensory cells that detect potential prey organisms              
              excite the neurons to fire and release serotonin. Sensory cells                
              that respond to distension of the body resulting from a meal both              
              inhibit the feeding neurons from firing and terminate feeding. In              
              this award Dr. Charles Lent will investigate the relationship                  
              betwen feeding behavior and neuronal firing patterns; his studies              
              will also use specific nerve cell staining and sensitive chemical              
              assays to describe the anatomy and transmitters of sensory cells               
              that control the activity and serotonin levels in the large nerve              
              cells that are responsible for feeding. Because the behavioral                 
              states of hunger and satiation are separable, these studies will be            
              able to demonstrate the way in which communication between nerve               
              cells regulates the amount of transmitter that expresses either one            
              or the other of these two behavioral states. This research will                
              contribute fundamental knowledge about the neurochemical                       
              organization and control of feeding behavior.
