Title       : Kinetics and Mechanism of Iron-Ligand Exchange Reactions in the Presence of
               Surfactants and/or Crown Ethers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9113199

Award Number: 9113199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin L. Crumbliss alc@chem.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The principal goal in this project is to elucidate the                         
              mechanism in microbes whereby iron is released from its                        
              extremely stable carrier at the appropriate time and location.                 
              Model experiments which use micelles designed to probe possible                
              effects of the aqueous/cell interface on the labilization of                   
              iron from siderophores and other polydentate chelators will be                 
              performed.  The influence of the aqueous/micelle interface on                  
              the kinetics of iron/ligand exchange between, for example, the                 
              hydrophilic siderophore ferrioxamine B and a micelle bound                     
              hydrophobic chelator, benzohydroxamic acid, will be tested.                    
              Phenanthroline will also be incorporated into the micelle in                   
              some experiments, as preliminary data show that phenanthroline                 
              accelerates iron/ligand exchange into the micellar pseudo-phase                
              via a redox mechanism.  Supramolecular assemblies in aqueous                   
              solution will be investigated in order to evaluate second                      
              coordination shell effects on iron(III)-ligand dissociation                    
              kinetics.  Hydrophobic crown ethers may permit these supra-                    
              molecular assemblies to form on micelle "surfaces".  These                     
              assemblies may be used as models for cell surface receptor                     
              complexes.  The kinetics of ligand exchange within these supra-                
              molecular assemblies (e.g., ferrioxamine B-crown ether-                        
              surfactant) and the influence that ternary complex formation                   
              has on these kinetics will be measured.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organo-                    
              metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Alvin L.                       
              Crumbliss of Duke University will model the way in which iron                  
              is released in microbes at the appropriate time and location.                  
              Bacteria contain molecules which bind and transport iron so                    
              efficiently that some are used as drugs in chelation therapy.                  
              The results of these bioinorganic experiments will enhance our                 
              understanding of microbial iron transport mechanisms and                       
              mechanisms related to metal extraction processes.
