Title       : Safe Source Chemical Beam Expitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9113992

Award Number: 9113992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence P. Sadwick sadwick@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Superlattices, multiple quantum wells, and other                               
              heterostructures of various semiconductors will play                           
              an increasingly important role in advanced                                     
              electronics. Further development work is needed on                             
              the growth techniques used to fabricate these                                  
              structures.  Advanced electronic systems will                                  
              require higher performance devices that will require                           
              high-quality heterostructures for radar and                                    
              communications systems. At present, the two most                               
              commonly employed techniques for the growth of                                 
              multilayer materials for today's complex device                                
              structures are molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and                                
              organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE), also                               
              known as metalorganic chemical vapor deposition                                
              (MOCVD). In the last few years a hybridization of                              
              the above two techniques has occurred, resulting in                            
              a new technique known as chemical beam epitaxy                                 
              (CBE). The initial results suggest this is a superior                          
              technique for the growth of material for use in                                
              advanced device structures such as InGaAs/InP                                  
              heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs).                                     
              Disadvantages exist with both MBE and OMVPE.                                   
              The inability of MBE to grow good epilayers of P-                              
              containing materials such as InP and GaInAsP will                              
              severely limit this technique for next generation                              
              devices. Furthermore, with MBE grown material,                                 
              oval defects place an upper limit on the number of                             
              devices at an integrated circuit level and the overall                         
              device yield. In addition, an upper bound on doping                            
              levels translates to higher series resistance and a                            
              compromise in HBT design. Low wafer throughput                                 
              and the down-time needed to reload source                                      
              materials substantially increase cost and result in                            
              unpredictable time delays. The most serious                                    
              problem facing the OMVPE technique is the need                                 
              for high flow rates of hazardous and life-threatening                          
              gases such as arsine and phosphine. This point                                 
              cannot be overemphasized: the impact on future                                 
              growth techniques will be highly influenced by                                 
              environmental concerns, health risks, and legal                                
              prohibition. Engineered properly CBE can                                       
              overcome these problematic limitations.                                        
              This proposal discusses an investigation of chemical                           
              beam epitaxy, including work on the development                                
              of new sources and the growth mechanisms. The                                  
              primary focus of this investigation is to develop safe                         
              organometallic group III and group V sources that                              
              result in materials with properties superior to those                          
                                                                                             
              produced to date by CBE and comparable to the                                  
              best produced by MBE and OMVPE. The overall                                    
              objective is to make significant and substantial                               
              improvements in the CBE process for the                                        
              production of As-andP-based semiconductors with                                
              the major emphasis being on P-containing binary,                               
              ternary and quaternary III/V compound materials                                
              for device applications using safer, less toxic                                
              sources.
