Title       : Mechanism of Acidification of Endosome in Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9113366

Award Number: 9113366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : May 1,  1993         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harish Padh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore L. Steck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Endocytic cargo traverses endosomal vacuoles before encountering            
              acid hydrolases in lysosomes.  Both endosomes and lysosomes have an            
              acidic interior believed created by vacuolar proton pumps resident             
              on their membranes.  Lower Ph in these endocytic compartments is               
              crucial for lysosomal hydrolases, and the sorting of ligands,                  
              receptors, and membrane components.  Where these membranes derive              
              their pumps is unclear.  Data from studies on Dictyostelium                    
              discoideum indicate that endosomes and lysosomes have undetectable             
              proton pumps on their membranes.  In addition, abundant proton                 
              pumps are present on a discrete and easily separable vacuole,                  
              termed "acidosome."  The data suggest that through transient                   
              association, in the presence of cytosol and magnesium ions, the                
              acidosomes provide protons but not proton pumps to the endosomes.              
              The proposed transport of protons and counterions but not large                
              molecules from the proton-pumping ATPase rich acidosomes to the                
              endocytic vacuoles might proceed through small channels spanning               
              their apposed membranes, perhaps akin to synaptophysin pores in                
              presynaptic ends or gap junctions.  Experiments are proposed to                
              elaborate and test the hypothesis that proton transfer is the                  
              mechanism of endosomal acidification.  The acidosomes, endosomes,              
              and cytosol factor(s) will be purified.  The reconstitution of                 
              proton transfer between organelles in vitro using the purified                 
              preparations of acidosomes, endosomes, and the required cytosol                
              factor(s) should provide sound evidence for this hypothesis.  In               
              addition, dynamic communication between these organelles and the               
              required factor(s) will be probed under differing modes of                     
              endocytosis.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Endocytosis, the uptake of materials from the cellular environment             
              by invagination of the plasma membrane and pinching off to form a              
              membrane-enclosed intracellular organelle containing the material              
              in question, is a crucial process in the life of a eukaryotic cell.            
              It is key to transport and assimilation of nutrients, signal                   
              transduction, and biological defense mechanisms.  This study will              
              enhance our understanding of the fundamental process of                        
              endocytosis.
