Title       : A Unified Framework for Resolving Inconsistencies in Reported Unemployment
               Duration Data in a Panel of Monthly CPS Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1991      
File        : a9113095

Award Number: 9113095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82114              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Romeo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Data quality is an extremely important problem,                          
              especially for regularly administered instruments such as the                  
              Current Population Survey (CPS),  which acquire a life of                      
              their own that resists major methodological innovations.                       
              This study implements a framework for resolving                                
              inconsistencies in the unemployment duration data from a four                  
              month panel of the CPS.  The inconsistency problem that is                     
              referred to is that the change in the number of weeks of                       
              reported unemployment does not equal the time between surveys                  
              in some data records,  nor does the reported data clearly                      
              indicate that one unemployment spell has ended and another                     
              one has begun.  In many records,  there is insufficient                        
              information to resolve ambiguities about the exact sequence                    
              of labor force states,  and the true duration of                               
              unemployment.  The method proposed for cleaning up                             
              unemployment duration data from the monthly CPS panels is                      
              probabilistic.                                                                 
                    For each data record containing ambiguities about the                    
              true labor force state and true duration of unemployment,  a                   
              joint probability distribution is formulated over possible                     
              consistent sequences of labor force states and true                            
              durations.  Then using Monte Carlo sampling,  consistent                       
              sequences are sampled and used as inputs into a model                          
              describing unemployment durations in a population.  Repeated                   
              sampling of consistent sequences for each record yields                        
              different estimates of the population distribution,  and                       
              allows a measure of information loss due to inconsistencies                    
              in the data to be calculated.                                                  
                    A proportional hazards Markov chain model which allows                   
              for the inclusion of covariates parametrically,  and for                       
              analysis of duration dependence nonparametrically is                           
              developed.  This model is well suited to examine short,  data                  
              rich CPS panels,  and can provide a dynamic picture of                         
              changes in unemployment spell lengths of members of various                    
              labor force groups in response to seasonal or other changes                    
              in the economic climate.                                                       
                    Two empirical studies are planned.  One will use the 4-                  
              8-4 sampling scheme of the CPS to estimate the effects of                      
              occurrence dependence on the length of unemployment spells.                    
              The second will use data from the CPS for all 12 months in                     
              1981 to examine how labor market prospects of various groups                   
              are affected by the onset of a recession.                                      
                    This is a very promising proposal by a young researcher                  
              on an important topic.  If successful the study could have a                   
              major effect on data analysis using the CPS,  with possible                    
              extensions of the approach to the Panel Study on Income                        
              Dynamics (PSID) and other panel data bases that confront                       
              similar problems of inconsistencies.
