Title       : Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Behavior-Based Control for Autonomous
               Tending of Manufacturing Workcells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9113802

Award Number: 9113802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max Donath donath@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subbiah Ramalingam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9148,9293,
Abstract    :
              This material handling project addresses behavior based control                
              for autonomous tending of manufacturing workcells.  Automation                 
              systems assume that all objects are where they are supposed to be              
              and that sensors and machines function as they are meant to.                   
              Failure to satisfy these assumptions can often result in                       
              catastrophic failure.  Methodologies that facilitate the                       
              integration of sensors, computers and machines in order to                     
              autonomously accomplish complex tasks, i.e. sensing and dealing                
              with the unexpected, are not well developed at all.  This project              
              proposes a behavioral control strategy to accomplish these tasks.              
              The idea is based on observations of naturally occurring examples              
              of autonomous systems, such as animal behavior.  The strategy is               
              based on the implementation of multiple behaviors taking                       
              advantage of multiple sensors and actuators functioning                        
              concurrently.  Such ideas have been tested on robots, and the                  
              result has been to provide  a successful strategy for robust                   
              operation in dynamically changing, unstructured environments.                  
              This project proposes to use this approach in the tending of                   
              machine tools used for low volume batch manufacturing, including               
              the transfer of tool and parts among stations on the shop floor.               
              With the experience gained in this research, progress is expected              
              towards the long term goal of developing a general methodology                 
              for designing and building an hierarchical structure of                        
              integrated behaviors which can be use to address many generic                  
              material handling issues.***//
