Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model-based Statistical Inference and Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9505043

Award Number: 9505043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Stigler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Li Meng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Proposal DMS 95-05043  Principal Investigators:  Stephen M. Stigler,   Xiao-Li
              Meng  Institution:  University of Chicago  Title:  Model-based Statistical
              Inference and Data Analysis    Abstract    The investigators study topics that
              concern the construction and   investigation of statistical models involving
              latent structure   for the analysis of complex data sets.  Stigler's research
              involves   models for communications networks where the available data is in
              the   form of frequency counts of directed transactions.  The models studied  
              depart from standard linear models for paired comparisons in that   they are
              not transitive  - they exhibit cycles - and they incorporate   departures from
              standard multinomial models for the dispersion of   counts.  Meng's research
              involves frequentist properties of Bayesian   procedures, and is related to his
              research on multiple imputation   methodology, a general and efficient
              inferential tool for handling   the complex problem of nonresponse in sample
              surveys, especially   those that produce public-use data files which will be
              analyzed by many   users.  Meng will seek to establish robust frequentist
              properties of   Bayesian procedures in multiple imputation inference, with
              specific   reference to confidence validity under uncongenial multiple
              imputation   inferences, frequency evaluations of posterior predictive
              p-values,   and unbiased imputations and single observation unbiased priors.   
              The research is of two parts.  One part studies the nature of scientific  
              communication, seeking to build statistical models to understand better   the
              relationship between theoretical research and applied research   (in particular
              the degrees to which they influence each other), and   the relationships
              between different fields of science (for example,   do different but related
              disciplines necessarily form a hierarchy,   or do they exhibit more complicated
              patterns of "trade" in ideas.)    The other part involves the construction of
              statistical models for   analyzing  survey results when nonresponse is a
              problem.  All surveys   may be susceptible to bias when potential respondents
              decline to   participate for reasons related to the answer they would have
              given,   and the methods studied will ameliorate this problem for complex
              surveys   such as the U. S. Census, where it is desirable to prepare public-use
                data files that address this problem and are not overly sensitive to   the
              statistical assumptions made.
