Title       : Structure-Property Relations for Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1995       
File        : a9505599

Award Number: 9505599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn H. Fredrickson ghf@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9505599  Fredrickson  With the advent of powerful new surface characterization 
              techniques, a number of experimental groups have reported on  the surface
              segregation and wetting behavior of  multicomponent polymer blends, as well as
              block and random  copolymers.  Surface energy differences between components 
              are generally assumed to be responsible for producing the  inhomogeneous
              composition profiles in such systems.  Very  recent experiments on model
              polyolefin blends and  copolymers, however, have shown that a strong
              correlation  exists between interfacial thermodynamics and the difference  in
              conformational properties (i.e., backbone flexibilities)  of the components,
              leading to an alternative entropic  explanation for surface segregation. 
              Theoretical  calculations based on the self-consistent field theory of  Edwards
              will be performed to place these experimental  observations on a sound
              theoretical footing.  Besides  exploring surface enrichment in such
              "conformationally  asymmetric" polymer blends and copolymers with small heats 
              of mixing (e.g., polyolefins), calculations will be  performed to investigate
              interfacial thermodynamics and  wetting behavior in blends of "architecturally
              asymmetric"  polymers, such as mixtures of linear and star polymers  composed
              of the same chemical repeat unit.  An examination  of surface enrichment is
              also planned for molten polymer  blends that contain star-block copolymers, and
              for which  broken conformational and architectural symmetries may  compete. 
              The objective of these studies if to develop  structure-property relations that
              will facilitate the  rational design of polymer interfaces for engineering 
              applications.  The theoretical work proposed will be  coordinated with parallel
              experimental efforts currently  underway.  %%%  Theoretical research will be
              conducted on the properties of  polymer surfaces.  In particular, the question
              of why  certain types of polymers tend to migrate to the surfaces of  polymer
              mixtures and solids will be explored.   While having  fundamental interest,
              this problem is also of high  technological interest since it impacts our
              ability to coat  and paint plastics.  ***
