Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Cultural Change in Western Hunan,
               China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9505686

Award Number: 9505686
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa J. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505686  Brown      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Melissa J. Brown to
              work with Professor Dong  Luo of South-Central Nationalities College in the
              People's  Republic of China.    During this award, the PI will do ethnographic
              fieldwork on  cultural change among the Tujia, a state-designated ethnic 
              minority, in Fengyan Xian in western Hunan Province with the  collaboration of
              scholars at the Zhongnan Minzu Xueyuan  (South-Central Nationalities College),
              or Min Yuan, in  Wuhan. Little is known about Central China since no western 
              anthropologists have worked there and the Chinese scholars  located there have
              had neither contacts or funds to  disseminate the results of their research
              outside China.  Therefore the historical experience of the Tujia will  provide
              a means for examining cultural change in relation to  local structure since
              they changed first toward and then  away from a Han Chinese cultural model. ***
