Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Quasi- Phasematched Integrated OPO's
               in Lithium Niobate and KTP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9505350

Award Number: 9505350
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Sundheimer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IN Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505350  Sundheimer      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Michael L.
              Sundheimer to work with Professor  Daniel B. Ostrowsky at the Universite de
              Nice Sophia  Antipolis in France.    This award will support the second year of
              a project started  under a Bourse Chateaubriand provided by the French 
              government.  This project involves the implementation of a  CW
              quasi-phasematched optical parametric oscillator (OPO) in  lithium niobate
              channel waveguides, beginning with  measurements of parametric fluorescence and
              gain.  A  resonant cavity will then be made to realize the OPO, which  will be
              done by affixing mirrors to the waveguide or, with  coatings applied directly
              to the waveguide ends.  Initial  experiments will be done with a CW Ti:Sapphire
              laser to  demonstrate the principle.  The driving force to-date for  such
              research has been the search for compact, efficient  diode-pumped blue-light
              sources.  Diode-pumping of an OPO  device would create a compact, tunable, all
              solid-state  laser source covering the important 1.3 and 1.55 um 
              telecommunications windows as well as providing wavelengths  useful for
              spectroscopy, atmospheric pollution monitoring,  and biological and medical
              applications. ***
