Title       : The Cell Biology and Genetics of the Maize Meiotic Kinetochore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9505670

Award Number: 9505670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Kelly Dawe kelly@dogwood.botany.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       -       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8 
               9                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 95-05670 R.
              Kelly Dawe  This is a cytogenetic study of meiosis, or gamete production, in
              maize, focusing on  the structure, the kinetochore, where the meiotic spindle
              attaches to the  chromosome.  In the post-doctoral work which serves as a basis
              for this proposal, image processing of fluorescent chromosomes using
              deconvolution software now comercially available resulted in more accurate
              timing of when chromosome pairing occurs during meiosis and a new cytological
              map for maize chromosome at the start of meiosis.  Using mutant maize inbred
              lines,  evidence was obtained to support the hypothesis that the kinetichore is
              a prerequisite to spindle formation in meiosis and that kinetochore-like
              structures appear in an inbred line with an abnormal chromosome 10. Dr Dawe
              will now pursue higher resolution imaging in order to achieve 3D reconstruction
              of the kinetochore itself.  Antibodies which have been used to fluorescently
              tag the kinetochore will now be used to map its substructure.  The proteins
              which code for these kinetochore proteins will be cloned and monoclonal
              antibodies prepared.  These reagent s and select inbred lines will be used to
              map the structural differences between the meiotic and mitotic kinetochores, 
              between kinetochores involved in reductional vs. equatorial division, and
              between the normal kinetochore and the kinetochore-like structure found in a
              line with abnomral chromosome 10. %%% The meiotic kinetochore has historically
              provided important insights into the broader functions of the kinetochore, one
              of the most important structures on the chromosome.  It has been shown to bind
              telomeric DNA, hold sister chromatids together, bind to spindle microtubules,
              interact with molecular motors on the spindle,and produce a signal that is used
              as a cell cycle check point. Insight into the way it does this will come with
              this study which dissects the components of the kinetochore and shows how they
              interact and change spacially with time. ***                          ;        
                                                                            Oh     +'  0     
                                               $       H       l                            
              S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                
                                                .                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                D       h                    
                                            R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                    
                                 95-05670                           Una Solomon              
                        Una Solomon                 @    O                              @    
                                            @    O                                           
                                                                        @    F #             
                                     Microsoft Word 6.0                                      
                             2                                                               
                                     ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               e 3       e                   -                               
                                         p       p   p       p       p       p       p       
                                                                             u   1           
                                                                                             
                     7               W           T       3   u                       p       
                                                                               u             
               p       p                                                                     
               p               p                                                       p     
               p       p       p                           i                                 
                                                                              95-05670 R.
              Kelly Dawe  This is a cytogenetic study of meiosis, or gamete production, in
              maize, focusing on  the structure, the kinetochore, where the meiotic spindle
              attaches to the  chromosome.  In the post-doctoral work which serves as a basis
              for this proposal, image processing of fluorescent chromosomes using
              deconvolution software now comercially available resulted in more accurate
              timing of when chromosome pairing occurs during meiosis and a new cytological
              map for maize chromosome at the start of meiosis.  Using mutant maize inbred
              lines,  evidence was obtai
