Title       : Development & Analysis of Multi-user Receivers for Multi-rate Wireless
               Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9505881

Award Number: 9505881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Fuja                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Urbashi Mitra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,9222,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9505881  Urbashi Mitra      In order for future wireless communications networks
              to accommodate  a variety of potentially disparate sources (voice, data and
              video  signals), multi-rate communication schemes must be developed.   Possible
              sources such as voice, video, and data communications have  inherently
              different quality of service (QoS) requirements.  A  constant bit-rate paradigm
              as exists in the current wireless  network will not serve such multi-rated
              services of the future.   The principal aim of this research is to begin the
              analysis and  development of communication receivers for multi-user 
              spread-spectrum communications with different information  rates.  Several
              multi-rate multi-user access schemes will be  considered for Direct-Sequence
              Spread Spectrum Code-Division  Multiple-Access communications.  Three
              activities are planned for  the preliminary study.  First, existing single bit
              rate receivers  will be investigated to determine whether they are easily 
              extensible to multi-rate communications.  Second, multi-user  receivers will be
              created to explicitly exploit the redundancy in  the mixture of narrowband and
              wideband user signals.  Third, a cost  function will be developed to compare
              the various receivers  created.  Due to the nature of the signals being
              considered, the  probability of bit detection error does not fully capture the 
              performance of a given receiver.  The ultimate goal of the proposed 
              preliminary research is to position the applicant to perform  research on the
              design and analysis of true variable bit rate  communications (e.g. video
              transmissions); communications where the  bit rate is changing for each
              individual user.  In multi-rate  communications each user transmits at a
              constant rate which may  differ from user to user.  It is believed that such
              receivers must  be adaptive in nature to properly support the variable rated 
              traffic.
