Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Antigene Strategies of Protein DNA
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9505345

Award Number: 9505345
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38450              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Perrin perrin@uclaue.mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505345  Perrin      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. David M. Perrin to
              work with Professor Claude  Helene of the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle
              in  France.    Antisense technology encompasses virtually all research 
              directed toward the rational generation of molecules which  can associate with
              DNA and/or RNA to block protein  production, suppress cell growth and division,
              or even kill  the cell.  The goal of this project is to characterize  antisense
              interaction by exploring 1) the synthetic coupling  of medicinally important
              DNA-damaging functionalities to the  oligonucleotide, 2) the synthesis and
              properties of more  resilient nucleotides, 3) the synthetic coupling of 
              intercalators to increase the stability of the interaction  and to characterize
              the antisense association by  spectrophotometric techniques and 4)the
              generation of other  sequences whose inhibitory properties will be examined in-
               vivo in bacterial and mammalian cell systems. ***
