Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Automatic Synthesis of Optimal
               Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9505943

Award Number: 9505943
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Sentovich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505943  Sentovich      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twelve months of research abroad at  research centers of proven excellence. The
              program's awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of 
              unique or complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental conditions
              abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit
              by Dr. Ellen M. Sentovich to work with Dr. Gerard  Berry at the Ecole des Mines
              de Paris.    The researchers will explore effective computer-aided design 
              tools (CAD)for synthesizing control systems. The study will  focus on encoding
              controllers, optimizing register selection  and analyzing combinational cycles.
               Control-intensive  electronic systems employed in a variety of new 
              applications, including automotive, avionic and robotic  controlq and
              communications systems, are difficult to design  correctly because they employ
              a mix of hardware and software  components.  Furthermore, the design process is
              complicated  by stringent design requirements and time-to-market  constraints.
              State-of-the-art tools are still not capable of  producing optimal, correct and
              complete control systems. It  is the goal of this research to combine the
              expertise of the  host engineers, specifying and compiling control-intensive 
              systems, with that of the postdoctoral fellow's logic  synthesis and
              optimization to further the research to create  effective CAD tools to meet the
              design constraints. ***
