Title       : Formalizing Software Specifications and Requirements in Higher-Order Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1995     
File        : a9505469

Award Number: 9505469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Gunter gunter@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elsa Gunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Zave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The goal of this project is to develop theory, tools, and  methods needed to
              carry out formal specifications of large  software systems.  The approach is to
              formalize the  Jackson/Zave (J/Z) specification techniques  using an  extension
              of the Higher-Order Logic (HOL) interactive  theorem-proving  system.  This
              project focuses on the  theoretical and design issues that this  entails for
              HOL, and  the methodological implications for the J/Z approach.  The  research
              explores ideas from research on polymorphism and  module systems for 
              programming languages, applying them to  HOL theories.    The J/Z method has 
              been used to provide a specification of  the AT&T 5ESS switch using a 
              first-order model-based  approach. HOL has been used for substantial hardware 
              and  software specification and verification projects such as the  Viper Chip 
              and the dynamic semantics of the Standard Meta-  Language (SML). This research 
              explores the possibility that  realizing the J/Z method within HOL can provide
              a  basis for  user level validation and, more generally, for formal 
              verification  of software.    The project is conducted as a joint
              academic/industrial  enterprise drawing on research in logic, type theory, and 
              semantics at the  University of Pennsylvania, and research in  interactive
              theorem proving,  application software, and  specification techniques at AT&T
              Bell Labs.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
