Title       : Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9505228

Award Number: 9505228
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Bohrson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              %         @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   &   '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         ;                                               o   
                                                                        o                    
                                         ;                                      Bohrson,
              Wendy A. EAR-9505228  This is a carefully thought-out proposal to document
              changes in crust and mantle structures during high-magnitude extension by
              integrating structural, geochemical, and geochronological data in a
              well-exposed section of the Basin-and-Range.  Over 4.5 km of volcanic rocks
              characterized by heterogeneous compositions and structural histories render the
              northern Eldorado Mountains of Nevada a remarkable target for investigating the
              interdependence of magma composition, magma volume, time, and extension rates. 
              The data permit the PI to (1) address the genetic link between extension and
              magmatism, (2) to quantify the changing roles that crust, lithosphere, and
              asthenosphere have during rifting, and (3) document the magmatic evolution of a
              continental rift zone.  By focusing on a restricted locality, the approach
              minimizes the complexities inherent in regional studies that compare areas with
              diachronous tectono-magmatic histories.    The work will provide constraints on
              the evolution of mantle source regions, the contribution of the crust to magma
              genesis, and the thermal and  chemical consequences of extension on crust and
              lithosphere.  It represents one of the few studies that explicitly links rates
              of extension with changes in eruptive style, magma volume, and composition, and
              thus will provide fundamental constraints for understanding the
              tectono-magmatic history of areas affected by large-magnitude extension.       
                                                   Oh     +'  0                              
                      $       H       l                                               D      
              h                                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n      
                                  (                                                   %      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              Bohrson, Wendy A.                   National Science Foundation         Judy
              Hannah                 @    #                              @                   
                             @     k                                                         
                                                         @                                   
                     Microsoft Word 6.0                                                     
              2                                                                              
                      ;                               ;                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 e =       e 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   Q                                         
                                       >       @       @       @               y             
                   T   X   K                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 >                                                                           
                 >           p                                                               
                                               Bohrson, Wendy A. EAR-9505228  This is a
              carefully thought-out proposal to document changes in crust and mantle
              structures during high-magnitude extension by integrating structural,
              geochemical, and geochronological data in a well-exposed section of the
              Basin-and-Range.  Over 4.5 km of volcanic rocks characterized by heterogeneous
              compositions and structural histories render the northern Eldorado Mountains of
              Nevada a remarkable target for investigating the interdependence of magma
              composition, magma volume, time, and extension rates.  The data permit the PI
              to (1) address the genetic link between extension and magmatism, (2) to
              quantify the changing roles that crust, lithosphere, and asthenosphere have
              during rifting, and (3) document the magmatic evolution of a continental rift
              zone.  By focusing on a restricted locality, the approach minimizes the
              complexities inherent in regional studies that compare areas with diachronous
              tectono-magmatic histories.    The work will provide constraints on the
              evolution of mantle source regions, the contribution of the crust to mag
