Title       : Hydrogen Bonding and Proton Transfer: A Cooperative Ab Initio Quantum Chemical
               and Matrix Isolation Experimental Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9505888

Award Number: 9505888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet E. Del Bene FR042008@YSUB.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/742-2377

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Janet E. Del Bene at the Department of Chemistry, Youngstown   State
              University, and Professor Willis B. Person at the Department of   Chemistry,
              the University of Florida, are supported by a grant from the   Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program at NSF. This support is   for a joint
              theoretical and experimental research program to   systematically study the
              intermolecular interactions in a number of   hydrogen bonded complexes.
              Professor Del Bene is determining very   accurate ab initio wavefunctions for
              the complexes and using these   wavefunctions to obtain structures, binding
              energies, and vibrational   frequencies. Professor Person is performing
              measurements of the infrared   spectra for these complexes in solid rare gas
              matrices. The theoretical   and experimental efforts are closely coupled and
              coordinated and this   joint effort provides a level of understanding of the
              infrared spectra   and bonding properties that could not be achieved by either
              effort alone.   The focus of the work supported by this grant is to elucidate
              the   structural and vibrational properties of complexes with strong hydrogen  
              bonds. A range of strengths of the proton donors and acceptors are  
              systematically considered for the complexes being studied.  Hydrogen bonding is
              an extremely important phenomenon which occurs   widely; it determines the
              properties of a large number of systems ranging   from condensed water to
              complex biomolecules. Despite extensive studies   of hydrogen bonding, there
              are important open questions about the   significance and interpretation of the
              experimental infrared spectra and   about the theoretical understanding of the
              bonding character. In   particular, there are questions about the degree of
              proton transfer in a   given complex and the consequences of this transfer for
              properties of the   complex. Professors Del Bene and Person are bringing
              special   qualifications to resolve these difficult questions especially
              because   they are able to directly relate Professor Person's experimental  
              observations to Professor Del Bene's theoretical characterization of the  
              bonding character.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
