Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Unified Approach to Discrete Data Representation and
               Wavelet Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9505460

Award Number: 9505460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Chui   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph D. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505460  Chui    Four problem areas concerning discrete data representation and 
              wavelet   analysis are addressed in this project.  The first area is to 
              establish a unified   scheme for constructing wavelets based only on nested
              sequences  of   subspaces but not on any two-scale relation.  The second area
              is  the study of   multivariate wavelets and frames with matrix dilations.  The
               third area is on   representation of discrete data by radial basis functions 
              (RBF's).  The fourth   area is the investigation of adaptive wavelets, based on
              spline  techniques.  A   particular interest is in modeling by spline and
              radial basis  functions and in   constructing and analyzing the corresponding
              wavelets.  In view  of the fact   that most modeling functions, including all
              the interesting  standard radial   basis functions, do not satisfy a two-scale
              (or refinement)  relation, a unified   scheme for the construction of wavelets
              that does not rely on  such a relation   is developed.  This constitutes the
              first area of the proposed  research.  The   second area is centered around
              multivariate wavelets, where the  main   concern is matrix dilation.  For
              instance, the boundedness of the  affine   operator and that of the
              corresponding Littlewood-Paley energy  functions,   for a finite family of
              square-integrable functions with zero  mean, will be   investigated and
              sufficient conditions that guarantee lower  bounds will be   established.  The
              third area is centered on the study of  localized cosine   Riesz bases and
              their corresponding duals.  The duals, or  bi-orthogonal   bases, must
              facilitate computational efficiency.  For this and  other reasons,   spline
              techniques, such as knot insertion and knot removal, will  be   investigated. 
              The final area concerns the  modeling of discrete  data.  For   high
              dimensions, radial basis functions seem to be the most  efficient tool,   and
              the emphasis will be on various linear and  nonlinear  problems   involving
              these functions.    The central theme of this rese arch proposal is the
              development of    mathematical  tools for analysis and synthesis of discrete
              data  in one or   higher dimensions, in an Euclidean space or on a closed
              manifold  such as   the unit ball.  This proposed research is a unified
              approach to  represent any   discrete data set in an effective way so that
              "wavelet" analysis  can be   readily performed. Both spline and radial basis
              functions will be  used for   data representation.  It is well known that
              spline functions  provide a very   powerful tool for data modeling due to their
              most desirable  properties such   as flexibility for adaptive implementation,
              computational  efficiency, and   localization capability.  On the other hand,
              radial basis  functions are more   powerful for handling higher-dimensional
              data sets, particularly  when the   data information is taken randomly. 
              Wavelets will be constructed   and   wavelet algorithms will be developed by
              using both spline  functions and   radial basis functions.  In addition, for
              analyzing nonstationary  data that   change in shape, the investigators will
              look into the use of  localized cosine   transforms by using splines or radial
              basis functions as  envelopes (or   windows).  Adaptive algorithms will also be
              developed.  One of  the main   reasons for wavelets to be considered as a very
              powerful tool for  data   analysis is their fast algorithms.  The research will
              be focused  on   constructing wavelets using both spline and radial basis 
              functions for   effective implementation and fast computation.  Software 
              development will   be  carried out concurrently, and one of the main goals is
              to  ensure that the   algorithms can also be implemented in hardware.
              Industrial  standards in the   hardware prototype development will also be kept
              in mind.
