Title       : Counterion Accumulation Around Finite Nucleic Acid Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9505866

Award Number: 9505866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Hagerman paul.hagerman@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9505866  Hagerman   The high local phosphate charge densities found in nucleic
              acids, particularly those possessing significant tertiary structure, have a
              profound influence on the spatial distribution and extent of association of the
              counterion atmosphere. This interplay between the macroion and its counterions
              can in turn play a principal role in determining the global conformation of the
              macroion, or in directing the binding of proteins and small ligands. However,
              except for linear nucleic acids, little is known regarding the nature of
              counterion accumulation. In order to address this issue, the current research
              combines computational and experimental approaches to the characterization of
              two specific structural elements in nucleic acids, namely, the helix terminus
              and the four-way junction. The former represents a simple paradigm for the
              contribution  of peripheral portions od nucleic acid structures to counterion
              accumulation, while the latter provides a system for studying the contribution
              of elements of higher-order (tertiary) structure. The computational approach
              used to describe the degree of counterion association (Aim 1) involves grand
              canonical Monte Carlo simulations  to predict Donnan distribution (preferential
              interaction) coefficients  (( ) the principal observable in an equilibrium
              dialysis experiment. The experimental determination ( of values for the linear
              and branched nucleic acids represents Aim 2. Finally,  the technique of
              steady-state electrophoresis will be employed to examine the relationship
              between thermodynamic ion binding (reflected in () and the effective charge of
              a nucleic acid undergoing electrophoresis.  %%%  One important aspect of a
              general understanding of gene expression is an appreciation of the means by
              which regulatory proteins interact with DNA. While it is clear that one
              component of such interactions involves specific recognition of DNA sequence,
              another, less well understood component involves the interplay between charges
              on the DNA molecule,  the  regulatory proteins, and small ions in the vicinity
              of the DNA.  Based on  prior research it has become apparent that the
              distributions of small ions in the vicinity of DNA can direct the binding of
              proteins to particular locations, particularly when the DNA contains elements
              of higher-order structure (e.g., branches, as found during recombination).  The
              current research represents a direct extension of the previous studies and will
              continue to rely heavily on high-performance (supercomputer) computational work
              in combination with experimental studies, both aimed at the further
              characterization of small-ion distributions in the vicinity of DNA.  Such
              studies will yield direct predictions regarding the nature of the interactions
              between gene-regulatory proteins and DNA.  ***
