Title       : Biochemical Analysis of PHO5 Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9505644

Award Number: 9505644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Laybourn laybourn@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the function of the core histones in the
              regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription.  Many, if not most,
              transcription regulatory mechanisms may be fully manifest only in a chromatin
              context.  Core histones in the form of nucleosomes repress transcription. 
              Recent genetics studies indicate that core histones are directly involved in
              RNA polymerase II transcription regulation. The mechanism of transcription
              regulation on a chromatin template will be investigated using Pho4p
              transcription factor activation of the yeast PHOS promoter as a model.  Results
              from these studies will provide a more precise understanding of the role of the
              core histones in the mechanisms that determine whether a gene is active or
              repressed.  Depletion of core histones in vivo causes the derepression of
              transcription of the yeast PHO5, GAL 1, and CYC 1 genes.  Previous studies of
              PHO5 gene regulation have provided important clues to the mechanism of
              transcription regulation on chromatin.  However, these studies have all been
              carried out in vivo.  A more complete understanding o f the mechanism requires
              biochemical analysis.  This laboratory is the first to have purified yeast core
              histones in large enough quantities for biochemical investigation of their role
              transcription regulation.  These histones have been used to reconstitute
              nucleosomal templates, restoring repression of basal transcription to the PHO5
              promoter.  Thus, this laboratory is in a unique position to undertake these
              analyses.  This research will: (1) Reconstitute transcription activation from
              the PHO5 promoter. In vitro transcription will be reconstituted from
              recombinant and purified yeast basal transcription factors and purified Pho4p
              and Pho2p, and these systems will be used to reconstitute basal and activated
              PHO5 transcription.  (2) Determine the degree of PHO5 basal transcription
              repression by reconstituted nucleosomes.  Nucleosomes will be reconstituted on
              the PHOS promoter using purified components.  The levels of basal transcription
              between naked DNA and chromatin templates will be compared, and the relation
              between TATA-box and RNA start site accessibility and transcription activity on
              chromatin templates will be determined. (3) Investigate the ability of Pho4p to
              counteract nucleosome repression of the PHO5 promoter. Nucleosomes will be
              reconstituted onto the PHO5 promoter, and the factor requirement will be
              determined for Pho4p to counteract nucleosome repression.  The level of PHO5
              activation will be compared on naked and chromatin templates.   * * *  9506255 
              Richter  This research addresses the relationship between the structure,
              function and regulation of the ATP synthase enzyme.  This allosteric enzyme
              reversibly utilizes the energy of a transmembrane proton gradient to synthesize
              ATP.  The long term goal of the research is to contribute toward an
              understanding of the mechanism of the energy transduction process and to
              understand how this enzyme is regulated under physiological conditions in
              plants and animals.  Prior NSF funding has led  to: 1) Cloning and
              over-expression of all five subunits of the catalytic F1 portion of the
              chloroplast ATP synthase (CF1); 2) Recovery of the subunits from bacterial
              inclusion bodies and refolding them into their native, active forms;  and 3)
              Reconstituting them into a functional F1 complex.  Further studies will utilize
              this system to genetically engineer CF1 subunits for analyzing regions of
              functional importance, and to examine functional dynamics of subunits during
              the catalytic process using biochemical and biophysical techniques.  This
              proposal describes a collaborative multidiciplinary approach focusing on the
              structure and function of the three smaller CF1 subunits, )and (.  Genetic
              engineering experiments will involve: 1) Site-directed mutagenesis studies to
              probe the functional and structural importance of different regions of the
              polypeptide chains via replacement or deletion of specific amino acids or
              sequences of amino acids; 2) Studies of subunit dynamics through attachment of
              intrinsic (tryptophans) and extrinsic (via cysteine residues) fluorescent
              probes to specific sites on the ( ( and ( subunits.  Labeled subunits will be 
              reconstituted with CF1 deficient in these subunits for fluorescence studies
              aimed at (a) structural  mapping of subunits within  the CF1 complex using
              fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements  and (b) monitoring subunit
              dynamics during catalytic turnover by the enzyme by monitoring the time- 
              dependent anisotropy of intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescent probes; 3) Chemical
              crosslinking studies  involving attachment of bifunctional  chemical
              crosslinking agents at various engineered sites within  the ( and ( subunits. 
              Mutant subunits will be reconstituted with the other CF1 subunits and with the 
              membrane-bound proton channel portion (CF0) of the enzyme for chemical
              crosslinking studies aimed at  identifying the sites of interaction between CF1
              and CF0 subunits.  %%%  This research addresses the relationship between the
              chemical structure and biological function of the ATP synthase enzyme of plant
              chloroplast membranes.  This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of the
              energy from sunlight into the chemical storage form.  ATP (adenosine
              triphosphate).  ATP in turn supplies the energy  for the conversion of carbon
              dioxide into sugar in plants.  Analogous enzymes supply more than 90% of the
              ATP required for energy-dependent metabolic processes in animals and bacteria. 
              The long term goal of the research described in this proposal is to identify,
              at the molecular level, how the  ATP synthase enzymes capture energy and
              convert it into ATP.  We intend to approach this goal by  genetically
              engineering the ATP synthase so as to probe the importance of specific sites
              within the  enzyme for the energy conversion (catalytic) process.  Some of the
              genetically engineered sites will  provide sites for attachment of chemical
              probes which will be used to identify specific events  involving changes in the
              structure of the enzyme which occur during the catalytic process.  Attachment 
              of other chemical probes to genetically engineered sites will allow us to
              cross-link (tether) pieces  of the enzyme together so that we can identify
              specific sites of protein-protein interaction which  occur within the enzyme
              and which are important for catalysis.  A thorough understanding of this very 
              efficient natural energy conserving process will potentially lead to the design
              and implementation of  vastly improved energy storage and utilization processes
               or human use.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
