Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory of Spectra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9505130

Award Number: 9505130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505130  Smith       Spectra have been important in homotopy theory for many
              years.   Recently the investigator has constructed a category of spectra  with
              a symmetric monoidal smash product.  The construction is  elementary and will
              provide an introduction to spectra which will  not scare away the novice.  The
              strict associativity of the smash  product means that many other definitions
              regarding spectra can be  greatly simplified.  For example, one can easily
              discuss ring  spectra, commutative ring spectra, module spectra.  The 
              investigator is using this new definition of ring spectra in the   study of
              topological Hochschild homology and topological cyclic  homology.       Spectra
              have been developed over the last thirty years as a  bridge between the
              geometric problems that the algebraic topologist  studies and the algebraic
              techniques which he uses.  The earliest  examples were given by Rene Thom in
              his work on the cobordism  classification of manifolds, where he showed that
              manifolds, the  geometric objects common to mathematics and physics, are
              classified  up to cobordism by certain spectra.  Over the years, as one needed 
              spectra having more and more properties, many different  constructions have
              been given.  These constructions have became  increasingly complicated, until
              only a few experts could understand  them.  However, recently the investigator
              has found a much easier  way to construct spectra that nonetheless have all the
              properties  one needs for the applications.  This makes the field far more 
              accessible, especially to graduate students, and should lead to  much fuller
              appreciation of this powerful tool.  ***
