Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computations for Knotted Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9505087

Award Number: 9505087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Roseman roseman@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                       Surfaces in 4-dimensional space exhibit knotting behavior   similar to
              circles in 3-space and are mathematically central to basic   understanding of
              4-space. The primary point of view is topological.   Basic steps in the program
              are as follows. (1) Represent knotted   surfaces and isotopies of these
              surfaces as data sets. Traditional   topological constructions do not readily
              give rise to formulas, thus   calculations for coordinates of vertices is a
              non-trivial matter.   Computations based on the concept of an energy of a knot
              give rise to    interesting, useful, and in some sense, natural placements and 
               motions of knotted surfaces in four dimensional space.  A second   method is
              local in nature and is based on the investigator's methods   of higher
              dimensional knot moves.  A third method involves   interactive computer
              graphics.  (2)  Represent knotted surfaces in a   symbolic way.  To a surface
              in 4-space one can associate a   combinatorial object called a knot diagram.
              There is a calculus for   such diagrams similar to that which exists for
              classical knot   diagrams, a goal is to implement this.  From a knot diagram
              one can   determine some algebraic invariants of a knotted surface.  A  
              presentation of the knot group is one such example.  Using examples   (produced
              in part (1), above), higher dimensional diagrams will be   generated and
              analyzed with the hope of finding other combinatorially   defined invariants.
              (3)  Develop visualization techniques for the   search and verification of
              mathematical relationships between   examples.  It is not enough to "see" these
              objects, one wants to get   a mathematical understanding.  One such new
              visualization technique   uses a parameterized texture to provide natural
              visual cues for   higher dimensional information. Another involves interactive 
               manipulations objects in 4-space.  Currently, the investigator is   developing
              use of the CAVE in conjunction with parallel computation   as the best current
              tool for such a four-dimensional inte ractive   environment.            The
              basic question is: what is four dimensional space ?  One   is looking for
              mathematical answers with emphasis on computation and   visualization.  The
              study of four (and more) dimensions is not at all   esoteric.  Mathematically,
              a dimension is nothing more than a number.    Anything that needs to have four
              independent variables to describe it   can be considered to be a subset of
              four-dimensional space.  The most   well known example is an "event".  An event
              happens at a certain   place and a certain time.  Three numbers are needed to
              locate the   position of the event and the "fourth dimension" is time. The
              reason   that four-dimensions is very different than three is that it is  
              difficult to visualize.  This is a focus of this research.  The   things that
              we visualize best are surfaces, so it is natural to use   surfaces in
              four-dimensional space as a visualization tool. In   addition surfaces provide
              powerful mathematical probes into 4-space.   This investigation relies heavily
              on "state of the art" equipment.    To grapple with the complexities of the
              computation, use is made of   "super-computers".  To grapple with the
              complexities of visualization   and manipulation, use is made of a "virtual
              reality" system.  In   summary, the broad significance of this program is the
              extension of   frontiers of visual understanding for complex information using 
               modern computational tools.
