Title       : Flora of North America North of Mexico: Phase III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1998     
File        : a9505383

Award Number: 9505383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $920001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy R. Morin   (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schnase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Flora of North America (FNA) is a project undertaken by the community of
              systematic  botanists to provide authoritative, up-to-date information, to a
              wide range of users and in a variety  of media, on the names, relationships,
              characteristics, and distributions of the 20,000 species of  plants that grow
              outside of cultivation in North America north of Mexico. Flora of North America
               presents an assemblage of knowledge resulting from original research as well
              as a fresh consideration  of any previous studies, including recent
              experimental research, field work, study of herbarium  specimens, and careful
              analysis of previous literature.  Particularly important is the unique 
              integration of knowledge of the taxa throug hout their range in the U.S.,
              Canada, and Greenland.  Many  of the treatments present for the first time, and
              possibly the only time, knowledge that results form  a researcher s lifetime of
              study of a group of plants.  The treatments also incorporate results of  recent
              research that otherwise might not have become available to nonspecilalists for
              many decades.  This project is a binational collaboration between U.S. and
              Canadian botanists that has been endorsed  by the American Society of Plant
              Taxonomists, the American Bryological and Lichenological Society, the  Canadian
              Botanical Association, and the Botanical Society of America.  It is the only
              research program  to have been so endorsed.  Thirty institutions have committed
              major staff time and facilities to the  successful completion of the Flora, and
              hundreds of botanists in the U.S., Canada, and elsewhere are  contribution
              their time and expertise to the project. Specific products of Flora of North
              America  include fourteen printed volumes and a CD-ROM, a new relational
              database, a variety of Internet-  accessible information services, including
              traditional gopher services, a full-featured FNA World Wide  Web site,
              WWW/Mosaic interfaces to online, multimedia publications, and an SQL-compliant
              Mosaic  interface to FNA s relational data.  these products contain data on
              taxonomic relationships, toxicity,  economic use, and other biologically
              important information that are received from specialists, edited  by project
              staff and editorial committee members, reviewed by taxonomic and regional
              specialists, and  put into final form for delivery in Internet and in print. 
              Additional and up-dated information is  received form a variety of sources,
              evaluated by the information management committee, and integrated  into the
              database. Flora of North America provides a unified framework for basic and
              applied research  dealing with North American plants and plant products. 
              Diverse kinds of information that have been  carefully verified by project
              staff and reviewers are av ailable form a single source in a uniform  format,
              and differing taxonomic opinions form many widely used references are
              reconciled and related  to an authoritative standard.  Plant anatomists and
              morphologists, ecologists, phytochemists,  evolutionary biologists, and
              molecular biologists in addition to our fellow taxonomists, all need  accurate,
              complete information in order to circumscribe their studies appropriately, to
              select  representative taxa for detailed investigations in large groups, and to
              interpret their results in  relation to the massive body of data now available
              for many groups.  Information in the database,  particularly when linked with
              precise locality data found on herbarium specimens, can be analyzed to 
              discover correlation s among geographical distribution, co-occurrence with
              other organisms, genetic  relationships, and morphological chemical attributes.
               Flora of North America provides a gold mine of  information for further
              research.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
