Title       : Reparameterization and Longitudinal Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9505065

Award Number: 9505065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Slate slate@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS  95-05065    PI:     Elizabeth Slate, 1991  Institution: Cornell
              University    Title:   Reparameterization and Longitudinal Modeling   
              Abstract:      This research is concentrated in two main areas of statistical 
              inference and modeling: reparameterization and hierarchical models for 
              longitudinal data.  The reparameterization research develops  methodology that
              identifies parameterizations for a wide class of  statistical models for which
              normal approximations to the likelihood  function and posterior density are
              accurate.  Parameterization  diagnostics based on measures of non-normality are
              used to identify  well-behaved parameterizations and to derive sample sizes
              sufficient  for reliable inference based on asymptotic normality for many 
              commonly-used parameterizations.  The hierarchical modeling component  of the
              research compares and unifies models for longitudinal data,  including Markov
              chain models, hierarchical mixed effects models, and  fully Bayesian
              hierarchical models.  Estimation, prediction and design  issues are addressed,
              and special consideration is given to the  incorporation of random changepoints
              in these models.       This research studies statistical models which may be
              uqed  for  processes such as the basis of a feed-forward controller for many of
              today's  complex manufacturing processes.  Because exact inference can be very 
              difficult in these complicated models, scientists often resort to the 
              simplification of summary results which are implicitly understood in   the
              context of normality (i.e., the bell curve).  The first component of this
              research   studies procedures for determining when this simplification is
              misleading and   presents alternative statistical models.   This research will 
              lead to increased numerical   efficiency in fitting these complex models,
              permitting more timely response to  changing processes.  The second component
              of this research studies models for  longitudinal data.  These models are
              needed when the data consist of  serial mea surements within individuals for a
              number of individuals.    Such data arise in a wide range of applications, from
              reliability studies to economic   indicators to health monitoring.  The
              research compares and unifies a number of  models for longitudinal data, and
              addresses estimation, prediction and  design issues.  Special consideration is
              given to the incorporation of  random changepoints in these models (i.e.,
              points in time where the process  exhibits some serious change in behavior). 
              The   changepoints may represent onset of disease, critical part fatigue, or  
              changes in consumer behavior.  The research studies how longitudinal   models
              may be used in a dynamic fashion to detect these changepoints quickly.
