Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diagnostics in Structured Data and Quality Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9505440

Award Number: 9505440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Hawkins doug@stat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS  95-05440  PI:     Douglas Hawkins   Institution: University of
              Minnesota     Title:   Diagnostics in Structured Data and Quality Improvement  
                     Abstract:      The principal directions of the work are case and model
              diagnostics, and  methdologies for handling data with a natural ordering such
              as time series,  or regression data ordered by one of the predictors.  The
              first branch of  the work extends methods for identifying atypical cases in
              multiple  regression, multivariate and time series data, and for moderating
              their  effects on the subsequent analysis of the data.  The second branch of 
              the work addresses problems of methodologies for identifying structural 
              changes in ordered data (for example regression and multivariate data)  and for
              overcoming the difficulties caused by unknown parameter values.  A major
              application  for this work is statistical quality improvement.    Many
              important societal problems involve making valid inferences from  complex data
              sets.  The decision whether a facility is adding to the   pollution levels in
              the groundwater, for example, is made on the basis   of series of groundwater
              samples.  Analyzing these series is complicated  by the presence of apparent
              maverick values, which may be the result of  laboratory error or may reflect
              actual pollution events.  The methods   developed with this award help to
              recognize such values and to resolve the  issue of the true pollution levels. 
              Quality improvement is     of great importance - both in manufacturing and in
              all areas  of government and the private sector.  Pointers to quality
              improvement   for deterioration can be found from identifying structural
              changes in  series of measurements  The development of powerful easily-used 
              change diagnostics in this research will  lead to sounder and more reliable 
              ways of pinpointing the sources of change.  The work has both   methodological
              and computational elements.  While the computational  aspect benefits from high
              performance computing equipment and me thods,  the development of better
              computational procedures also leads to   solutions to problems currently beyond
              the powers of even the most  powerful computer systems.
