Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Elliptic Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9505047

Award Number: 9505047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Knowles iwk@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knowles       The investigator studies parameter identification inverse 
              problems.  Typically, in such a problem one uses certain given  information
              about the solution of a partial differential equation  to compute one or more
              of the coefficients in the equation.  Such  problems are invariably ill-posed
              (sometimes badly so) and, to  make matters worse, in processing the data in
              most practical  applications, one must contend not only with measurement error
              but  sometimes also with the fact that the readings may only be taken  at a
              rather sparse collection of measurement points.  In  consequence, in many
              areas, it is well documented that algorithms  for parameter identification that
              are sufficiently reliable to  engender widespread practical use are not yet
              available.  In this  project the investigator develops a new approach to a
              broad class  of parameter identification problems.  At the core of the approach
               is the Dirichlet principle for elliptic boundary value problems,  that the
              solution may be obtained by the minimization of a certain  energy functional;
              that the same energy functional can also be  used to compute coefficients in
              the elliptic equation, if an  appropriate constrained minimization is employed,
              is the key  observation.  Recent experiments have shown that the same numerical
               stability that is associated with the Dirichlet principle approach  to finding
              solutions is also present in the constrained  minimization, and furthermore the
              method appears to be quite  robust in the presence of noise in the data.  The
              class of  parameter identification problems to which the approach is 
              applicable is, roughly speaking, those that involve elliptic  equations that
              may be solved by means of a Dirichlet principle; as  is well known, this is a
              large class, having considerable  practical significance.  The bulk of the work
              in the project  involves applying these ideas to producing working algorithms
              for  the solution of the aquifer transmissivity problem (a crucial step  in the
              modeling of under ground water systems) and the problem of  imaging inside the
              human body with electrical impedance  tomography.       Inverse problems
              dealing with parameter identification in the  presence of data error are of
              fundamental practical importance in  a number of areas, including, but by no
              means limited to, medical  and industrial imaging, high energy physics,
              geophysics, and  hydrology.  Such problems are mathematically ill-posed in the
              sense  that small variations in the data (caused by measurement error for 
              example) can cause uncontrollably large errors to appear in the  calculated
              parameters.  In this proposal a new optimization  approach to a broad class of
              parameter identification problems is  presented that already shows significant
              promise for handling the  moderately ill-posed problems in this class, and
              there are  indications that such an approach may help solve the most 
              egregiously ill-posed examples.  The project concentrates on two  test cases,
              the aquifer transmissivity problem (a necessary and  crucial step in monitoring
              the flow of contaminants in underground  water systems, for example) and the
              problem of (noninvasive and  nondestructive) imaging inside the human body
              using electrical  impedance tomography.  If suitably effective algorithms can
              be  developed with these ideas in the test cases, similar algorithms  should be
              possible for a wide range of related applications in the  areas outlined above,
              and elsewhere.
