Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Mechanism of Fermi Level Pinning at
               Metal-Semiconductor Nanojunctions Fabricated by STM Tip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1995     
File        : a9505480

Award Number: 9505480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40300              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Tong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505480  Tong      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. William M. Tong to
              work with Dr. Paolo Perfetti  at the Instituto di Struttura della Materia in
              Italy.    The goal of this proposal is to fabricate metal-  semiconductor
              conductor junctions of atomic scale and probe  their electronic structure as a
              function of their sizes and  other parameters.  The tool to perform these
              experiment is  the scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).  Small islands of  most
              metals can be deposited by field ionizing metal atoms  from a pretreated
              tungsten tip.  The electronic structure of  these junctions is investigated by
              scanning tunneling  spectroscopy (STS), which is essentially the IV curve of
              the  islands.  This study will not only allow exploration of the  relatively
              uncharged area of nano-island deposition, but it  will also help gain a better
              understanding of the Fermi  Level (FL) pinning mechanism in the near-atomic
              limit by  mapping out how the density of states (DOS) evolves as a  function of
              island size, local defects, dopant levels, and  other factors. ***
