Title       : Osmoregulation and Contractile Vacuole Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9505910

Award Number: 9505910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Allen allen@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9505910  Allen      Osmoregulation is the process by which all cells establish 
              their water and salt balance keeping the cell's cytosol  slightly hypertonic or
              isotonic to its external environment.  In fresh water protozoa the organelle
              generally regarded to  be responsible for osmoregulation is the contractile
              vacuole  complex (CVC) which is thought to secrete a hypotonic  solution. 
              However, as cellular membranes are permeable to  water, how these or any cells
              can accumulate, store and  expel water or hypotonic solution uphill against a 
              concentration gradient of water remains a paradox.  This  project studies the
              poorly understood CVC organelle system  with electrophysiological,
              immunocytochemical and cell  biological methods.   The model organism selected
              is  Paramecium, a ciliate which offers the advantages (1) of  having
              recognizable and separate CVC compartments for fluid  uptake, fluid transport
              and fluid storage/expulsion and (2)  of allowing an easy assay for determining
              total cellular  fluid output.  The host laboratory has extensive experience 
              with this cell and its CVC, having studied in detail its CVC  ultrastructure.
              Monoclonal antibodies to different parts of  the CVC of this ciliate are
              available from preliminary work.  An understanding of how osmoregulation is
              achieved in  "primitive" single-celled eukaryotes will establish the 
              fundamental principles on which multicellular organisms may  have fashioned
              their own osmoregulatory systems as they  evolved.  (1)   Ion-selective
              microelectrodes are used to  determine the ionic contents of the in vivo CV
              fluid. (2)  The electrical potential, capacitance, and ionic conductance  of
              the CV membrane is measured and compared with the values  found for plasma
              membrane.  Membrane ion channels and  electrogenic pump activity are
              discriminated  electrophysiologically and pharmacologically, usine specific 
              ion channel and pump blockers.  Patch-clamping is used on  isolated CV membrane
              to determine the properties of  individual channels or pum ps.  (3)
              Confirmation that 15 nm  "peg" structures represent the V-type H+ ATPase is
              made  using monoclonal antibodies to specific polypeptides of the  pump. The
              tubules containing the pump are isolated and  characterized using the
              techniques of molecular biology. (4)  A fluid segregation mechanism is
              proposed.  The effects of  osmotic stress on the CVC is studied to see if these
              effects  are consistent with the mechanism.  The outcome of these  studies
              contribute to an understanding of the basic  mechanism of osmoregulation in
              this single-celled fresh-  water eukaryote as well as give a start on
              understanding CVC  regulation and provides a step in the eventual understanding
               of the path of evolutionary development of osmoregulation in  higher animals. 
              %%%  Cells must maintain their content of salts and water at a  concentration
              which is favorable for life even though the  cells live in a harsh environment.
               If these concentrations  waver from the norm, the cell will not be able to
              carry on  its metabolic functions and will die.  This project is an 
              exploration of how a single cell living in fresh water is  capable of secreting
              water to maintain the proper balance of  water and salts.  Protozoa have a
              contractile vacuole system  (CVC) which presumably does this job.  However,
              what is not  understood is how the water is accumulated within this CVC  since
              all membranes including those surrounding the CVC are  permeable to water.  One
              way around the paradox would be for  the cell to pump salts into the CVC to
              maintain a solution  within the CVC equal in salt concentration to the cell's 
              cytoplasm.  In this way water would enter the CVC and there  would be net
              backflow of water into the c cytoplasm.  Both  water and salts would then be
              secreted from the cell.  However, what salts the cell is capable of continually
               excreting remains unknown.  Thus the investigation is  undertaken to determine
              what the contents of the CVC are in  the fresh water protozoan Paramecium,
              thereby determining  what the ce ll is excreting through its CVC.  (1) Ion- 
              selective microelectrodes are inserted into a living CVC to  measure the
              concentration of different ions. (2)  Microelectrodes are also used to
              determine the electrical  potential, resistance, and capacitance of the CVC
              membrane.  Clues about the types of ion channels and ion pumps driven  by the
              electrical potential across the membrane will be  followed-up with experiments
              using drugs which block  specific channels or pumps. The biochemistry of
              individual  ion carriers can be determined using by assaying the  electrical
              properties in an isolated patch of membrane  (patch clamping). (3) Using
              monoclonal antibodies against  pump components,  the identity of the pump can
              be verified  visually. (4) A probable mechanism of how the CVC works in  this
              protozoa is suggested and tested.  This study gives us  clues about how
              osmoregulation (the balance of salt and  water in cells) is made possible in
              nature and how this  process may have evolved from "simpler" forms of life to
              its  present state in higher organisms.
