Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Comparative Study of Cushitic Syntax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9505658

Award Number: 9505658
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Orin D. Gensler meillet@violet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505658  Gensler      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Orin D. Gensler to
              work with Professor Bernd  Heine at the Institut fur Afrikanistik at the
              Universitat zu  Koln in Cologne, Germany.    The goal of this project is to
              learn the Cushitic languages  and linguistics, specifically Cushitic syntax in
              an  Afroasiatic and East African context.  This work will build  on Gensler's
              previous work in which he assembled detailed  information from 18 African
              languages, in a balanced  continent-wide sample, including several East African
               languages, among them one Cushitic language, Afar.  This  data has been useful
              in a purely African context as a  typological mini-database for areal work. 
              Now he will  approach Cushitic as a member of an East African Sprachbund.  The
              linguistic link between Ethiopic and Cushitic is a  matter of areal and genetic
              considerations which provide a  classic example of undisputed substratal
              influence.  This  year will lay the ground work for future field work on a 
              Cushitic (or Omotic) language in East Africa, where there  are many
              ill-described or undescribed languages, some which  are on the verge of
              extinction. ***
