Title       : Characterization of Nitrogen Dioxide Derived Polypeptide Adducts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9505806

Award Number: 9505806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl B. Hood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meharry Medical College
	      1005 Dr D B Todd, Jr Blvd
	      Nashville, TN  372083501    615/327-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1227,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9505806  Hood  This research is based on the hypothesis that the chronic effect
              of  NO2 on protein structure and function is due, in part, to the  reaction of
              this oxidant pollutant with specific basic amino acid  side chains and that
              such reactions are potentiated by formation of  oxidant radicals resulting from
              the peroxidation of polyunsaturated  fatty acids (PUFAs).  Preliminary data
              suggest that NO2 reacts with  the E-amino group of lysine residues and with the
              amide nitrogen of  surface exposed lysine and arginine residues in the
              polypeptide  backbone which can result in polypeptide bond cleavage.  In vitro 
              NO2 exposures of a series of decapeptides followed by exposures of  recombinant
               1-PI (a 53kDa protein which protects the critical  structural protein,
              elastin, from proteolysis by elastase) will be  performed to determine the
              susceptibility of these polypeptides to  pollutant oxidants.  NO2 exposures of
              selected decapeptides and of  proteins, followed by exposures of inhibitors and
              unsaturated  hydrocarbons as well as membrane entrapped inhibitors analyzed by 
              Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry, 15N-NMR, 13C15N-NMR, and  1H-NMR and
              Gas Chromatography will identify specific NO2 derived  adducts. These studies
              will also determine whether the autoxidation  of unsaturated fatty acids
              contributes to polypeptide inactivation.  The in vitro exposure studies will be
              conducted using well   defined systems, providing accurate quantitation and
              biochemical  characterization.  The target molecules chosen are relevant to the
               mechanistic study of conformational transitions in proteins as a  result of
              oxidant exposure.  %%%  Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and its associated NO (x)
              (nitroxide) species  are examples of atmospheric pollutants derived from fossil
              fuel  combustion and cigarette smoke.  Combustion processes initially  produce
              nitric oxide, which is then oxidized in the atmosphere to  the much more
              reactive NO2 species.  This photochemical process is  responsible for the daily
              variations i n nitroxide concentrations in  large metropolitian areas.    Very
              little effort has been directed at the possibility that  oxidants, such as NO2,
              may directly alter the structure of  proteins.  Based on the
              oxidation-reduction potential of NO2 in  neutral aqueous solutions, it has been
              postulated that NO2 exhibits  a high degree of selectivity among the molecular
              constituents of  living cells.  This research will examine the effects of NO2 
              exposure on selected peptides and proteins.  Structural changes  will be
              determined and the susceptibility of these protein  structural changes to
              different conditions of oxidant exposure will  be evaluated.   ***
