Title       : Laboratory Studies of Ice Initiation Mechanisms in Cumulus Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1999   
File        : a9505298

Award Number: 9505298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth V. Beard k-beard@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry T. Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              K. Beard/Abstract  9505298         The effectiveness of evaporation ice nuclei
              (EIN) will  bestudied in laboratory simulations of cloud drop formation, 
              charging, evaporation and reentrainment in cumulus clouds  developing through
              the freezing level.  Such nuclei are potentially  effective ice nuclei because
              of organic and inorganic materials in  cloud drops.  Charge accumulation at
              cloud top is a source of ice  nucleus enhancement by electrofreezing.  For the
              proposed nuclei  continuous-flow experiment, cloud drops will be obtained from
              cloud  condensation nuclei (CCN) using laboratory mixing and cloud  chambers
              and the Illinois State Water Survey continuous flow  diffusion-chamber system,
              and from ultrasonic nebulization of aloud  water.  Cloud drops will be charged
              using a corona device and  evaporated by mixing with dry air.  The activation
              (threshold)  temperature of the resultant nuclei will be measured in the 
              presence of condensing, supercooled drops that act as condensation  freezing
              nuclei as a function of temperature.         The EIN electrofreezing mode will
              be evaluated by measurements  at several charge levels, and the EIN
              evaporation-freezing mode  will be deduced from measurements using EIN particle
              generated both  warmer and colder than freezing.  A separate set of nuclei
              activity  measurements will be made to distinguish contact-freezing from  
              condensation-freezing by using an evaporating cloud in the freezing  chamber,
              so that contact of nuclei is enhanced by phoresis and  condensation-freezing is
              suppressed.         A complete set of experiments is planned using nebulized
              cloud  water that has been collected during research flights.  Another 
              complete set of experiments will be conducted with cloud-water  formed on CCN
              using the continuous flow diffusion system with  corresponding chemical
              analysis.  The nuclei experiment and the  diffusion system will be
              transportable so that measurements can be  made at various locations in the
              future.
