Title       : Aqueous Size-Exclusion Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9505953

Award Number: 9505953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Dubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              involves the continuation of an experimental and molecular  modeling research
              program studying solute retention phenomena in  size exclusion chromatography
              (SEC). Professor Paul L. Dubin and  his students at the Indiana University -
              Purdue University at  Indianapolis have selected various model compounds of
              defined  geometry that are indicative of spherical and asymmetric solutes 
              which exhibit ideal and non-ideal elution characteristics on porous  glass SEC
              stationary phases. The impetus of this study is to derive  rigorous theoretical
              relations which correlate the chromatographic  partition coefficient of various
              solutes with their size and  geometry. In addition, Professor Dubin will
              incorporate  electrostatic effects to model protein separation by SEC. The 
              retention characteristics of several highly purified model proteins  will be
              measured at Superose 12 stationary phases. Electrophoretic  light scattering
              and capillary zone electrophoresis techniques will  also be used to
              characterize high molecular weight analytes.   Aqueous size exclusion
              chromatography is commonly used to assay  molecular weight distribution and
              identify mixtures of complex  synthetic and natural water soluble polymers.
              Retention order in  this technique is based on the size based partitioning of
              analyte  throughout varying sized pores of the stationary phase, with those 
              solute having geometries equivalent to that of the packing being  retained
              longer on the column. However, in cases where geometric  considerations do not
              solely govern interactions between the solute  and the stationary phase, the
              retention characteristics of analytes  at SEC stationary phases can be quite
              different from that of the  calibration standard, which can lead to gross
              errors in the  measurement. Prof. Paul Dubin and his students at Indiana 
              University will use various model compounds and molecular modeling  algorithms
              to derive a fundamental retention theory which relates  retention of polymeric
              solute with solute size.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
