Title       : Penrose Conference on 'Tectonic Development of the Canada Basin, Arctic Ocean'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1995     
File        : a9505753

Award Number: 9505753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Lawver lawver@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5212      POLAR EARTH SCI (ARCTIC RES)
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides participant support funds for a Penrose Conference on the 
              tectonic development of the Arctic Ocean Basin.  Penrose conferences are 
              sponsored by the Geological Society of America and they are intended to bring 
              together researchers at critical junctures in the development of scientific
              thinking  in fields of geology and geophysics.  The title of this conference is
              "The Tectonic  Development of the Canada Basin and Surrounding Regions", and it
              will be held  September 28-October 3, 1995.    The tectonic history of the
              Arctic region is still extremely controversial and of  great importance not
              only to our understanding of global tectonics, but also to  understanding the
              framework of the known and conjectured oil and mineral  resources of the
              Arctic.  The movement of the tectonic plates involved in  evolution of the
              Arctic region have not all been identified, even 25 years after the  plate
              tectonic revolution.  In particular, how and when the Canada Basin section  of
              the Arctic developed during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic is still debated in the 
              scientific literature.  The Eocene to recent evolution of the Arctic Ocean was 
              thought to be reasonably straightforward, consisting of identified seafloor 
              spreading along the Nansen-Gakkel Ridge in the Eurasian Basin.  But now, recent
               field work indicates that some of the Cenozoic seafloor spreading motion in
              the  Eurasian Basin was transformed into the Canada Basin.  Similarly, recent
              analyses  of ERS-1 satellite derived gravity data over the Arctic Ocean to 84 N
              have added  new information, some of it relating directly to the controversy
              concerning the  origin of the Canada Basin.    At the present time, the various
              groups that work on the many different aspects of  the Arctic tend to work
              independently of one another, and attend different  national and international
              meetings.  Therefore, substantial progress could be  made in the understanding
              of Arctic tectonics by bringing together the key  scientists from these groups
              to integrat e studies based on terrestrial geology and  geophysics around the
              margin of the Arctic, marine geological and geophysical  studies, and
              aeromagnetic, aerogravity and satellite data.  In addition, the Russian  data
              that were not available to western scientists until recently, need to be 
              incorporated  into the tectonic models for the Arctic, along with new data 
              obtained through joint research undertaken between Russian scientists, and 
              scientists from Germany, U.S. and Canada.    This meeting is an opportunity to
              advance understanding of the present geological  and geophysical knowledge of
              the Arctic, and to plan coordinated and cooperative  future work in the Arctic.
