Title       : NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program: Solidification Dynamics and
               Microstructural Investigation of Plasma Sprayed Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9505360

Award Number: 9505360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendall Hollis hollis@pmtf.sandia.gov. edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9505360  Hollis    This proposal supports a one-year postdoctoral fellowship 
              for Dr. Kendall Hollis at Nippon Steel Corporation in  Futtsu, Japan.   Project
              funding will enable Dr. Hollis to  undertake a collaborative research effort
              with Dr. Nobutaka  Yurioka of Nippon Steel Corporation.  The investigators 
              intend to study the formation of the coating from molten  particles and how the
              dynamics of the deposition process  determine the micro structure of the
              resultant coating.  As  the application of coatings by plasma spraying can
              greatly  reduce the fabrication cost or greatly extend the useful  life of
              equipment, it is anticipated that the technology  will continue to receive
              attention by government and  industrial laboratories for many years to come.   
              As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Hollis will have the  opportunity to become
              familiar with research techniques and  equipment at Nippon Steel Corporation
              while contributing to  the overall research effort.  Therefore, this proposal 
              fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and  transfer of
              scientific knowledge through an international  collaboration.  ***
