Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerics for Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9505116

Award Number: 9505116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin M. Mischaikow mischaik@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mischaikow       Most numerical methods for studying ordinary differential 
              equations are based on one of the following two ideas: (1)  tracking individual
              trajectories via an approximation of the  differential equation, or (2)
              searching for orbits with  predetermined properties, e.g. a periodic orbit or
              an invariant  torus, by solving an associated boundary value problem.  While 
              these techniques are obviously successful, they have shortcomings;  one can
              only approximate orbits over finite time intervals and  these methods have
              difficulty detecting orbits which are unstable  in the sense of dynamics. 
              These unstable orbits can be extremely  important since they define the
              boundaries of basins of  attraction, and hence, determine the global dynamics
              of the  system.  In addition, there are many problems where the objects of 
              interest are precisely the unstable bounded orbits, e.g. traveling  waves.  In
              the second case, one needs to know a priori what types  of solutions should be
              looked for and in what regions of phase  space one should look for the
              solutions.  The investigator develops  complimentary methods for studying the
              global dynamics of ordinary  differential equations.  The theoretical basis for
              the project is  Conley's theory of dynamical systems.  The work is separated
              into  four tasks. (1) Given as an input an ordinary differential  equation and
              a region in phase space, develop efficient numerical  schemes to determine
              isolating neighborhoods and compute their  Conley indices. (2) Given a
              potential isolating neighborhood,  develop more efficient mechanisms for
              obtaining computer assisted  proofs to verify that the neighborhood is an
              isolating  neighborhood and to rigorously compute the Conley index of the 
              associated isolated invariant set. (3) Extend the abstract Conley  index
              theory, which allows one to draw conclusions concerning the  structure of the
              dynamics from knowledge of the index and the  isolating neighborhood. (4) Apply
              these techniques to ordinary  differential equations  for which the global
              dynamics is poorly  understood.  It should be emphasized that the end goal of
              these  four steps is to obtain a rough understanding of the global  dynamics of
              the ordinary differential equation.  In particular,  these procedures provide
              information about both the type and  structure of dynamics that occur, and the
              region of phase space in  which these dynamics take place.  A finer
              understanding of these  dynamics can then be more efficiently investigated
              using the more  classical methods mentioned at the beginning.       It is clear
              that most phenomena, whether physical, chemical  or biological in nature, need
              to be described by nonlinear models.  Thus, to describe the dynamics of these
              phenomena one is required  to solve problems in global analysis.  In practice,
              this usually  requires numerical computations, since our theoretical analytic 
              techniques are not yet adequate.  With the advent of high  performance
              computing considerable progress has been made in  understanding the behavior of
              a wide variety of nonlinear  dynamical systems.  However, there are many
              drawbacks to most  current numerical and computational techniques at our
              disposal.  This project is aimed at two of them.  The first arises from the 
              fact that the classical numerical techniques often provide bad  approximations
              over long time intervals (i.e. they are unreliable  for long range predictions)
              and also they have difficulty  detecting unstable dynamic structures (these
              unstable structures  determine the path by which the object being modelled
              reaches its  asymptotic state).  The second problem involves difficulty in 
              understanding the tremendous amounts of numerical data which the  computers are
              capable of generating.  Typically this problem is  overcome by graphically
              displaying the data.  Unfortunately, most  models involve more than three
              variables, and hence visualizing  the numerical results becomes a difficult
              task.  This project  develops theoretical techniques and efficient numerical
              methods  for  describing the global dynamics arising from nonlinear ordinary 
              differential equations, and then applies these techniques to a  wide range of
              biological and physical problems.  The theoretical  aspect involves translating
              algebraic information into dynamics  and the numerical side involves computing
              these algebraic  invariants by approximating the differential equations.  The 
              algebraic information works equally well for stable or unstable  dynamics and,
              of course, being algebraic, does not need to be  visualized in order to be
              understood.
