Title       : Practical Techniques for the Design, Specification, Verification, and
               Implementation of Concurrent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9505562

Award Number: 9505562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Smolka sas@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Over the past decade, researchers have developed tools that offer  automated
              support for applying formal methods to the design and  analysis of concurrent
              software systems.  In principle, these  tools allow system designers to utilize
              formal system  verification techniques without requiring them to know all the 
              details of the underlying mathematical theories.  In practice,  however, the
              impact of the tools has been limited because of the  relatively small scale of
              the problems they can handle and  because of their lack of support for more
              traditional development  methods for software, such as structured design
              techniques,  simulation, and debugging.    This research project aims at
              extending the applicability of  existing automated formal techniques for
              concurrent systems to  problems of real-life scale and complexity.  The focus
              is on two  broad issues:  (1) increasing the efficiency and scalabity of 
              existing approaches; and (2) enhancing the usability of existing  techniques by
              integrating them with more traditional software  development methods.  More
              specifically, it seeks to develop  advanced state-space management techniques
              for checking system  specifications against logical properties expressed in the
              modal  mu-calculus, and techniques for graphically conveying diagnostic 
              information for systems that fail to meet their logical  specifications.  The
              impact of the research is being assessed by  analyzing several real-life
              applications, such as sliding-window  communications protocols and cache
              coherency protocols for  distributed shared memory.    This research builds on
              the investigators' prior work on the  Concurrency Factory, an integrated
              toolset for specification,  simulation, verification, and implementation of
              concurrent systems.  ***  _
