Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Logic and Set Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9505118

Award Number: 9505118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas R. Blass ablass@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505118  Blass       The research project of Andreas Blass is in four areas: (1)
              Cardinal   characteristics of the continuum, including both the general theory
              of   such characteristics (involving Galois-Tukey connections) and the detailed
                study of particular characteristics, especially the recently introduced  
              evasion and prediction numbers. (2) Applications of set theory, especially   in
              the theory of abelian groups. (3) Semantics of linear logic, especially   game
              semantics and its variants. (4) Logic of topoi, particularly the   logical
              properties of geometric morphisms.  The research project of Glen   Whitney
              concerns interpreting general recursive definitions, especially in  
              non-determinisitic and concurrent contexts.  Specific questions include:   (1)
              Finding a universal class of structures with a recursion operation, so   that
              every structure will be contained in one from this class. (2)   Comparing
              proposals for the semantics of concurrent programming languages.   (3) Seeking
              connections with fixpoint logics used in finite model theory.   (4) Extending
              the current theory to allow more detailed modelings of   parameter and message
              passing between subprograms.          Both the formal language of recursion
              FLR, which Whitney will  study, and Girard's linear logic LL, one of Blass'
              research topics, can   serve as mathematical models of certain aspects of
              computing.  FLR models   recursion, i.e., programs using subroutines identical
              to the programs   themselves.  Whitney's project is directed toward improved
              understanding of   recursion in the context of parallel computing, i.e.
              computations done   collaboratively by many machines operating simultaneously. 
              LL models data  types; its game semantics models the situation where accessing
              data   involves more of an interaction (access protocol) between the provider
              and  the user of the data than mere transmission of data.  Both theories are 
              currently at the stage of mathematical exploration, but it is hoped that  the
              information obtained w ill be of use in the design of future programming 
              languages and in the formal verification of correctness of programs.   Cardinal
              characteristics of the continuum are a way to exhibit and clarify  the
              combinatorial content of difficult problems from various areas of  mathematics
              -- originally topology and analysis, more recently algebra as  well.  They
              provide connections between these different areas and thus  allow progress on a
              problem in one area to be applied in another.  In  addition, they make these
              problems amenable to treatment by the methods of  modern set theory.  The final
              topic in Blass' proposed research, topos  theory, also serves to connect
              apparently disparate areas, mostly within  mathematical logic.  The particular
              topic of geometric morphisms of topoi  combines ideas from set theory, from
              information systems (introduced as a  model of computation), from sheaf theory
              (a part of topology), and from  constructive logic.  ***
