Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computation of Stability Information and Global Error
               Estimation with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9505049

Award Number: 9505049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik S. Van Vleck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Van Vleck       The investigator analyzes the behavior and stability  properties
              of differential equations under discretization.  In  particular, methods are
              developed for the efficient computation  of  stability information and global
              error estimation for large  systems of ordinary differential equations.  The
              research is  focused in two areas.  The first area is to determine methods for 
              accurately computing Lyapunov exponents and related quantities.  This includes
              analysis of methods and their errors and the  development of robust software to
              determine not only the Lyapunov  exponents but also an estimate of the error in
              their computation.  The second area is in the study of backward and shadowing
              error  analysis as a means for characterizing global error when solving 
              nonlinear differential equations numerically.  The investigator  applies these
              concepts to discrete in space, continuous in time  difderential equations that
              arise in the biological and physical  sciences.  The ultimate goal of this
              project is to analyze,  develop  and implement algorithms for the long-time,
              large-scale  computation of approximate trajectories for systems of lattice 
              differential equations.  While computing trajectories the codes  simultaneously
              obtain global error estimates and finite time  Lyapunov exponents or kinematic
              eigenvalues and the associated  growth/decay directions.  This research is
              expected to yield  contributions in the areas of dynamical systems, numerical 
              analysis and applied modeling.       The goal of this project is to provide
              improved accuracy in  simulations of models corresponding to large scale
              physical and  biological processes.  With more accurate simulations these 
              models  may be studied in greater detail and this should lead to  improvements
              in the models.  Because of the large scale nature of  the models the
              investigator employs distributed and parallel  computing environments.  The
              techniques to be used to increase  the  accuracy of the simulations rely on
              mathematical techniques  in  dynamical systems and numerical analysis.  In
              particular, the  investigator develops techniques that attempt to isolate the 
              potential for error.  He is particularly interested in  determining  the
              directions in which approximate solutions, obtained during  simulations, expand
              and contract.  Additionally, he wishes to  determine the rate at which this
              contraction and expansion takes  place.  This allows to determine which
              directions in the  approximate solution are susceptible to error growth (i.e.
              the  directions corresponding to expansion) and which directions are  less
              susceptible to error growth (i.e. the contracting  directions).  Ultimately,
              the contraction and expansion  information  is to be incorporated into the
              simulation software.  This  information is used to control the error in the
              simulation and  estimate the final error in the approximate solution.  The 
              methods  are aimed at showing that near the approximate solution there  exists
              an exact physical solution.  This may be an exact solution  of a slightly
              different model or an exact solution for the model  being studied but starting
              from a slightly different sample.
