Title       : The Impact of Accountability on Judgement and Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9505680

Award Number: 9505680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Tetlock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes 12 experiments designed to test predictions derived from
              a social contingency model of judgment and choice in which key functions of
              social cognition include:  (a)assessing the relative justifiability of
              available response options; (b)generating compelling justifications for one's
              opinions and decisions. The 12 experiments (plus exploratory study) test a host
              of predictions concerning:  (a)  the conditions under which people cope with
              accountability demands via low-effort impression-management of response
              thresholds (e.g., attitude shifting) as opposed to more demanding strategies
              that require considerable cognitive effort (effort that can take either
              self-critical or self-justifying forms); (b) the power of various types of
              accountability demands to amplify or attenuate response tendencies widely
              classified as "errors or biases" in the social cognition and decision-theory
              literatures; (c) the power of various types of accountability demands to alter
              perceptions of what counts as an "error or bias" by activating alternative
              "inferential sets" (e.g., conversational norms, intuitive scientist versus
              prosecutor).  The proposed research places human thought in social context. 
              People make most decisions within settings in which they feel, in varying ways
              and degrees, accountable to others.  If our goal is an integrative theory of
              judgment and choice, we need to clarify how the psychology of the individual
              decision-maker interacts with the social, institutional and political context
              to shape thought and action.  The current studies help  to fill this gap in
              knowledge by clarifying when people respond to accountability demands by simply
              shifting their views toward the anticipated audience and when they respond to
              accountability by becoming either more self-critical and reflective or more
              self-justifying and defensive.  The research should have important implications
              for designing organizations in ways that enhance the quality of individual and
              group judgment and decision-making .
