Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Numerical Simulator for the Taylor-Couette Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9505863

Award Number: 9505863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Thomas thomas@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this project is to build a numerical simulator for the
              Taylor-Couette experimental device which is capable of emulating laboratory
              experiments.  The project will involve developing a robust numerical scheme
              capable of simulating the Taylor-Couette flow over a wide range of parameter
              values, including all of the known flow regimes from Couette flow to the
              pre-turbulence flows.  The emphasis of this project is on the duplication of
              physical experiments.  In addition, the Taylor-Couette simulator will be used
              to investigate some of the mathematical results that have been obtained,
              especially those which do not agree with the experimental results.  The project
              will involve an efficient implementation of a three-dimensional scheme on a
              vector and/or parallel computer (using multigrid to speed convergence) along
              with a full graphical output package that will both imitate the available
              experimental outputs and give additional results (not generally obtainable in
              physical experiments) that will show more clearly some of the phenomena and
              mechanisms that are involved in these flows.  The data generated by the
              numerical computations will be analyzed using biologically motivated ``neural''
              feature detectors which provide low-dimensional representations of
              high-dimensional data sets.  Visualization techniques based on preprocessing
              the data using neural networks, self organizing feature maps, in addition to
              the more standard Karhunen-Loeve decomposition will be investigated.  This
              emphasis on pattern analysis will be directed towards validation of the model
              by directly comparing large and medium-scale coherent structures which appear
              both in the numerical simulator and laboratory experiments.    In many areas
              involving development and manufacturing, numerical simulation is becoming an
              integral part of the development and manufacturing processes. There has been a
              longstanding popular argument that one might  ``throw away the wind tunnels,..
              and perform all of the experiments on the comp uter.''  However, there have not
              been many studies which  clearly demonstrate to what extent computer
              simulations can replace or augment information obtained experimentally.  Large
              computer codes are used to explain and predict complex phenomena (say in
              weather forecasting) that, due to the cost of running these codes, have never
              been carefully validated.  The instabilities and flow patterns exhibited by the
              Taylor-Couette flow have challenged experimenters and theorists for many years.
               The results that have been obtained include a rich assortment of complex flow
              regimes encountered during the eventual transition to turbulence. Hence, the
              Taylor-Couette problem is an excellent candidate to assess how well a computer
              model can perform physical experiments.  The Taylor-Couette problem is such
              that the results are sufficiently complex to require an accurate numerical
              model, an efficient solver and a large number of grid points.  Because of these
              aspects of the problem, the results will illustrate how well a computer model
              can simulate a physical problem over a broad range of parameters, will indicate
              what numerical efficiencies are possible on large problems and will clearly
              illustrate many of the problems associated with long term numerical simulations
              that produce large amounts of data.
