Title       : Structure and Function of Viral Nucleic Acids Polymerases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9505977

Award Number: 9505977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori A. Kohlstaedt kohlstaedt@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             #2 \>      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    #2 \>  
              #2 \>        4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         C   D   E   F   G   H   I   J   K  
              L                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9505977
              Kohlstaedt To learn how dimer formation differs in the closely related
              polymerases, the Kohlstaedt lab will crystallize Maloney murine leukemia virus
              and avian sarcoma virus reverse transcriptases .  Stucture solutions will be
              supplemented by biochemical experiments aimed at delineating domain boundaries
              and domain functions in all three of these polymerases.  Collaborative projects
              extend the training potential of Dr. Kohlstaedt's research plan. Plans are
              being executed that will lead to the solving of other crystal structures with
              participation of students from other research groups. These students will learn
              to think critically about structural problems, and some will participate in the
              solving of crystal structures. Besides the training aspect of her research
              plan, which involves graduate and undergraduate students and will later involve
              postdoctoral trainees, Dr. Kohlstaedt will be actively involved in improving
              formal instruction in structural biology and biophysics. She will be involved
              in initiating new course offerings and updating existing ones. New courses
              proposed include "Macrom olecular Crystallography" to be offered to both
              graduates and undergraduates and "physical chemistry for biochemistry" to be
              part of the required curriculum for undergraduate biochemistry majors. Two
              extant courses will be modernized: "Protein Chemistry" and "Biophysical
              Chemistry," both graduate courses.  In addition, Dr. Kohlstaedt will offer
              literature review and tutorial classes in structural biology. %%% The ultimate
              goal of our research is to understand structure-function relationships in
              enzymes. Viral polymerases offer ~n ideal model system for the pursuit of this
              goal since they seem to represent multiple, convergent solutions to the same
              problems of binding and catalysis. We currently are working to grow crystals of
              adenovirus polymerase and of ASV and MuLV reverse transcriptases. Our overall
              approach is to study the structures of viral polymerases by both
              crystallography and biochemistry. By these complimentary techniques we hope to
              build a detailed knowledge of the structure and function of these enzymes. Our
              goals for the proposed period of support are: 1. Biochemical definition of
              domain boundaries in adenovirus polymerase and identification of the domain(s)
              that function in the initiation of genome replication. 2. Physical definition
              of the polymerization state of MuLV reverse transcriptase in the presence of
              DNA. 3. Growth of crystals suitable for xray structure analysis of adenovirus
              polymerase, a fragment of the polymerase, adenovirus terminal protein, the host
              factor NF-1 and/or binary complexes between these proteins. 4. Growth of
              crystals suitable for x-ray structure analysis of ASV and/or MuLV reverse
              transcriptase. These experiments approach two goals: The first is a better
              understanding of the entire replication particle in adenovirus. The second is a
              better understanding of protein folding and dimerization in lentiviral reverse
              transcriptases. ***                                  @                         
                                                                                             
                                                            ....()()))()()                   
                                                                    ;                        
                                                       Oh     +'  0                          
                          $       H       l                                               D  
                  h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      Rhonda Young                @    {   9                 
                      @     M   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                          
              (                                                   B                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               >                          @  
                Zy\>                                                                         
                                      @    2~                                     Microsoft
              Word 6.0                                                      3                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  e =       e                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                    C                        
                                                        x       z       z       z
