Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Approximation, Estimation, and Computation Properties of
               Neural Networks and Related Parsimonious Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9505168

Award Number: 9505168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Barron   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Proposals:  DMS 9505168   PI: Andrew Barron   Ilstitution: Yale University  
              Title:   APPROXIMATION, ESTIMATION, AND COMPUTATION PROPERTIES                
              OF NEURAL NETWORKS AND RELATED PARSIMONIOUS MODELS     Abstract:    Artificial
              neural networks and related parsimonious models for function   approximation
              and estimation have attracted recent attention in science   and engineering. 
              Work by the authors has uncovered several interesting   aspects of these
              methods.  Approximation bounds have been obtained by   methods taken from the
              probability theory of empirical processes,   including bounds on the average
              squared error and the maximal error of   neural network and related
              approximations.  These approximation bounds   reveal a rate of convergence that
              is insensitive to the dimension of the   input space for certain nonparametric
              (infinite dimensional) classes of   functions, specified via the closure of
              convex hulls of finite dimensional  families of functions.  As a consequence
              accurate statistical estimation   of functions in these nonparametric classes
              is possible without recourse   to exponentially large sample sizes. 
              Unfortunately, computation of neural   net estimates can be an extremely
              difficult task.  The investigators study   how the problems of accurate
              approximation, estimation, and computation are   intertwined.  In this research
              they investigate fundamental mathematical,   statistical, and computational
              limits of the capacity to approximate and   to estimate these functions
              accurately by computationally feasible   algorithms.    Empirical modeling
              techniques used in a variety of scientific and  engineering tasks deal with the
              problem of how to combine a large  number of observable quantities to best
              predict or approximate   a response variable.   The input - response relation
              may be described   by a rather complicated function, and it may be desirable to
                approximate it by a combination of a small number of     elementary,
              comparatively simpler, functions. These models   dif fer from classical
              techniques in approximation  and statistical estimation in that the functions
              that are combined   are not fixed in advance, but rather selected and adjusted
              according   to what is known or observed concerning the intended response
              variable   so as to provide the best fit.  The investigators are quantifying
              the   mathematical and statistical advantages of these  adjustable selections. 
              Artificial neural networks and related techniques are at the heart  of modern
              models for adaptive and high performance computation.  The investigators study
              the limits of what is computationally   feasible with these models.  The
              ubiquity of requirements for accurate  prediction and empirical modeling for
              use of the scientific method  in general and for nationally strategic topics in
              particular are  motivating factors in this research.
