Title       : RNA-Protein Interactions in a Double-Stranded RNA Virus of Saccharomyces
               Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9505829

Award Number: 9505829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Bruenn cambruen@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9505829  Bruenn  Many of the double-stranded RNA viruses of lower eucaryotes are
              non-infectious viruses that persist indefinitely by replicating in tandem with
              their host cells, their spread mediated entirely by sexual and asexual
              reproduction. They have adapted to this lifestyle in some cases by packaging
              extra RNA not essential to the virus but encoding products of selective value
              to their host cells. These products are cellular toxins that kill cells not
              harboring the virus (the killer phenotype). Several such systems are known
              among the fungal dsRNA viruses, the best studied of which is the Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae virus (ScV). A number of characteristics make this system very
              attractive for studying nucleic acid-protein interactions. First, the host
              cells are readily amenable to molecular and classical genetics. This makes it
              possible to use the killer phenotype for screening and selection of viral
              mutants. Second, the virus separately encapsidates its RNAs, making many
              experiments simpler than those in the dsRNA viruses of higher eucaryotes, many
              of which have as many as 12 unique dsRNAs encapsidated in each viral particle.
              Third, extensive analysis of the single essential large viral dsRNA (4580 bp)
              has mapped many viral functions. There are only two viral proteins, one the
              major capsid polypeptide and product of the cap gene, and the second a
              multifunctional protein the result of frameshifting between the two open
              reading frames (cap and pol) to produce a cap-pol fusion protein. The cap-pol
              fusion protein has the enzymatic and packaging activities of the virion. Among
              the cis-acting sites is the viral binding site (packaging site) which has (for
              RNA) a very high affinity for its recognition protein (the cap-pol fusion
              protein).  This research will define the interaction between cap-pol and this
              binding site by mapping all the elements of specificity in both the RNA and the
              protein. Analysis will include in vitro mutagenesis of both cap-pol and the
              binding site, domain swapping experiment s between related RNA binding sites,
              domain swapping experiments between related cap-pol proteins, optimization of
              the RNA binding site, and optimization of the cap-pol binding domain. The
              minimal size of the optimal RNA biding site is known (19 nucleotides) as is the
              region of the viral protein necessary for binding (73-200 amino acids). This is
              one of the few systems in which both in vivo and in vitro systems for selection
              and analysis of altered binding sites and binding protein exist. It promises to
              contribute significantly to understanding RNA-protein interactions.  %%%  Many
              of the double-stranded RNA viruses of lower eucaryotes are non-infectious
              viruses that persist indefinitely by replicating in tandem with their host
              cells, their spread mediated entirely by sexual and asexual reproduction. They
              have adapted to this lifestyle in some cases by packaging extra RNAs not
              essential to the virus but encoding products of selective value to their host
              cells. These products are cellular toxins that kill cells not harboring the
              virus (the killer phenotype). Several such systems are known among the fungal
              dsRNA viruses, the best studied of which is the Saccharomyces cerevisiae virus
              (ScV). A number of characteristics make this system very attractive for
              studying nucleic acid-protein interactions. First, the host cells are readily
              amenable to molecular and classical genetics. This makes it possible to use the
              killer phenotype for screening and selection of viral mutants. Second, the
              virus separately encapsidates its RNAs, making many experiments simpler than
              those in the dsRNA viruses of higher eucaryotes. Third, extensive analysis of
              the single essential large viral dsRNA (4580 bp) has mapped many viral
              functions. There are only two viral proteins, the major capsid polypeptide and
              the cap-pol fusion protein, which has the enzymatic and packaging activities of
              the virion. This research  seeks to understand the nature of the interaction
              between cappol and its viral RNA binding site by mapping all th e elements of
              specificity in both the RNA and the protein. This is one of the few systems in
              which both in vivo and in vitro systems for selection and analysis of altered
              binding sites and binding protein exist. It promises to contribute
              significantly to understanding RNA-protein interactions.  ***
