Title       : SBIR Phase II: Epitaxial Ferroelectric/Conductive Oxide Thin Film
               Heterostructures on Silicon for Microelectronics Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9505412

Award Number: 9505412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299171             (Estimated)
Investigator: PANG-JEN KUNG   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  Li  9505412         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will employ a state-of-the-art fabrication method "Pulsed Laser
              Deposition (PLD)" to create single crystal layered structures of exotic
              materials (ferroelectrics and conductive oxide) on micromachined silicon with
              integrated silicon circuitry. These new fabrication methods and materials will
              permit the construction of electronic devices and infrared (IR) detectors which
              are faster, more sensitive and lower in cost than competing commercial
              technologies. The innovations of the proposed program are: 1) advancing
              thin-film deposition technology to achieve fully epitaxial growth of
              ferroelectric films on silicon substrates, by using the highly successful
              pulsed laser deposition technique; 2) replacing the Pt bottom electrode with
              the epitaxial conductive oxide material, La0.5Sr0.5CoO3 (LSCO); 3) applying
              emerging thin-film technology to the fabrication and design of uncooled
              pyroelectric IR detectors, which are currently made only from bulk pyroelectric
              materials; 4) achieving exceptional thermal speed performance by using
              micromachined silicon wafers as substrates; 5) achieving fully epitaxial
              pyroelectric IR detector arrays on Si, which can be monolithically integrated
              with Si integrated circuits (ICs). In the Phase I program, the proposers
              successfully demonstrated the feasibility of the critical component for the
              multilayer technology. Heterostructures containing five epitaxial thin-film
              layers, i.e. LSCO / BaTiO3 / LSCO / YBa2Cu307-x / YSZ or LSCO / (Pb, Zr)TiO3 /
              LSCO / YBa2Cu307-x / YSZ, were deposited on Si(100) substrates by in-situ
              Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). The proposers have fabricated and tested an
              uncooled pyroelectric detector, based on the novel ferroelectric/conductive
              oxide heterostructures. The Phase I research has laid down a solid foundation
              for Phase II. The proposers expect that a prototype electronic device, the
              pyroelectric infrared detectors or detector arrays, will be developed by the
              end  of the Phase II program. In Phase III, this prototype will be packaged and
              developed into a commercial product.       The development of high-performance,
              low-cost, uncooled IR detector arrays will address future markets in
              applications such as: infrared spectroscopy, gas analysis, fire detection,
              thermal imaging, drivers' aid, pollution monitoring, medical thermograph,
              missile guidance, night vision, target tracking systems, laser detection and
              range finders, airborne-spaceborne scanners, space-based astronomy, and IR
              research.  ***
