Title       : North America Research Fellows Program: The Ecology and Evolution of Host Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9505941

Award Number: 9505941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith X. Becerra jxb@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9505941  Becerra      This award is under the North American Research Fellows 
              Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from  the United States,
              Canada and Mexico, to visit research  establishments in one or both of the
              other two countries for  periods of three to twelve months. The program's
              awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of  unique or
              complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental conditions abroad.   
              This award will support a twelve month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr.
              Judith X. Becerra to work with Dr. Daniel  Pinero at Ciudad Universitaria
              (UNAM) in Mexico.  A second  year of support will be provided by the
              Postdoctoral and  Junior Investigator Research Fellows Program, to work with 
              Dr. Michael Hammer at the University of Arizona.    This research will involve
              comparison of DNA phylogeny of  the chrysomelid genus Blepharida with the
              evolution of  chemical and morphological traits of its host, the genus 
              Bursera.  The PI will also determine whether adaptive traits  in plants and
              insects have evolved under each other's  evolution by testing whether the ages
              of the associated  clades of plants and insects are equivalent.  The U.S. 
              portion of the award will be spent estimating the probable  dates of origin of
              species of Bursera and Blepharida by  calculating the rates of nucleotide
              substitution in the ITS  (Internal Transcribed Spacer) sequences obtained,
              following  the molecular clock hypothesis.  This research will provide  the
              first evaluation of the significance of plant defensive  chemical compounds,
              defensive plant morphology, and  counterdefensive insect morphology and
              behavior, for the  evolution of host exploitation by phytophagous insects.  ***
