Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Self-focussing as a Deterministic Mechanism for
               Generating Spatial Complexity in Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9505327

Award Number: 9505327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Powell powell@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse A. Logan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Bentz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Powell       The investigator and his colleagues study the spatial  dynamics of
              populations, developing and analyzing models that  incorporate biological data
              and investigating the way individuals  of a population aggregate and disperse. 
              Aggregation leads to  spatial complexity through feedback.  The feedback is
              nonlinear  when the cues individuals use to aggregate depend on the number of 
              individuals.  In a population model that allows for movement,  aggregative
              feedback causes nonlinear self-focussing, the  organization or `focussing' of
              population groups on small scales.  Decreases in the scale of spatial
              correlation make the dispersal  pattern more complex, leading to complicated
              spatial structure.  Mathematically, issues of pattern formation are related to
              the  structure of invasion waves or `fronts' between ecological states.  When
              the structure is known, stability analyses of states behind  the front or along
              the front determine how complexity is  generated.  A body of mathematical work
              has focussed on predicting  the speed and shape of invasion waves in biological
              problems.  Unfortunately, known techniques only address the invasion problem 
              in systems of low dimensionality (one or two dependent variables),  and do not
              lend themselves to general ecological application.  Techniques to predict front
              propagation in systems of many  variables are therefore at the center of the
              research.  Front  solutions, or waves of invasion, are the basis for stability 
              analyses at invasion boundaries, which predict how curvature  instabilities
              produce complexity at the invasion boundaries.  Results of these mathematical
              efforts are used to understand  complexity generation in the mountain pine
              beetle/pine system.  Results from the mathematical model are compared with data
              on  size, shape, and structure of known infestations.       In short, the idea
              is to determine how much focussing, or  clumping, of a species determines the
              natural formation of  patterns in ecosystems.  Aggregation, or clumping, of
              spec ies  occurs naturally, and can be predicted mathematically.  The 
              researchers examine how this mechanism creates complexity in  ecosystems, and
              study how to determine how much of ecological  complexity is self-generating,
              as opposed to being generated by  the complexity of the environment.  The
              Mountain Pine  Beetle/Lodgepole Pine ecosystem is studied because elements of
              the  spatial pattern (attacked and killed trees) are distinctive and  easy to
              measure.  Moreover, understanding the predictable aspects  of the course of
              pine beetle infestations is important to  understanding the role this pest
              plays in western forests,  including the relationship between beetle-killed
              pines and forest  fire.
