Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stein's Method and the Zero Bias Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9505075

Award Number: 9505075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Goldstein larry@paradox.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gesine Reinert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505075 Goldstein  Abstract    In the past two decades, Stein's method has
              become an increasingly valuable tool for obtaining bounds for distributional
              approximations of certain sums of dependent random variables by the normal or
              Poisson. The investigators propose to explore a new distributional
              transformation, coined the ``zero bias transformation,'' and an associated new
              coupling that may be used in conjunction with Stein's method for obtaining
              bounds to the normal for sums of random variables having particular dependence
              structures. The new coupling can be used to shed light on certain questions
              where previous methods have yielded only an incomplete picture. In addition,
              when approximating the sum of symmetric dependent random variables, or those
              having vanishing third moment, the zero bias coupling is natural and promises
              to yield smaller bounds on the approximation error. The zero bias technique has
              numerous potential applications to cases of both local and global dependence,
              for instance, to nonlinear sampling and rank statistics. Moreover, the zero
              bias transformation may be defined for general random objects such as random
              measures and diffusions, with applications to Empirical Central Limit Theorems
              for dependent observations, and a process treatment of the Wald Wolfowitz
              theorem.    The normal curve is used extensively in a variety of statistical
              applications, such as when sampling a large lot of goods for quality control,
              or in opinion polling. In real situations the normal curve is often only an
              idealization of something too difficult to compute. In the context of sampling,
              better accuracy of the normal approximation comes with larger sample sizes, but
              sampling is typically expensive or time consuming. Therefore, it is useful to
              have an idea of how well the normal curve approximates the true situation for
              small and realistic sample sizes. The normal curve approximation also appears
              in a variety of other, often more complex, statistical contexts. There exist a
              number of approaches for  assessing the accuracy of the normal approximation,
              each best suited to a particular need. In adding to these techniques, the
              investigators are developing a new method which improves on those existing, for
              some situations. For instance, use of the new method, applied in the sampling
              context, would result in more reliable statistical conclusions drawn from
              realistic samples.
