Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models in Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9505129

Award Number: 9505129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Donnelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505129 Donnelly  Abstract      The proposed research falls in three broad
              areas.  The first of these concerns  measure-valued population models.   A
              particle representation is used to study properties of a general class
              (including the Dawson-Watanabe and Fleming-Viot) of "neutral" processes and
              their induced genealogical structure.  A major aim of the proposal is to extend
              this construction, most notably to incorporate selection (equivalently location
              dependent branching rates in the spatial setting), but also (in the genetics
              context) to allow for recombination and population substructure.   Motivated by
              problems in the interpretation of human population genetic data, the
              investigator and his colleagues study particular subclasses of the general
              models with a view to understanding the effects on genealogy, and hence on
              genetic data, of various assumptions about population dynamics, and possible
              demographic correlations.  A second area of the proposal concerns properties of
              geographically structured population genetics models. Recent results relating
              to coalescence times in these models allow explicit calculation of moments of
              identity measures for mutation structures (beyond infinite alleles) relevant to
              molecular DNA data. Conversely, an understanding of the models motivates a
              study of measures of population differentiation (and associated estimators) for
              molecular genetic data which generalize Wright's F_st coefficient.   The third
              area of the proposal concerns the application of existing and anticipated
              theoretical results to statistical questions in the analysis of genetic data.  
              These include exact likelihood ratios for a wide class of selective models
              against neutrality (and hence efficient inference procedures), the potential
              for use of information on the age order of alleles in testing neutrality, the
              correlation structure of estimates of evolutionary parameters from samples of
              linked genes, and the (non-)existence of consistent estimators of certain
              evolutionary parameters from singl e-locus data.   The project is concerned
              with advancing our understanding of evolutionary processes.  The development of
              mathematical models allows an examination of the consequences of particular
              evolutionary mechanisms: one may ask "if evolution acted in the following way,
              what sort of patterns would we expect in genetic data?".  Mathematical modeling
              is necessary because many evolutionary forces operate over extremely long time
              scales for which direct observation, or experimentation, is impossible. 
              Comparisons of model predictions with actual genetic data then provides insight
              into the extent to which the posited mechanisms are acting.   The investigator
              studies, at a general level, the consequences of particular assumptions about
              the structure and demography of populations of interest. Particular aspects of
              the project relate to models for the evolution of human populations. Various
              statistical questions which arise in the interpretation of genetic data are
              also included.
