Title       : The Structure and Function of Human Serum Transferrin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9505824

Award Number: 9505824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Ikeda rick.ikeda@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              VEcI      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     VEcI   
              VEcI        4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                  Oh     +'  0               
                                     $       H       l                                       
                     D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @    =1 9:            
                           @    mv   e =       e                                             
                                               "       "   "       "       "       "       " 
                   \       \       \       \       \       t       ~       \       #   C     
                                                                                             
                       #   Õ       u               f   T       4   #                       " 
                                                                                     #       
                     "       "                                                               
                     "               "                                       6       D      
              "       "       "       "                           4                          
                                                                                    9505824
              Ikeda Transferrin is a monomeric glycoprotein of 679 amino acids ( 80,000 MW)
              that is folded into two homologous domains. It is the protein responsible for
              solubilizing and transporting circulating iron. There is one iron binding site
              in the N terminal domain of transferrin and one iron binding site in the C
              terminal domain. In both domains the bound iron atom is held by six ligands.
              Four ligands (an aspartic acid, two tyrosines, and a histidine) are provided by
              the protein and two ligands are provided by a synergistically bound carbonate
              anion. The synergistic anion is required for iron binding and it has been
              hypothesized that the carbonate is specifically anchored within the iron
              binding clefts of both domains o f transferrin by a conserved arginine. 
              Although the iron ligands in the binding clefts of transferrin are identical
              and the sequence and structure of the two domains are nearly identical, the
              thermal stability and iron binding properties of the N and C terminal domains
              differ. It has been hypothesized that the differences in the thermal
              stabilities of the two domains of transferrin are caused by differences in the
              thermal stabilities of one or both of the component substructures of the two
              transferrin lobes, while the differences in the iron binding properties of the
              N  and C terminal domains of transferrin have been attributed to differences in
              the amino acids that line the iron binding clefts of the two domains. The goals
              of this study are to test these hypotheses. Specifically: 1 ) N  and C terminal
              half transferrin will be expressed in Pichia pastoris (yeast) and the general
              integrity and activity of the recombinant N terminal and C terminal half
              transferrins will be confirmed. This will prove that recombinant half
              transferrins can be produced quickly and easily. 2) Hybrid half transferrins
              will be produced by exchanging the subdomains of N  and C terminal half
              transferrin, and the recombinant proteins will be used to determine whether the
              differences in the thermal stability and iron binding activity of N  and C
              terminal half transferrin are caused by one or both of the component
              substructures of the half transferrins. 3) Half transferrin mutants will be
              constructed. The mutants will then be used to begin to test the hypothesis that
              the involvement of Arg124 and Arg456 in the binding of the synergistic anion
              makes these amino acids essential for iron binding by N  and C terminal half
              transferrin.  These experiments will be the first to compare and contrast
              similar mutations in both domains of transferrin. This should increase our
              knowledge of the mechanisms of iron binding by transferrin and will help us to
              understand how transferrin functions to solubilize iron. %%% Iron is essential
              for  blood production and cell growth. In short, it is essential for human
              life; however, iron is almost insoluble in physiological solutions.
              Consequently, it must be solubilized so that enough iron is available for
              proliferating cells. In humans, the protein that is responsible for binding,
              solubilizing, and transporting circulating iron is human serum transferrin.
              Structurally, transferrin is a 679 amino acid protein that is folded into two
              domains. One domain is formed by amino acids 1 to 331, while the nearly
              identical second domain is formed by amino acids 339 to 679. There is one iron
              binding site in each domain of transferrin, and although the sequence and
              structure of the two domains are nearly identical, the thermal stability and
              iron binding properties of the two domains of transferrin differ. The goals of
              this project are to use recombinant DNA technology to separately produce each
              domain of transferrin, and to study the separated domains of transferrin to
              determine why the nearly identical domains exhibit different iron binding
              characteristics and different thermal stabilities. These studies will help us
              to understand how transferrin binds iron, and how the iron binding
              characteristics of transferrin allow the protein to solubilize and transport
              iron. ***                                      @                               
                                                                                             
                                                     ....()()))()()                          
                                                             ;                              S
              u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (
