Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Ternary Metal Pnictides and Pnictide Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9505565

Award Number: 9505565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Kauzlarich smkauzlarich@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9505565  Kauzlarich    This research is concerned with the synthesis and 
              characterization of transition metal pnictide and pnictide  oxide compounds.
              Efforts will be focused on the combination  of the heavy main group pnictogens
              such as arsenic, antimony  and bismuth, the first row transition metals, and
              the  alkali, alkaline earth, and rare earth metals. The Zintl  concept will be
              used to direct the synthesis of new  compounds. One objective of this research
              is to synthesize  new ternary compounds of the type A+ +  (MX)- , where M is a 
              transition metal, A = alkali or alkaline earth metal, and X  = semimetal or
              main group element. These new compounds can  be considered Zintl compounds if
              the d electrons are  localized on the metal and the bonding description remains
               the same. This strategy for the synthesis of new compounds  is unique to
              solid-state chemistry and is a directed  synthetic effort. In addition,
              transition metal pnictide  oxides will be synthesized and characterized. Unlike
              most  compounds containing a pnictogen and oxygen atom, there is  no bonding
              interactions between the two in these compounds.  They are layered materials
              and one might expect to find  unique properties associated with compounds that
              crystallize  in this structure type. New compounds will be characterized  by
              powder and single crystal x-ray and/op neutron  diffraction, resistivity versus
              temperature, magnetization  versus field and versus temperature,
              thermogravimetric  analysis, differential thermal analysis, epr, IR and UV-vis 
              spectroscopy.  %%%  This project will result in the synthesis of new compounds 
              that may exhibit novel magnetic and electronic properties  and will expand the
              knowledge concerning structure,  properties, and bonding of materials at the
              interface  between Zintl compounds and intermetallics. In addition, 
              structure-property relationships will be studied. Research  on ternary
              transition metal pnictides will provide new  insight on the development of
              solids with novel properties.  Pnictide  Oxides are a small class of compounds
              that have not  been well characterized to date.
