Title       : Surface Science of Semiconductor Nanocrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9505302

Award Number: 9505302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Paul Alivisatos alivis@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9505302  Alivisatos    Semiconductor nanocrystals are a new type of
              material exhibiting a  wide range of size dependent optical, electrical, and
              thermodynamic  properties. A great deal is now known about the interior 
              composition and structure of nanocrystals, but relatively little is  known
              about their interfaces. The aim of this work is to develop  the ability to
              control the composition and structure of  semiconductor nanocrystal interfaces.
              This is necessary before the  physics of quantum confinement can be understood
              and before the  technological promise of this class of materials can be
              assessed.  Two main tools will be used: 1) photoelectron spectroscopy and 
              related techniques, and 2)  infrared reflection-absorption  spectroscopy. Using
              an ordinary X-ray source, it will be possible  to routinely identify and
              potentially to manipulate the chemical  identity of the nanocrystal surface
              species. With the Advanced  Light Source synchrotron, it will be possible to
              perform  photoemission experiments at higher resolution and with variable 
              photon energy. These experiments will be targeted at measuring  average bond
              lengths, and the density of interior and surface  electronic states, both
              occupied and unoccupied. Infrared  reflection-absorption spectroscopy will be
              used to identify the  chemical species present, and the nature of their
              bonding. If the  nanocrystals can be oriented in the chemical deposition
              process,  then orientational information can also be extracted.  %%% 
              Semiconductor nanocrystals are a new type of material exhibiting a  wide range
              of size dependent optical, electrical, and thermodynamic  properties. The
              limiting factor scientifically and technologically  in the area of nanocrystals
              is inadequate understanding and control  of the nanocrystal surface. In optical
              spectroscopy, trap levels  associated with the interface strongly influence
              absorption and  emission linewidths and lifetimes. In electrical studies, all 
              carriers must pass through the interface. In thermo dynamic studies,  the fact
              that order 50% of the atoms are at the surface strongly  influences the phase
              diagrams. A great deal is now known about the  interior composition and
              structure of nanocrystals, but relatively  little is known about their
              interfaces. The objective of this work  is to construct a "surface science" of
              nanocrystals, just as there  is one for plane crystal surfaces.
