Title       : Cyclic Beta Glucans of the Rhizobiaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9505706

Award Number: 9505706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1097,9104,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9505706  Miller  Gram-negative bacteria accumulate high levels of
              oligosaccharides within their periplasmic compartments.  The biosynthesis of
              these oligosaccharides is strictly osmoregulated, and periplasmic
              concentrations may reach levels greater than 100 mM when cells are grown in
              hypoosmotic media.  The accumulation of these molecules has been shown to
              represent an adaptive strategy for growth in hypoosmotic environments, and it
              is believed that this accumulation provides a mechanism for the cell to
              regulate periplasmic volume.  In the proposed research program, Rhizobium
              meliloti will be used as a model bacterium to directly investigate the roles of
              the periplasmic oligosaccharides during hypoosmotic adaptation.  Three major
              objectives are proposed: 1) identification of new classes of R. meliloti
              mutants defective for periplasmic oligosaccharide biosynthesis; 2)
              characterization of R. meliloti periplasmic oligosaccharide mutants
              (hypoosmotic growth, periplasmic volume, and cell surface properties); 3)
              further characterization of periplasmic oligosaccharide biosynthesis by R.
              meliloti (osmotic regulation and transport).  The proposed studies will provide
              important insight concerning the nature of the microbial periplasm in the
              interactive dynamics of biological diversity of the rhizosphere and ecosystem
              stability involving essential microbe/plant host/parasite relationships.  %%% 
              Because biological membranes are freely permeable to water, all living cells
              must cope with changes in the availability of water in their environment.  This
              is particularly a problem for bacterial cells which directly encounter wide
              ranges of osmotic strength environments (e.g., from very dilute to hypersaline
              conditions).  Certain bacteria are further challenged by osmotic stress because
              they contain an outer cellular compartment called the periplasm.  The
              compartment is integrally linked to many fundamental cellular processes
              (including nutrient acquisition, protein export, and motility) and may
              represent up to 4 0% of the total cellular volume.  Nonetheless, understanding
              of the periplasm is surprisingly limited.  Recently, it was shown that a great
              diversity of bacteria accumulate high concentrations of structurally unique
              oligosaccharides (a class of carbohydrate) within their periplasmic
              compartments during growth in dilute environments.  Furthermore, it has been
              shown that a variety of biosynthetic pathways have evolved among bacterial to
              insure the synthesis and accumulation of periplasmic oligosaccharides. Although
              the precise functions of the periplasmic oligosaccharides remain undefined, it
              is generally believed that their accumulation provides a mechanism for the cell
              to regulate periplasmic volume when cells are stressed osmotically.  In the
              proposed research program, R. meliloti, an agriculturally important soil
              bacterium, will be used as a model microbe to directly investigate the roles of
              the periplsmic oligosaccharides during growth in osmotically stressed
              environments.  The results of this study will provide important information
              concerning the structure and function of the periplasm, a dynamic compartment
              linked to several important cellular processes.  ***
