Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods & Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1995      
File        : a9505021

Award Number: 9505021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. LeVeque rjl@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9139,9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The investigator develops multi-dimensional high resolution  finite volume
              methods for solving nonlinear hyperbolic systems of  conservation laws and
              related problems arising in a variety of  applications.  The public domain
              software package CLAWPACK  (Conservation LAWs PACKage) he has developed is
              extended to handle  a wider variety of problems on both Cartesian and
              curvilinear  grids in 1, 2, and 3 space dimensions.  Mosaic composite grids are
               further developed to allow body-fitted grids near an irregular  boundary to be
              coupled with Cartesian grids away from the  boundary.  Immersed interface
              methods for handling discontinuities  in the solution or its derivatives are
              used in conjunction with  multi-dimensional conservation law methods to solve
              fluid dynamics  and wave propagation problems with material interfaces.  These 
              techniques achieve second order accuracy on uniform Cartesian  grids cut by
              irregular interfaces.  Similar techniques are applied  to problems with stiff
              source terms arising from chemical  reactions or combustion, giving rise to
              thin reaction zones that  behave macroscopically as interfaces.  Specific
              applications in a  number of areas are studied, including groundwater flow, 
              atmospheric flow, chemotaxis, and astrophysics.  The software being  developed
              is intended for teaching as well as research purposes,  and includes extensive
              documentation and applied examples.  An  accompanying textbook is being
              written.         The investigator develops computational methods and public 
              domain software for the solution of a class of mathematical  problems that
              arises in virtually every field of science and  engineering.  The partial
              differential equations considered can, in  various forms, model the motion of
              liquids or gas (e.g., air in  the atmosphere, water in the ocean, aerodynamic
              flow around  aircraft or through turbines, groundwater or oil beneath the 
              earth's surface), or the motion of waves in fluid or air (e.g.,  acoustic waves
              in the air or ocean or in ultrasonic explor ation of  the body, seismic waves
              in the earth originating from earthquakes  or artificially generated for oil
              exploration, radar waves).  Even  the motion of organisms in ecological
              modeling or cells in  developmental biology follows similar laws.  The methods
              are based  on extensive research over the past 20 years, primarily in the 
              aerodynamics and weapons development communities.  This technology  is slowly
              being transferred to other areas, but is hindered by the  complexity of most of
              the algorithms.  The software of this project  should help speed this process. 
              It is designed for general use as  both a teaching and research tool, with
              extensive examples  included in many applications areas.  Novel methods are
              also  developed to deal with phenomena occurring on different time  scales
              (e.g., fast chemical reactions coupled with slow  groundwater or atmospheric
              flow) and for problems in geometrically  complicated regions of space bounded
              by irregular boundaries or  containing interfaces where material properties
              change (e.g.,  between different types of rock in groundwater flow and 
              seismology, or between bone and tissue in ultrasound imaging).  Close
              collaboration is underway with researchers in many areas  (particularly
              groundwater flow and atmospheric modeling), both to  improve and generalize the
              software and to use it in the solution  of specific problems.  An application
              of great interest is  contaminant transfer in groundwater flow, where linear or
               nonlinear advection in a porous medium with discontinuous  permeabilities and
              irregular geometries must often be coupled with  stiff source terms for
              adsorption and reactions.  Accurate models  are needed both as an aid to
              remediation of polluted sites and to  the study of proposed underground storage
              sites for nuclear waste.  Atmospheric modeling is crucial both in short-term
              weather  prediction and in long-range global modeling of climate, ozone 
              depletion, etc.  The investigator works with researchers in these  areas to
              incorporate this  software into standard models as well as  to develop new
              methods where needed.
