Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Synthesis of Carbon-11 Labeled
               Steroidal Androgen Receptor Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1995    
File        : a9505394

Award Number: 9505394
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas a. Bonasera bonasera@mirlink.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505394  Bonasera      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              provide partial support for a postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Thomas A.
              Bonasera to work with  Professor Bengt Roland Langstrom of Uppsala University
              PET  Centre in Sweden.  The initial ten months of research will  be supported
              by a Fulbright grant.  This award will allow  Dr. Bonasera to do a full year of
              research.    The purpose of this research project is to study the 
              radiochemical synthesis of carbon-11 labeled steroidal  androgen receptor
              ligands as potential imaging agents for  positron emission tomographic (PET)
              assessment of the  androgen receptor protein in men with prostate cancer. 
              Several androgen receptor ligands (steroids with high  affinity for the
              androgen receptor protein) will be  synthesized in the carbon-11 labeled form. 
              Some of them  will be labeled at two different positions with carbon-11.  The
              main objective is to develop efficient reaction  conditions for the carbon-11
              radiolabeling of these  steroids, to optimize the reaction yields in each step
              of  the synthesis, and to select one or more of the ligands for  further future
              study as a PET imaging agent. ***
