Title       : Applications of State Resolved Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9505032

Award Number: 9505032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Setser setserdw@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1318,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Donald   Setser
              of Kansas State University will study state-resolved dynamics and   kinetics of
              phase species important in combustion and atmospheric   chemistry.  Various
              spectroscopic methods will be used to prepare   reactants and observe product
              state distributions.  Infrared   chemiluminescence will be used to study
              products from  atom-radical and   radical-radical reactions,  identify
              mechanisms, and determine overall   rate constants.  Electronic emission and
              laser induced fluorescence will   be used to study the mechanism and state
              distributions of rare gas halide   molecules produced by two-photon laser
              assisted reactions. These studies   will compare the state distributions of
              products resulting from   collisions in dilute gas mixtures with those obtained
              from reactions   within a prepared van der Waals molecule.  The results of
              these   investigations will be interpreted in terms of dynamical models which  
              have been developed for certain types of gas phase reactions and the   insights
              obtained will be used to understand more complex reactive   systems.   Radicals
              are highly reactive, usually unstable molecules which are   present in high
              concentration in energetic chemical reactors such as   combustion systems. 
              Reactions of radicals are also important in the   mechanisms responsible for
              the depletion of the ozone layer and global   warming.  Professor Setser's
              investigations will provide information   about the elementary reactions
              involved in these mechanisms, and the   nature and energy content of the
              species produced by these reactions.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
