Title       : Survey of Brazilian Amazonian Lizards, Snakes, Amphisbaenians, Anurans, and
               Their Arthropod Prey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9505518

Award Number: 9505518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie J. Vitt vitt@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janalee P. Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Frogs, lizards, snakes, and a wide diversity of arthropods including, but not
              restricted  to insects, spiders, mites, centipedes, millipedes, isopods,
              amblypygids, scorpions, and  pseudoscorpions, will be surveyed at three remote
              sites in the Amazon region of western Brazil.  Exact  localities for individual
              specimens will be determined using a global positioning system. Field  protocol
              will involve sampling the herpetofauna and using the stomach contents of
              lizards and frogs as  samples of the invertebrate fauna.  Lizards and formsg
              engulf their prey whole, and the large majority  of these arthropods (85-90%)
              are in perfect or near-perfect condition.  Tissues will be taken form all 
              species of the herpetofauna.  Herpetological specimens will be deposited in
              collections of the  Oklahoma Museum of Natural History (OMNH) in the United
              States and the Museu Paraense Emilo Goeldi (MPEG) in Belem, Para, Brazil, and
              all invertebrates will be initially deposited in the collections at the MPEG.
              For herpetological specimens, field research, identifications, descriptions of
              new taxa, and  production of an  Internet accessible database will be a
              collaborative effort between the PIs and  Brazilian scientists.  Tissue samples
              will be deposited in the tissue collection of the American  Museum of Natural
              History (AMNH) and will be available to all qualified investigators.  A
              database,  accessible via Internet, will be designed to provide accurate and
              continually updated species lists,  localities, and references to ecological
              data including lists of arthropod taxa removed from stomachs.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
