Title       : Nuclear Excitation by Single-Quantum Annihilation of Positrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9505886

Award Number: 9505886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose C. Palathingal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin G. Lynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lester D. Hulett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Palakkal Asoka-Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505886  Palathingal  When the electromagnetic energy released as a positron
              gets  annihilated in flight with a bound atomic electron in the Coulomb  field
              of the nucleus, meets the energy criterion for resonance  absorption, the
              excitation of the nucleus could be a possible  result.  There are major
              discrepancies between the results of  calculations of this phenomenon and the
              available experimental  data.  The various experiments conducted so far have
              all suffered  from common disadvantages.  They utilized whole spectra of 
              positrons derived from radioactive sources and thick targets.  Metastable
              states of the nucleus were studied for periods of a  few life times.  The
              results were not accurate, and were prone to  ambiguities for interpretation. 
              In view of this, experiments  have been called for that would use monoenergetic
              positrons and  thin targets.  Such studies will be undertaken utilizing the 
              Dynamitron at Brookhaven and at ORELA at Oak Ridge National Lab.  Short-lived
              states will be studied, that would make a continuous-  running beam experiment
              possible.  Thin targets of varied  thickness will be used.  Secondary effects
              that might contribute  to the nuclear excitation alongside the single-quantum 
              annihilation, proposed by differing theoretical models,  would be  explored. 
              It is expected that data could be derived that would  be accessible for
              unambiguous interpretation, and would lead to  a clear understanding of the
              physical processes underlying the  phenomenon.  ***
