Title       : International Nathiaghali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary
               Needs/Energy and Sustainable Development, June 22 to July 13, 1995, US-Pakistan
               Joint Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9505603

Award Number: 9505603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Toufiq A. Siddiqi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Cult&Tech Interchange
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96801    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              13        Physics                                 
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This project supports the participation of a delegation of US
              scientists and engineers in `The Nathiaghali Summer College on Physics and
              Contemporary Needs/Energy, Environment and Sustainable Development` planned for
              June 22 to July 13, 1995 in Nathiaghali, Pakistan.  The Program is for three
              weeks:  The first week is for discussions on `frontiers of physics` including
              fundamental structure of matter, astrophysics and cosmology, and advances in
              condensed matter physics; the second week is for `energy, environment and
              sustainable development` including energy sources, demand and supply, energy
              technology innovations, and energy and the environment; and the third week is
              for `energy safety systems` including risk benefit assessment in energy
              systems, reactor safety and the environment, and reliability enhancements in
              power reactors.  The participants include speakers from the United States,
              Europe, and Pakistan, and attendees from China, India, Central Asia, the Middle
              East, as well as from Pakistan.  The participants will include university
              faculty members and graduate students.  Proceedings will be published, covering
              the presentations and the important results of discussions.  Scope:  This
              project supports US scientists' participation in one of the most successful
              regional meetings that attract strong participation from most of the developing
              countries in Asia, especially South and Central Asia, and also from China,
              South East Asia and Africa, and some participation from Latin America.   The
              speakers from the US and from the European countries contribute to the
              extensive exchange of information, and gain from interacting with the
              scientists from the various developing countries represented.  Partial support
              for the meeting comes from a number of sources including the Government of
              Pakistan, the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, the
              Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the Islamic Educational,  Scientific and
              Cultural Organization.  The meeting is likely to contribute to advancing
              science in the developing countries, and to help US scientists by increasing
              their interaction with these developing countries and their abilities to
              advance US scientific interests.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
