Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Efficient Numerical Methods for Large Reynolds Number
               Unsteady Viscous Incompressible Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9505275

Award Number: 9505275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Guo Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    EFFICIENT NUMERICAL METHODS FOR LARGE REYNOLDS NUMBER                  
              UNSTEADY VISCOUS INCOMPRESSIBLE FLOWS                               Jian-Guo
              Liu   Project Summary:    The investigator proposes to develop and analyze
              efficient, accurate, and reliable numerical methods for unsteady viscous
              incompressible flows in the presence of boundaries with large Reynolds number,
              in hopes of simulating directly wall-generated turbulence. Efficient numerical
              computations of 3-D incompressible flow are currently far behind the practical
              needs. Indeed, even some very basic issues in formulating a numerical method
              are unsettled whenever boundaries are present, such as the correct numerical
              boundary conditions for the vorticity and efficient 3-D formulation.  Some
              connections between different types of vorticity boundary formulations, such as
              local via global and the MAC scheme via Thom's formula, have already been found
              by this investigator and his collaborator Weinan E.  With explicit treatment of
              the vorticity term and high-order (essentially) compact difference approach,
              they recently introduced a very efficient fourth order scheme in
              vorticity-stream function (vector) formulation, together with a complete
              convergence theory. The investigator proposes to continue developing efficient
              and accurate numerical methods for the three dimensional computation using both
              the vorticity-stream function and vorticity-velocity formulations.  The
              investigator also plans to conduct a systematic study of statistical behavior
              and coherent structure of some 2-D and 3-D wall-bounded turbulence flows such
              as the driven cavity flow, backward-facing step flow, etc.  and carry out a
              detailed numerical comparison with the homogeneous isotropic turbulence
              simulations. Extensive work has been done on direct simulation of isotropic
              turbulence in wall-free flows, much less work has involved wall-bounded
              turbulence.  However, most turbulence is generated at the walls.   
              Understanding turbulent flows is a grand challenge comp arable to other
              prominent scientific problems such as the large-scale structure of the universe
              and the nature of subatomic particles. In contrast to many of the other grand
              challenges, progress on the basic theory of turbulence translates nearly
              immediately into a wide range of engineering applications and technological
              advances that affect many aspects of everyday life. Direct numerical simulation
              for Navier-Stokes equation is an effective tool that complements experimental
              and theoretical investigation of turbulence.  The investigator proposes to
              study two problems in the field: (1) Developing efficient, robust and reliable
              numerical methods for viscous incompressible flows in domains with solid
              boundaries, especially in the cases with large Reynolds number. (2) Using these
              methods to study statistical behavior and coherent structure of two and three
              dimensional wall-bounded turbulence via direct numerical simulations.
