Title       : Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9505216

Award Number: 9505216
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Lieberman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              EAR-9515216  Lieberman, Bruce S.    The proposed research addresses the
              fundamental problem of the role that ecological communities play in governing
              the evolution of life on earth.   The Cambrian radiation is ideally suited as a
              paleontological system for studying this process because of the rapid pace of
              diversification, and because it marks the first appearance of marine
              communities and complex ecosystems containing diverse animals.  To explore the
              relationship between paleoecological and evolutionary patterns and processes
              during the Cambrian, the Fellow will compare those patterns with those
              documented from later time periods while considering the environmental changes
              that accompanied the radiation.  Specifically, did the evolutionary rules
              governing the rapid Cambrian radiation when complex communities were absent
              differ fundamentally from rules that operated later when communities were well
              established?  The Fellow will draw upon his own expertise from the study of
              Devonian fossil lineages; he will apply paleoenvironmental analyses and
              multivariate statistical analyses of data on species distributions to identify
              paleocommunities and recurrent assemblages, and determine if they are stable or
              fluctuating with time.  The study will increase understanding of the unique
              event in Earth history when animals began to diversify, and it will elucidate
              the role communities play in diversification and extinction.
