Title       : Purchase of High Speed Multi-processor Computer with Parallel Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9505522

Award Number: 9505522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiji Morokuma morokuma@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis C. Liotta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9215,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities   Program
              will assist the Department of Chemistry at Emory University in   the purchase
              of a parallel computational facility.  This equipment will   enhance research
              in a number of areas including the following:  A.    Potential Energy Surfaces,
              Reaction Rates and Mechanisms, and Dynamics of   Combustion Related Reactions
              and Other Reactions.  B.  Combined `ab   initio Molecular Orbital + Molecular
              Mechanics` Studies of Reactions of   Complicated `Real` Molecular Systems.  C. 
              Ab initio theoretical studies   of elementary reactions involving excited
              states of molecules.  D.  Ab   initio theoretical studies of structures and
              reactions of transition   metal atoms, ions, complexes and cluster complexes. 
              E.  Simulation and   Computational Approach to Condensed Matter Chemistry.  F. 
              Theory and   Computation of the Dynamics and Vibrations of Molecules.  G.  The 
               collision dynamics of radicals.    Multi-processor computers with parallel
              capability are being used more,   with the advent of parallel computing codes
              and are being integrated into   existing workstation clusters.  The most
              important feature of a network   is that it can simultaneously satisfy
              departmental computing needs, serve   as a development environment for new
              theoretical codes and algorithms,   provide state of the art graphics and
              visualization facilities, and   support research in state-of-the-art
              applications of parallel processing   for the entire department.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
