Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Methods for Nonlinear Inference in Time
               Series with Stochastic Variance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9505109

Award Number: 9505109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas G. Polson ngp@gsbngp.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9505109  PI:  Nick Polson  Institution:  University of Chicago 
              Title:  Statistical Methods for Nonlinear Inference in Time Series with
              Stochastic Variance       Abstract:     This project develops and applies
              hierarchical statistical models for  nonlinear inference problems to the new
              areas of multivariate data with  stochastic variance as well as nonnormal
              errors. Previous research  by Jacquier, Polson and Rossi (1994) has shown that
              this methodology is   better than the usual statistical methods, such as
              generalized methods of   moments, for the case of normal univariate stochastic
              variance. This research  utilizes Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques and
              hierarchical modeling to  construct and implement a methodology for inference
              which incorporates  multivariate stochastic variance and nonnormality. Within
              this methodology,  it is straightforward to examine the effects of alternative
              assumptions  such as different error distributions on the resulting inferences.
              In addition,  the project develops an outlier diagnostic procedure to be used
              in the presence  of stochastic variance.      This research develops a general
              methodology for analyzing time series data,   such as stock prices, interest
              rates and other financial series, where variance,   or volatility, changes over
              time. Until recently, such data were analyzed assuming  either constant
              variance or variance changing according to a predetermined pattern.  Recent
              statistical work has shown that a better way of analyzing these data is to  
              assume randomly changing variance. This approach is known as stochastic
              variance   (or volatility) time series  modeling. This research provides a more
              general  framework for analyzing these models which does not rely on the usual
              limiting  assumptions of existing methodologies. A number of statistical tools
              are provided to   analyze the data within the stochastic variance framework.
              The methodology developed  in this research presents an improved way to analyze
              time series data, and severa l  examples based on financial time series are
              included.
