Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Synthesis of Vitamin D3 Metabolites and their Analogues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1995       
File        : a9505318

Award Number: 9505318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6150               (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvador G. Alvarez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the  Promotion of Science
              Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Salvador G. Alvarez, Department of Chemistry,
              University of California, Santa Cruz.  This fellowship opportunity will enable
              Dr. Alvarez to begin a collaborative research effort with Professor Isao
              Shimizu, Department of Applied Chemistry, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan.  The
              investigators propose a new method for the convergent asymmetric synthesis of
              1-alpha, 25-dihydroxy-vitamin-D3 via the synthesis of the CD-ring fragment. 
              This analogue of vitamin-D3 is an active steroid hormone and is a leading drug
              candidate for treating osteoporosis, a common disease with older populations. 
              The proposed project provides a general synthesis of vitamin-D3 metabolites and
              their analogues for the exploration of structure activity relationship studies.
              This 12-month visit by Dr. Alvarez will provide him with a potential for future
              collaborative activities between the United States and Japan. As a postdoctoral
              fellow,  Dr. Alvarez will have the opportunity to become familiar  with novel
              research  methodologies and steroid chemistry at Waseda University while
              contributing to the overall research effort.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills
              the objectives of the program in its exchange and transfer of scientific 
              knowledge through an international collaboration.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
