Title       : Spatial Geometric Constraint Solving Using Constructive Geometry and Homotopy
               Continuation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9505745

Award Number: 9505745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Hoffmann cmh@cs.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elisha Sacks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The project develops the theory and implementation of a  practical spatial
              geometric constraint solver that integrates    symbolic methods  from
              constructive geometry with numerical  methods from   homotopy continuation 
              theory.  Geometric constraint  solvers are a key component in   modern
              Mechanical  Computer-Aided  Design systems, and offer a critical   technology
              for increased  productivity, rapid response manufacturing, and agile   
              manufacturing.  Effective  solvers exist for planar constraints,  but spatial
              problems   of moderate size  exceed the capabilities of  many research solvers.
               The   solver being developed  will cover the  broad class of problems
              specified by   distance, angle, and  incidence constraints among points, lines,
              and planes.  It   will  solve small  problems interactively and problems of
              moderate size  in a   few seconds.  Using a  constraint graph whose nodes
              represent  elements and whose   edges represent  constraints, a constraint 
              analysis will decompose the   constraint problem into a  series of  small
              construction problems that can be solved   efficiently using  preprocessing. 
              Elementary constructions will be carried out    algebraically,  more complex
              construction steps by homotopy  continuation.    The hybrid algorithm  combines
              the robustness and  completeness of symbolic methods   with the  uniformity and
               efficiency of numerical methods.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
