Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Estimation: New Tools, New Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9505151

Award Number: 9505151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iain M. Johnstone imj@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Donoho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS  95- 05151  PI(s):   Iain Johnstone - 1981, David Donoho - 1984   
                  Institution: Stanford     Title:   Adaptive Estimation, New Tools, New
              Settings         Abstract:     The research develops fundamental tools in
              theoretical statistics to aid  understanding of such adaptive procedures, and
              shows how to tune them   so they are noise-cognizant and stable. Underlying the
              approach are  a) the idea of oracles, which know perfectly well how to adapt
              representations   ideally,  b) the idea that the goal of adaptation in the
              presence of noisy data is to   quantify how closely realizable procedures
              (which do not have privileged   information about the object) can mimic an
              oracle,  and c) the design of   procedures coming as close as possible to the
              oracle.  The project  also develops  methods for comparing different adaptation
              schemes by comparing  oracles of different kinds, for example time-frequency
              oracles  and time-scale oracles.  This is an outgrowth of our earlier   results
              on wavelets, where this approach was used to show that wavelets  have a
              property of being nearly-ideally spatially adaptive.  In addition a 
              computational environment is being developed for   implementing and
              systematically testing such approaches.     As a further outgrowth of the
              proposers' earlier work on wavelets,  the project studies a number of
              improvements and extensions  of wavelet shrinkage, for example in the
              directions of classification,  confidence bands, correlated data and selection
              of orthogonal bases.    This research seeks to develop statistical theory  and
              computational tools in the general area of adaptive methods of  representing
              and analyzing signals, images and other objects.  On the one hand, this project
              is prompted by the extremely  high interest in adaptation on the part of people
              working  in fields of signal processing, image processing,   time-frequency
              analysis, speech processing analysis.  New signal representations appear in
              these fields almost daily,  along with new principles fo r selecting
              representations.  Such representations are useful for data compression, which
              is not  the main interest here; but they are also useful for noise removal and 
               signal interpretation, which are important areas for statisticians to
              consider.  On the other hand, this project is prompted by the goal  of
              developing statistical theory which can give clear understanding  of such
              adaptive schemes. Some of the most highly adaptive schemes  being suggested in
              signal processing pose a real challenge  to traditional statistical thinking. 
              For example, some adaptation schemes   search (either explicitly or implicitly)
              through thousands or millions of  representations of a signal in order to
              arrive at their final result.  A statistician,  when thinking about applying
              such methods to a noisy signal, is by training   forced to ask to what extent
              the result merely reflects the  effects of snooping through noise, detecting
              pseudo-structure which actually  due to noise, and due to the vigorous search. 
              The research seeks to develop  fundamental tools in theoretical statistics to
              aid understanding of  such adaptive procedures, and shows how to tune them so
              they are  noise-cognizant and stable.  This project may have two spin-offs. 
              First,  some of the results may be stimulating and/or useful to  the community
              of ``inventors of adaptive procedures'' in  signal, image, speech, and
              time/frequency, and related communities.  Second, the theoretical work may
              stimulate statisticians to take  more interest in making further contributions
              in such directions.
