Title       : CARRER: Estimation of Fracture Aperture Distributions From Wellbore Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9505773

Award Number: 9505773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Renshaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505773  Renshaw    Fractures are recognized as important component of many
              subsurface flow systems.  Consequently, an understanding of the hydrogeologic
              characteristics of fractures directly affects our ability to model such
              important societal problems as waste isolation, ore deposit genesis, natural
              resource recovery, and aquifer remediation.  Over the past decade, numerous
              investigators have used theoretical, numerical and experimental methods to
              attempt to understand the flow and transport characteristics of individual
              fractures.  While the experimental and conceptual models of the fracture
              geometry used by each of these investigators differs, the basic conclusion
              reached by each is the same; that flow and transport through an individual
              fracture is primarily controlled by the fracture apertures within the fracture
              plane and , in particular, the mean and variance of the fracture aperture
              distribution.    Unfortunately, little data are available on the distribution
              of fracture apertures in a single fracture.  Further, it is unclear to what
              extent fracture aperture data obtained from surficial exposures or laboratory
              samples, which have been subject to unloading and /or stress concentrations due
              to blasting, represent the in situ distribution of fracture apertures.  Thus
              the primary objective of the proposed work is to develop and experimentally
              test an indirect.in situ distribution of fracture apertures.  Thus the primary
              objective of the proposed work is to develop and experimentally test an
              indirect, in situ, technique for estimating the distribution of fracture
              apertures based on three different types of wellbore data: direct aperture
              measurement, hydraulic head measurements and tracer arrival time times.  For
              flow and transport through a very simple fracture in an impermeable matrix, the
              proposed estimation procedure is demonstrated to predict the distribution of
              fracture apertures with a reasonable degree of accuracy.  In order to adapt
              this procedure to real fractures, the possible diff usion and sorption of the
              tracer into and onto the fracture walls and rock matrix needs to be considered.
               Testing the estimation procedure on a laboratory scale sample with a
              measureable aperture distribution is also proposed.  Such a test of the
              technique is a necessary prerequisite for the application of the estimation
              procedure to field data.   The proposed research complements the education
              objectives as both seek to further integrate the tools and techniques of
              engineering hydrolgeology with more traditional geological analyses.  For
              example, one of the education goals is to redesign the introductory
              hydrogeology curriculum to more thoroughly integrate the engineering and
              geological aspects of the field.  This includes the development of exercises
              and interactive computer-based laboratories which require the students to
              interpret and analyze geologic data before they begin to model the hydrogeology
              of the system.  Additionally, the introductory course is being redesigned to
              include many of the more recent engineering analyses not found in traditional
              courses.  These include discussions on such topics as slope and fault
              stability, geostatistics, linear estimation and uncertainty, and optimization
              and management.  The goal is not only to demonstrate the many different aspects
              of modern hydrogeology, but also to give the students sufficient background
              that they might apply these tools to problems in other geoscience fields beyond
              hydrogeology.
