Title       : Surface Chemistry of Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9505501

Award Number: 9505501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Schwartz jschwartz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1762,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials  
              Research, Schwartz and Bernasek will study the preparation and structural  
              elucidation of interfaces between oxided metal or metal oxide surfaces   and
              organometallic complex-derived overlayers.  This research combines   aspects of
              organometallic chemistry and surface science.  Methods will be   developed for
              activation of surfaces of conductors or insulators by   introduction of -OH
              groups.  The reaction of metal atoms or   organometallic complexes with these
              surface groups will be studied and   contrasted with solution analogs.  It will
              be possible to create various   types of mixed overlayers in specific and
              reproducible ways. These   interfacial layers will covalently bond between
              components of the   composite.  Investigations will be performed in parallel on
              bulk oxide or   nitrogen analog substrates under ambient and ultra-high vacuum
              using   single crystal supports.  The use of characterizable single crystal  
              materials will enable an investigation of the precise nature and extent   of
              covalent interaction between the overlayer and the surface of the   support. 
              %%%  Development of methodology for synthesis of surface-bound species, and  
              application of surface analytical techniques to analogous bulk and film  
              supports, will augment our understanding of materials synthesis and   interface
              structure at the microscopic level. Such information forms a   basis for
              understanding mesoscopic physical and chemical interfacial   properties of
              increasing importance as electronics and optoelectronics   components become
              smaller and more complex.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
