Title       : RUI: Ubiquitin Mediated Degradation of Picornavirus Processing Proteases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9505810

Award Number: 9505810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Lawson tlawson@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              t  9      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       f!      O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    ?W  9  
              ?W  9                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                    Oh     +'  0             
                                       $       H       l                                     
                       D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       jack cohen 
                                      jack cohen                  @     x7 9                 
                      @      O  e =       e                   f!                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  C          
                                                                      I       K       K      
              K       i                           T   >!  (                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                I                                            
                                                I           /                                
                                                                              Thomas G.
              Lawson                                                  MCB 9505810 PRIVATE    
              The genomes of picornaviruses encode a single large polyprotein, which is
              synthesized upon infection of the host cell. This polyprotein is processed into
              individual functional proteins by a series of specific cleavages, most of which
              are catalyzed by a protein designated as the 3C protease, which resides in the
              polyprotein. The 3C protease of the encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus has been
              found to be rapidly turned over, and it has been shown that this degradation is
              carried out, at least in vitro, by the ubiquitin mediated proteolytic system.
              This system, which appears to be responsible for the rapid turnover of a number
              of key regula tory cellular proteins in eukaryotes, has yet to be completely
              characterized, and very few natural substrates have thus far been discovered.
              The identification of the EMC virus 3C protease as a substrate for rapid,
              ubiquitin- mediated proteolysis means that this protein can be used both as a
              model for the study of rapid viral protein degradation and for studies of
              important questions about how proteins are recognized by the ubiquitin mediated
              system. The project proposed here will examine in detail the biochemical
              mechanisms by which ubiquitin mediated degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease
              occurs, with the primary overall goal being to obtain information which might
              contribute to the understanding of how proteins are recognized by enzymes of
              the ubiquitin- mediated system. This will be accomplished by preparing site
              specific and deletion mutants of the 3C protease coding sequence. A rabbit
              reticulocyte system will be employed to test whether the altered, in vitro
              synthesized proteins can serve as substrates for ubiquitin mediated
              degradation. This will lead to the identification of a specific, previously
              unrecognized, protein "degradation" signal. A protein affinity technique will
              be employed to purify, from reticulocyte preparations, what is probably a novel
              ubiquitin system enzyme which recognizes the EMC virus 3C protease, presumably
              by binding to the degradation signal. Other proteins of the ubiquitin system
              which have been purified by other researchers will also be tested for their
              potential involvement in the degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease. These
              experiments will contribute to the understanding of how the ubiquitin mediated
              proteolytic system functions.  Other proposed experiments will be directed
              toward determining whether the in vivo degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease
              is ubiquitin mediated, and whether this degradation is necessary for efficient
              replication of the virus to take place. The stability of this mutated 3C
              protease in cultured mouse cells will be tested, and  this will show whether
              degradation in vivo requires the ubiquitin system. The possibility that the
              poliovirus 3C protease is also degraded by the ubiquitin mediated system will
              be tested. It will be determined if cultured human cell cytoplasmic extracts
              can support the degradation of the poliovirus 3C protease in a ubiquitin
              dependent manner. A positive result here would support the notion that all
              picornavirus 3C proteases are substrates for the ubiquitin- mediated
              proteolytic system. %%% Most short lived proteins in eukaryotes appear to be
              degraded by a system which selectively targets them for destruction through the
              attachment of the small protein ubiquitin. Very little is known about how this
              system actively selects only certain proteins. One major goal of this project
              is to explore how the ubiquitin system interacts with and targets a rapidly
              degraded protein, the 3C protease, which is produced by the
              encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus during infections of host cells. Attempts are
              underway to both locate particular structural features which cause this protein
              to serve as a substrate for ubiquitin mediated degradation, and to identify the
              specific components of the ubiquitin system which are involved. It is likely
              this knowledge will help explain how other unstable proteins are rapidly
              degraded. A second question this project seeks to answer is whether the rapid
              degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease is necessary for the replication of
              the virus. This may represent a novel means by which virus life cycles are
              regulated. Finally, the 3C protease of poliovirus is being evaluated as a
              potential substrate for ubiquitin mediated degradation, which will help to
              determine if instability is a common feature of all 3C protease type proteins.
              ***                                 @
