Title       : Development of Conducting Polymer Ion Selective Microelectrodes for Use in
               Environmental and Biomedical Analyses, US-Egypt Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9505498

Award Number: 9505498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Bishop pbishop@boss.cee.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports cooperation between Drs. Paul Bishop,
              Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Harry Mark, Department
              of Chemistry, at the University of Cincinnati, and Dr. Ahmed G. Abdo,
              Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Cairo.  The target
              of the proposed work will be the analytical applications of conducting polymers
              as anion and biological molecule sensors in a 3-electrode set-up and in flow
              systems, as well as ion selective electrodes and preconcentration devices. 
              Typical examples of these applications are in the fields of anion determination
              for water quality and pollution control and the determination of some
              biological molecules of biomedical and industrial interest.  Conducting
              polymers and functionalized polymers prepared by chemical and electrochemical
              synthesis will be used.  It is hoped to develop novel analytical techniques in
              the fields of anion, cation and molecular analyses where novel detectors are
              needed for aqueous environmental and biomedical samples, which are of primary
              concern in the U.S. and in Egypt.  Conducting polymer micro-electrodes will
              also be designed for effective in vivo analysis in human body fluids and inter-
              or intra-cellular examinations.  The latter application has not been
              extensively exploited and productive efforts are anticipated.      Scope:  This
              project will allow a cooperative activity between Dr. Mark who has expertise in
              electrochemistry and organic polymers; Dr. Bishop whose expertise is in
              biodegradation of toxic organics and transport in biofilms, and Dr. Abdo who is
              a recent Ph.D. (from U. Cincinnati) with expertise in analytical applications
              of polymers and chemical sensors, as well as electrochemistry. The project
              involves a visit by Dr. Abdo to Cincinnati for two months, and one visit by a
              US participant to Cairo in each of three years.  The results of the research
              could have some profound applications, and could lead to economic and
              environmental benefits, for both countries.    The project meets the objectives
              of the Division of International Programs in linking US scientists with foreign
              scientists when the expertise and capabilities are complementary, and where the
              project could lead to long term collaboration and to mutually beneficial
              results.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
