Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Certain Set-Theoretic Principles and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9505098

Award Number: 9505098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Koszmider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505098  Koszmider       The method of forcing invented by Paul Cohen brought
              Godel's result  into the realm of mainstream mathematics: some problems on
              Banach spaces,   Lebesgue measure, or Whitehead groups are undecidable.  As the
              continuum   hypothesis seems far from the basic properties of Lebesgue
              integral, these   principles seem far away from mathematical practice. 
              However, as in the   case of the continuum hypothesis, they affect the standard
              objects of modern   mathematics.  Set-theorists are developing a network of
              infinitary   combinatorial principles that provide answers to otherwise
              unsolvable   problems.  Some of these principles involve the existence of
              two-cardinal   combinatorial objects (e.g., morasses, or families of sets whose
              existence   is equivalent to the existence of morasses); these objects may be
              viewed as   generalizations of cardinals.  Although constructions which employ
              these   structures are usually more complicated than constructions by the usual
                transfinite induction, they may be necessary in more complicated  
              situations.  The first objective of the project is to extend and develop   new
              canonical methods of applying Velleman's simplified morasses for   constructing
              structures in Boolean algebras, topology and other fields.  A   second
              objective is to develop new methods of constructing forcing  notions using
              two-cardinal combinatorial principles.  These forcing notions   are used
              directly for proving undecidability.  If the new combinatorial   methods are
              applied to forcing theory, this may result in a series of new   consistency
              results in pure set theory as well as in its applications.  The   third
              objective is to introduce relatively manageable principles equivalent   to
              higher gap morasses and develop methods of applying them to the theory   of
              Boolean algebras, topology and other fields.  Koszmider has selected  
              well-known open problems from various fields as test cases, conjecturing   that
              some of these can be solved using the above new methods.        Mathematics is
              the language of science.  Scientific problems are  translated into formal,
              precise and abstract mathematical problems.   Mathematical machinery provides
              solutions to these problems and gives   blueprints (known as theorems) that
              provide conclusions to given   assumptions.  Proving theorems is what
              mathematics is all about; theorems   directly or indirectly affect the way we
              formulate and solve scientific   problems.  Is proving theorems a perfect
              method?  No!  In 1930, Godel showed   that in any reasonable system of
              mathematics there will be conjectures which   will never be decided and probems
              that will never be solved, unless we add   new axioms in the foundations of
              mathematics.  Are these unsolvable problems   only artificial logical
              constructions?  No!  In 1964, Paul Cohen invented  the method of forcing, which
              since then has been used for demonstating   unsolvability of many problems of
              mainstream mathematics.  We need to know   what problems are unsolvable and
              what extra assumptions in the foundations   of mathematics (new axioms) make
              them solvable.  Based on his work in the   field and on partial research,
              Koszmider conjectures that certain   combinatorial principles will provide a
              new method for demonstrating   unsolvability of a large collection of important
              problems.  These principles   could thus serve as extra axioms.  These problems
              arise in various parts of   mathematics, such as infinitary combilatorics,
              Boolean algebra, and   topology.  Koszmider plans to formalize this underlying
              theme and to prove   its relation to classical principles in order to use them
              efficiently.  ***
