Title       : Algorithm Design and Implementation for Parallel Scientific Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9505472

Award Number: 9505472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Miller glmiller@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,9218,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project applies parallel algorithm design theory   problems  arising from
              scientific problems governed by   partial differential  equations.  Most of the
              effort is restricted to solving    algorithmic problems including mesh
              generation and    partitioning.  This project  develops algorithms and code for
               the solution of scientific   problems that  are highly unstructured  and whose
              solution may be rapidly   changing with time.  Thus, the  emphasis is on
              parallel mesh generation algorithms   that will  run on parallel machines in
              conjunction with the system   solvers.  The project also  continues to improve
              the parallel efficiency of linear    system solvers and will  extend the work
              on combinatorial  approaches to the   construction of good  preconditioners for
              linear  system solvers.  These are used   to speedup the  convergence rate  of
              iterative methods.    A central approach   taken by this  project for the
              design of new  algorithms for problems such   as mesh generation  and 
              preconditioner construction is to use the fact that the    graphs for these
              problems have small separators that  can be   quickly found.  Under prior
              projects partially supported  by NSF, algorithms   were discovered and 
              developed to partition,  for instance, finite element meshes   into roughly two
               equal size  pieces by removing a small number of elements.    This work is 
              referred to as the geometric approach to separators.  The    geometric approach
               quickly produces provably good partitions for  finite element   meshes.  This 
              project intends to show how the role  of mesh generation   methods and
              separator  technology can be  reversed.  In particular, good mesh   generation
              methods are  being developed which use the separator technology.  This  
              technology  will also be  used in the construction of good iterative methods 
              for   solving these underlying  systems.    Further improvements are being made
              in the   geometric separator algorithms via experimental and analytic  
              methods.  Relationships  between the geometric method and   other known
              algorithms and  methods, such as spectral,  are being investigated.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
