Title       : Ecologic Novelty in Taxonomic Diversification: Evolution of Photosymbiosis in
               Planktic Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9505836

Award Number: 9505836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Norris rnorris@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Norris  9505836     The relationship between ecologica and morphological
              diversification is currently much in debate.  There is an increasing body of
              work that suggests that much speciation occurs in the absence of any change in
              ecology.  This paradigm suggests that most speciation takes place by the
              passive erection of barriers to dispersal.  In contrast, concepts such as
              "adaptive zone" imply that much speciation occurs when taxa evolve "key
              innovations" that permit them to scale unoccupied adative peaks.  From this
              perspective, diversification is an active process mediated by changes in
              ecological strategies.   Research will focus on phylogenetic and ecologic study
              of the globigerinid clade--the largest exant group of photosymbiotic
              foraminifera.  The proposed study will use stable isotope methods to deduce the
              occurrence of photosymbiosis in extinct foraminifera and then map this
              ecological information onto a phylogenetic tree.  It should be easy to disprove
              the key-innovation hypothesis if the results demonstrate that symbiosis was
              acquired long before or after the globigerinid radiation began or if
              photosymbiotic and non-symbiotic sister groups have similar evolutionary
              histories.  Moreover, any linkage between symbiosis and taxonomic
              diversification can be tested by comparing patterns of radiation in symbiotic
              and non-symbiotic sister groups in Neogene globigerinids with a mostly complete
              data set for the photosymbiotic Paleocene morozovellids.  The results may
              provide insights on the evolutionary role of photosymbiosis in other groups as
              well as chemosymbiosis in mollusc and other invertebrates.
