Title       : Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9505007

Award Number: 9505007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Eddy bill@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Genovese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9505007  PI(s):  William Eddy, Chris Genovese  Institution: 
              Carnegie Mellon University  Title:  Statisitcal Methods for the Analysis of
              Functional Magnetic Resonance             Imaging Data     Abstract:  This
              research involves the development of new statistical methods for the  analysis
              and interpretation of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)  data.  Such
              data can be viewed as the realization of a spatio-temporal  process with a very
              complicated distributional structure.  Models in  current use are grossly
              simplified for both mathematical and computational  expediency.  The
              statistical challenges in constructing more realistic  models are difficult and
              manifold.  Many revolve around understanding the  nature of the noise in the
              measurements and its effect on successfully  detecting regions of neural
              activation.  Noise in the data shows  significant spatial and temporal
              correlations that depend strongly on how  the data are collected.  Outliers are
              common, and there are strong sources  of systematic variation such as the
              subject's respiratory and cardiac  cycles.  Variances in the images depend
              nonlinearly on the means, and the  observed absolute levels of activation tend
              to shift between sessions  because of subject movement.  Moreover, all of these
              difficulties occur for  data collected from a single subject; the situation
              becomes much more  complicated if comparisons across subjects are attempted. 
              This research  focusses on three general problems in the statistical analysis
              of fMRI  data: 1. The characterization of the response to an activating
              stimulus in  the fMRI signal and the use of this information to build more
              realistic  models and make more precise inferences; 2. The development of
              robust  procedures for identifying active regions that account for the
              complexity  of the underlying spatio-temporal process; and 3. The construction
              of  functional maps within a specified system of the brain (e.g., the visual 
              system) and the use these maps for making predictiv e inference across 
              subjects.    Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is an exciting new
              technique  that uses advanced technology to obtain images of the active human
              brain.  The technique is of particular interest to cognitive neuropsychologists
               because of the unique perspective it offers into high-level cognitive 
              processing in humans: areas of the brain that are activated by a stimulus  or
              cognitive task ``light up'' in an fMRI image.  This technology will thus  play
              a critical role in understanding how the brain works; however, before  this
              potential can be realized, significant statistical challenges in the 
              interpretation and analysis of fMRI data must be overcome.  For example,  there
              is substantial uncertainty in the identification of neural activity  from these
              images and in the attribution of that activity to particular  cognitive
              processes.  Moreover, there is a need for new methods of making  statistical
              inferences of scientific interest from these large and complex  sets of data. 
              This research focusses on three broad aspects of the general  problem: 1.
              Constructing models for the systematic components of the  process that
              generates the data, 2. Studying and modeling the properties of  the noise in
              the measurements so that analysis and inference can be made  more precise, and
              3. Developing new methods of inference for addressing  interesting scientific
              questions with massive sets of data that arise from  measurements over space
              and time.
