Title       : North American Research Fellows: Mechanochemical Determinants of Biomembrane
               Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9505547

Award Number: 9505547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis E. Discher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505547  Discher      This award is under the North American Research Fellows 
              Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from  the United States,
              Canada and Mexico, to visit research  establishments in one or both of the
              other two countries for  periods of three to twelve months. The program's
              awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of  unique or
              complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental conditions abroad.   
              This award will support a twelve month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr.
              Dennis E. Discher to work with Dr. Evan Evans  at the University of British
              Columbia and Simon Fraser  University in Vancouver, British Columbia.    Under
              the direction of Dr. Evan Evans, Dr. Discher will  receive extensive training
              in experimental biochemistry and  biophysics and will hone his ability to
              mathematically  formulate and analyze system models of different scales.  His
              principle area of study will be the determinants of  membrane structural
              viability with general implications  toward biomembrane organization and
              function.  He will focus  on the red cell membrane.  Its encapsulating membrane
              is a  prototype for the general material character of eukaryotic  cell
              membranes. He will work on determinants of membrane  strengths and mechanisms
              of failure.  What will emerge from  their work will be the first detailed,
              molecular  understanding of forced failure of a cell biological system.  Beyond
              the fundamental science, red cell membrane mechanics  falls within national and
              international interests in both  novel material systems and any number of
              biological problems  such as malarial parasite invasion of red cells.  ***
