Title       : Collaborative Research: Recovery of Vertebrate Faunas after the K/T Boundary,
               Tullock Formation, Eastern Montana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9505841

Award Number: 9505841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70976              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Clemens billc@ucmpl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Clemens  9505841   The first objective of the project will be to refine the
              stratigraphic correlations of over 100 Early Paleocene vertebrate fossil
              localities in eastern Montana already discovered and sampled.  Here widespread
              coal/lignite beds bracketing many fossil localities contain interbeds of
              sanidine-bearing bentonites excellent for 40Ar/39Ar dating  with a potential
              resolution of 0.1%.  Preliminary studies using criteria described by Swisher et
              al. (1993) indicate that high resolution 40Ar/39Ar age determinations, in
              conjunction with microprobe analysis of interbedded volcanics and detailed
              magnetostratigraphies, are capable of providing precise identifications of
              individual coal/lignite beds throughout the area.  The resulting chronology
              will provide the basis for testing hypotheses of correlation of Early Paleocene
              local faunas from Montana with those known from New Mexico, Alberta, and
              intervening areas.   Interpretations of the processes and rates of biotic
              recovery after mass extinctions involve competing hypotheses concerning the
              relative significance of local survival, cladogenic diversification, and
              immigration from refuge areas.  Our preliminary results show the Early
              Paleocene, Puercan North American Land Mammal Age (NALMA), as recognized in
              eastern Montana, had a duration of ca. 1 Ma.  Puercan and early Torrejonian
              NALMA (Middle Paleocene) local faunas can be ordered in at least four temporal
              units.  Analysis of the systematic relationships of the mammals and other
              vertebrates in these stratigraphically well-controlled local faunas will
              provide the basis for much more refined tests of hypotheses concerning the
              evolutionary processes operative during the recovery of the terrestrial biota
              after the Cretaceous mass extinction than previously possible.   Locality and
              systematic data will continue to be recorded in computer-based curatorial
              systems at the University of California Museum of Paleontology and will be
              readily available to the research community.
