Title       : Automated Support for Testing and Debugging of Real-Time Programs Using Oracles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9505392

Award Number: 9505392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura K. Dillon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                One of the great challenges facing today's software engineers  is the
              development of reliable systems, which are known to perform correctly in  all
              circumstances.  The most critical applications often involve concurrency and 
              real-time, which increase the difficulty of system development and validation. 
              Testing and debugging cannot prove a system is correct. However, they are 
              currently the most effective methods available for validating real
              applications.  This project investigates the use of oracles created from
              Graphical Interval  Logic (GIL) specifications in testing and debugging of
              real-time programs.  GIL is a visual logic for specifying  and reasoning about
              properties of real-time systems. The existing GIL tools  allow mechanical
              checking that system specifications guarantee critical  correctness
              requirements.  This project seeks to produce a method for relating  GIL
              specifications to real-time programs that permits deterministic finite-state 
              automata constructed from GIL specifications to be used in  verifying that 
              executions of a program are correct. When an execution violates a
              specification,  the associated oracle would construct a GIL formula describing
              a fault in the  execution. This formula would be displayed graphically,
              appropriately aligned  with an execution trace, to help the user see where in
              the trace the fault  occurred and the nature of the fault.    Formal methods
              must be automated if  software engineers are to use them in the development of
              real systems. The  implementation and experimental evaluation of prototypes is
              therefore an  important facet of this project, which combines analytical
              research on  formal methods with experimental research aimed at assessing the
              practical  utility of formal methods.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
