Title       : Probability & Statistics Applied to the Theory of Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9505167

Award Number: 9505167
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Steele Steele@Wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505167 Steele  Abstract  The aim of this project is to build a  deeper
              understanding of the stochastic behaviors present in some  of the central
              problems of Euclidean combinatorial optimization.  Examples of problems that
              are to be investigated include the  stochastic models of the traveling salesman
              problem, the minimum  spanning tree problem, and several of  their related 
              approximations. The more specific objectives of the project  include (1)
              further development of the  distribution theory for  the traveling salesman
              problem and minimal spanning tree problem,  (2) more extensive development of
              Talagrand's theory of  configuration functions, (3) refined understanding of
              the tail  behavior of the increasing subsequence functional, and (4) 
              development of the basic limit theory for functionals associated  with
              non-optimal heuristics. The methods that will be used in  this investigation
              include Talagrand's isoperimetric theory,   Talagrand's theory of irregularity
              of distribution, the theory of  subadditive Euclidean functionals, the general
              efficiency theory  for statistical estimation, and  the theory of vector 
              quantization.  Each of these tools is of considerable importance  in its own
              right, and the expectation is that  useful insight  will be gained into the
              strengths and weaknesses of these tools  through the study of the concrete
              problems of  probabilistic  combinatorial optimization.     The interface of
              probability  theory and optimization has experienced remarkable growth over 
              the last five years, and this development has had substantial  impact on both
              theoretical computer science and the  practice of  algorithm development. The
              aim of this project is to build a  deeper understanding of the information and
              assistance that  probability can provide in some difficult and important
              problems  of computation. In particular, the project aims to develop 
              probability theory that helps describe the behavior of several  important
              quantities in the theory of combinatorial optimization,  a subj ect that
              studies the minimization and maximization of  functions that are defined very
              large finite sets. The more  specific objectives of the project include
              development of a  distribution theory for the length of the shortest path
              through a  large number of points whose locations are determined by a 
              probability distribution, and the  development of the basic  probability for
              some of the most  important approximation methods  of optimization theory.
