Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Random Coefficient Models and Robust Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9505290

Award Number: 9505290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Simpson dgs@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 95-05290  Principal investigator: Douglas G. Simpson 
              Institution: University of Illinois  Title: RANDOM COEFFICIENT MODELS AND
              ROBUST ANALYSIS    Abstract:    Random coefficient models have found wide
              application for   modeling correlation, incorporating laboratory or study  
              effects, and in developing Bayesian estimates and inferences.   Marginal
              analysis is an alternative approach in which models   are developed directly
              for marginal distributions (integrated  over random effects), and the
              inferences are at the level of  population average effects rather than at the
              level of   individual experimental units. Connections and contrasts  between
              these general modeling strategies and robust   statistics will be developed.
              The aim is to develop fresh   ideas for attacking hard problems in applied
              statistics.   Among the problems to be attacked: robust generalized linear  
              modeling and graphical data analysis; environmental exposure   risk assessment
              combining information from multiple studies   with varying protocols and
              endpoint measurements; inferences   for random function data arising from
              spectral measurement   instruments.    With the wide availability of powerful
              computers,   increasingly complex data are being collected. In   analytical
              chemistry it is now routine to qtore   separation spectra electronically. In
              environmental   toxicology large databases are being assembled on   potentially
              hazardous pollutants. The proposed research   is directed at the development of
              statistical methods   for such data. In combining information from multiple  
              exposure--response studies, it is possible to model   uncertainty due to things
              such as interlaboratory effects   or species differences using modern
              computational   techniques and new statistical paradigms. In   environmental
              chemistry, fluctuations in the  amount of material assayed and in the measuring
              instrument  itself lead to extra randomness in the measurement. Adjusting   for
              this effect is critical to the success of the metho ds,   particularly as the
              number of features measured, e.g., peaks   on a mass spectrum, becomes large.
              The proposed research will  develop toolkits for analysis, inference and
              diagnostics.   Key components of the work are algorithm development,  
              simulation studies, asymptotic analysis, testing of the   methodology, and
              software development. The major applications  driving this research are in
              environmental risk assessment   (combining information) and environmental
              monitoring   (spectral measurements), targeting strategic national   concerns
              in environmental management.  ??
