Title       : Collaborative Research; Mathematical Sciences, Transitions and Defects in
               Ordered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9505077

Award Number: 9505077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $745000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell Luskin luskin@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Sverak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               DMS-9505077 Luskin and James  This interdisciplinary group will  investigate
              nonlinear material  behavior and related issues in  analysis and computation.
              Its focus is  materials which undergo  martensitic and magnetic phase
              transitions,  with particular  application to shape memory and giant 
              magnetostrictive  materials. The theories and computational methods  under 
              development by the authors will be applied to the design of  new  actuator
              materials and composites. The authors propose to  design  a composite that
              exhibits a strong two way shape memory  effect,  design small scale,
              large-force actuators with low hysteresis,   and formulate a strategy for
              finding a magneto-memory material, a   material which would combine the most
              useful aspects of a shape   memory (large strain) and magnetostrictive
              (actuated by a  magnetic  field) material. The quantitative description of
              these  phenomena  rests in the framework of nonlinear analysis, in  particular
              within the  context of non-convex potentials whose  equilibria are highly 
              oscillatory across widely varying length  scales. Innovative numerical  methods
              and codes will be developed  to compute the dynamics of  complex microstructure
              in response to  a variety of environmental  changes.   Active materials, that
              is,  materials whose structure transforms  dramatically when subjected  to
              external stimuli like heat or  electromagnetic fields, have  enormous potential
              for use as actuators  and sensors across the  spectrum of technology, from
              aerospace to  communications to  medicine. This project addresses basic
              research  directed toward  the improvement and optimization of these  materials
              and the  discovery of new ones. The interplay between  their  microstructure
              and macroscopic properties is fundamental to   their exploitation and the study
              of these properties leads to the   frontiers of nonlinear theory, nonlinear
              analysis, and scientific   computation. The interdisciplinary training of
              graduate students  and  postdoctoral associates is an integra l part of this
              project.
