Title       : Survey of the Parasites of Small Mammals of the Sevilleta National Wildlife
               Refuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9505025

Award Number: 9505025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Duszynski eimeria@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murray D. Dailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The 100,000 ha Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge (SNWR) in central New Mexico
              lies  in a transition zone that straddles several major biomes of the
              Southwest:  Great Basin Shrub-Steppe,  Mogollon Pinon-Juniper Woodland, Great
              Plains Grassland and Chihuahuan Desert.  In the past six years  (1989-1994),
              collaborating with the University of New Mexico s Long Term Ecological Research
              (LTER)  program, 3,235 rodents (28 species, in 4 families) were collected and
              identified from permanent  collecting sites on the three major habitat types
              (grassland, desert/creosote, woodland) of the SNWR.  Hosts were necropsied for
              endoparasites (protozoa  coccidia , helminths) and some ectoparasites.  This 
              project will identify a nd analyze all the parasites found in these hosts and
              in hosts that will  continue to be collected during the next three years of
              this study.  By 1998, the project will have  put in place the means to easily
              identify and monitor the parasites form all mammalian hosts caught  through the
              year 2000 on the LTER Phase II grant, and into perpetuity on subsequent
              renewals.    The  data to be collected will be unique for several reasons:  1)
              This will be the first complete inventory  of a natural assemblage of parasites
              form all mammalian (rodent) hosts in three different communities,  each form a
              distinctly defined geographic locality (habitat type) over the period of a
              decade, and  beyond; 2) This study is part of a multidisciplinary approach to
              address conceptual issues of climate  change on ecosystem structure and
              function at multiple scales (individuals, communities, etc.) and  correlative
              data from these related studies will strengthen and contribute to the
              robustness of this  data set; and 3) As the only parasite study on any of the
              LTER projects nationwide, it will provide an  ideal model, and perhaps
              incentive, for parallel long-term studies of parasite communities to be 
              examined in a variety of other habitat types, and form a variety of different
              perspectives, at other  LTER sites in the network.  Upon completing this work
              the project team will be able to use these  long-term data to try to understand
              the dynamics of natural host-parasite assemblages.  Hypotheses  then can be
              erected to test/address at least questions:  How do the different parasite
              communities  colonize, mature, climax and senesce over time (or do they?)?  Do
              they vary in response to abiotic (  climate change) and/or biotic (dispersal,
              colonization) factors?  What temporal/spatial scales, and  among what kinds of
              organisms, do coevolutionary processes influence the community organization of 
              these parasites?  Studies of the dynamics of multiple, coexisting species are
              confined primarily to  microtine rodents and have hinted that multiannual cyc
              les tend to be synchronous (Brown and Heske  1990).  Are similar patterns seen
              for parasites of our desert rodents?  Answers to these questions  relating to
              community structure, as well as to questions concerning parasite biodiversity
              on the SNWR,  can be addressed partially or completely by the information
              gathered on the parasite species infecting  rodents collected on the SNWR. 
              Initial emphasis of the work will be on identifying all the parasites 
              collected, by processing to completion what will eventually be 9 consecutive
              years of parasite data,  and on training the undergraduate and graduate
              students involved in the art of taxonomy and  nomenclature of parasitic
              protozoans and helminths, to begin to supply some of these answers.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
