Title       : Compact, Low-Noise, Diamond Dynodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9505418

Award Number: 9505418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Brandes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Tech Matls, Inc.
	      7 Commerce Drive
	      Danbury, CT  06810    203/794-1100

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  Brandes  9505418         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project is exploring a low-noise, high-gain dynode useful for incorporation
              into a low-cost, high-performance photomultiplier tube (PMT).  PMTs have
              unmatched sensitivity for visible or ultraviolet wavelengths.  Existing PMTs,
              however, are inadequate or prohibitively expensive for many applications where
              sensitivity and gain must be combined with stability and reduced noise
              requirements.  Phase I showed that semiconducting diamond's unique properties
              could be exploited to create a low-noise, high-gain dynode for PMTs.    It was
              found that unoptimized boron-doped diamond has high secondary electron yields,
              the electron emission energy is low, the electron energy distribution is small,
              the yield is unaltered by air exposure, and the lifetime is equivalent to
              conventional dynodes.  Further, semiconducting diamond won't charge unlike some
              conventional materials.   Phase II will optimize the growth of diamond for
              secondary electron emission applications and clarify the electron transport and
              emission mechanisms.  In collaboration with a PMT manufacturer, this phase of
              the project will be directed toward design, development and testing of a
              low-cost, high-performance photomultiplier tube incorporating diamond dynodes. 
              Phase III, activities will focus on scaling up the process to enable volume
              production of the diamond based photomultiplier tubes.       The commercial
              applications for photomultiplier tubes and other electron multipliers are many,
              including medical applications and imaging, oil well logging, pollution
              monitoring, nuclear and high energy physics, and spectroscopy.  Availability of
              low-cost, high-performance, diamond-based PMTs would increase their use in a
              wide variety of such applications.  ***
