Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Experimental Studies of Blood Flow in
               Collapsible Carotid Arteries with Stenoses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9505685

Award Number: 9505685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalin Tang dtang@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9263,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Arteries with high grade stenoses may collapse under  physiological conditions. 
              The collapse may lead to accelerated  fatigue and rupture of the fibrous cap of
              the plaque into the  bloodstream with subsequent blockage of small arteries 
              downstream.  That can lead directly to heart attacks and strokes.  The 
              investigator and his colleague use mathematical, computational  and 
              experimental methods to study this collapsing process.  Mathematical models
              have been limited primarily to  one-dimensional  models because of the
              difficulty in handling the collapsing tube,  whose shape is unknown and
              changing.  A three-dimensional  nonlinear viscous mathematical model with free
              moving boundaries  is introduced and a novel numerical method is developed to
              solve  the model.  The numerical method uses solutions of the longwave 
              asymptotic expansions as the numerical initial condition and a 
              boundary-iterative method to find the unknown moving boundary and  the flow
              velocity and pressure.  Experiments are performed to  define the pressure-area
              relationship (tube law) for the elastic  tube models and to quantify the exact
              pressure-flow conditions  for  tube collapse in a laboratory set-up.  The
              laboratory experiments  and in vivo measurements provide data for the
              formulation and  verification of the mathematical model.  The validated model 
              together with its numerical solutions form a basis for further  investigations
              of the collapsing process.  Results obtained will  be useful for early
              detection and prevention of stenoses,  identifying the causes of rupture of
              plaque caps, and quantifying  physiological conditions under which collapse may
              occur.  While  physiological dimensions of the carotid arteries and related 
              parameter ranges are used in the computations and experiments,  the  methods
              developed in this project will be useful in a broad range  of applications
              where free moving boundaries are involved.       Plaque collecting in an artery
              can narrow it; this narrowing  is called a stenosis.  Just like wat er flowing
              in a narrowed  channel, the blood will flow faster past a stenosis.  In certain
               conditions, this can cause the artery to collapse.  Then the  plaque may break
              up in the bloodstream and subsequently block  small arteries downstream.  That
              can lead directly to heart  attacks and strokes.  The investigators study this
              collapsing  process, using mathematical, computational and experimental 
              methods.  Previous models have been limited primarily to  one-dimensional
              models because of the difficulty in handling the  collapsing tube, whose shape
              is unknown and changing.  This  project develops a three-dimensional
              mathematical model that  accounts for the blood flow and the change in shape of
              the  collapsing artery, and a novel numerical method to solve the  model.  One
              of the investigators conducts experiments to  determine  the pressure-area
              relationship (tube law) for the elastic tube  models and the exact
              pressure-flow conditions for tube collapse  in  a laboratory set-up.  The
              laboratory experiments and in vivo  measurements provide data for the
              formulation and verification of  the mathematical model.  Results obtained will
              be useful for  early  detection and prevention of stenoses, identifying the
              causes of  pupture of plaque caps, and physiological conditions under which 
              collapse may occur.  The numerical methods developed in this  project will be
              useful in other applications where free moving  boundaries are involved.
