Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Rheology and Morphology of
               Immiscible Blends of Flexible and Liquid Crystal Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1995  
File        : a9505545

Award Number: 9505545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505545  Walker      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support an eight-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Lynn M. Walker to
              work with Professor Paula  Moldenaers at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in
              Belgium.    The blending of polymeric materials during processing is a  rapidly
              growing industrial practice with the goals of  capitalizing on specific pure
              component properties and  lowering processing costs.  Blending offers an almost
               infinite range of final properties, the potential to utilize  recycled and
              high volume materials and the ability to use  existing processing equipment
              without costly alterations.  Unfortunately, the blending of polymeric materials
              is not  fully understood at a fundamental level, making the robust a  priori
              prediction of final properties almost impossible.  This limits the widespread
              use of heterogeneous blends,  especially those containing complex and
              specialized  polymeric materials.  However it is the unique properties of 
              these complex polymeric materials that offer the most  potential gain in
              blending processes.        The purpose of this research is to gain a
              fundamental grasp  of the flow-induced behavior observed in one special group 
              of blends. Specifically, the PI will study heterogeneous  blends containing a
              matrix of flexible polymer and  inclusions of liquid crystal polymer (LCP), and
              perform  several rheological and rheo-optical experiments on a model  blend.
              The results will provide quantitative estimates of  the macroscopic and
              microscopic parameters used in present  models for heterogeneous blends.   ***
