Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational and Mathematical Investigations in
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9505155

Award Number: 9505155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Todd miketodd@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuying Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Bland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie E. Trotter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1038,9216,9263,CVIS,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Todd       The investigator and his colleagues undertake broad studies  of
              optimization algorithms and the mathematical theory underlying  them.  The
              project covers continuous and discrete optimization  algorithms, both exact and
              approximate, their computational  complexity, practical large-scale
              implementation, performance  guarantees (in the case of approximate
              algorithms), and  applications in the physical sciences such as elementary
              particle  tracking, as well as more conventional applications in  manufacturing
              and logistics.  Particular projects include:     - a continuation of
              large-scale computational testing of       implementations of minimum-cost
              network flow algorithms;     - development and testing of algorithms for
              large-scale       nonlinear minimization problems with bound constraints;     -
              performance guarantees for efficient approximation       algorithms for
              machine-scheduling problems with budget       constraints and for other
              combinatorial optimization problems;     - development of more efficient
              interior-point methods for       convex programming and for linear programming
              problems       where no initial interior feasible solution is known;     -
              studies of the polyhedral structure of combinatorial       problems in graph
              theory and partially ordered sets, as well       as in applications such as
              crew scheduling -- computational       implementation and testing have been an
              integral aspect of       these studies; and     - further development of
              complexity theory for continuous       nonconvex problems.  These projects
              range from modeling through algorithm development  and analysis to
              implementation and testing.       Optimization addresses questions like:     -
              How do you schedule the production of hundreds of items with       varying
              demands over several months to minimize setup and       holding costs, subject
              to resource limitations and       capacities?     - How do you determine the
              geometric conformation of a protein        (how it ``folds") given an
              approximate en ergy functional for       any position?  Indeed, complex systems
              arising in the engineering, physical, and  biological sciences, and in the
              manufacturing and service  industries, involving hundreds to millions of
              interacting  variables, frequently lead to optimization problems when one 
              wishes to control or predict their behavior.  The investigators  study a number
              of specific projects related to modeling and  algorithm development for a
              variety of applications, ranging from  traditional settings like resource
              allocation, planning,  logistics, and distribution problems to new application
              areas  such as airline crew-scheduling, elementary particle tracking,  and shop
              scheduling.  A common thread is the search for efficient  methods to solve
              exactly large-scale instances of such problems,  or, if that is not likely to
              be possible, for efficient  algorithms that are guaranteed to obtain a solution
              that is close  to optimal in a precise sense.  The investigators also test
              these  algorithms computationally on representative instances of such  problems
              using serial and parallel computers.
