Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Workshop on Bayesian Statistics in Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9505461

Award Number: 9505461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Kass kass@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nozer D. Singpurwalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantine Gatsonis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9505461     PIs:  Robert Kass, Constantine Gatsonsi, James
              Hodges, Nozer   Singpurwalla     Institution:  Carnegie Mellon University    
              Title:  Bayesian Case Studies Workshop, October 1995           Abstract:       
                The symposium entitled ``Bayesian Statistics in Science and Technology:  
              Case  Studies III''   held at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh,  
              Pennsylvania,  includes  extended presentations of applications of Bayesian  
              methods.  These applications are in  problems  in which the statistician is an 
               integral member of the research team.   The objectives of the symposium are  
              to: (1)identify and focus attention on specific implementation and  
              theoretical problems that hinder applications of Bayesian methods, and to  
              identify candidate solutions; (ii) provide a forum in which the interplay  
              between statistical theory and practice will be explored in the context of  
              concrete research projects; (iii) provide a small-meeting atmosphere within  
              which junior investigators and graduate students can  explore substantial  
              Bayesian applications with experienced researchers;  and (iv) produce a   
              volume containing well-documented case studies and data sets suitable  for  
              use by researchers, practitioners, educators and students of applied statistics
                 and other quantitative fields.               Today there are  increasing
              amounts of  background information available   to  scientists undertaking an
              investigation.  It is important to utilize   previousknowledge effectively in
              designing studies and analyzing data.   Bayesian statistical methods are
              tailored to this purpose.  There have been   many recent advances in Bayesian
              statistical theory and computation, but   scientific meetings rarely spend 
              substantial time discussing  successful   applications of these methods to
              substantive scientific problems. This   symposium  concentrates attention
              solely on applications  of Bayesian   statistics.  The application areas range
              from economics to population    biology .  The result will be the elucidation
              of the interplay between theory   and  practice  and the identification of
              successful methods that will  point to  important directions for future
              research.  The interactions and dynamics of   the workshop will be captured and
              disseminated via video tape and in the   more traditional written  form of a
              conference proceedings.
