Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Synthesis Characterization, and
               Catalytic Testing of Ti-and V-Metallosilicates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9505474

Award Number: 9505474
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric E. Lowenthal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9505474  Lowenthal      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a twelve-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Eric E. Lowenthal to
              work with Dr. Paul  Ratnasamy of the National Chemical Laboratory in Pune, 
              India.    The initial research under this award will focus on the  evaluation
              of Ti- and V-metallosilicates, specifically, the  larger pore materials,
              V-NCL-1 and amorphous  titanosilicates, for the catalytic, gas-phase partial 
              oxidation of propylene using molecular oxygen diluted in an  inert gas such as
              argon or helium.  Experiments to assess  the activity and product selectivity
              of these catalysts, as  well as to collect reaction data suitable for micro
              kinetic  analysis of relative reaction rates will be carried out in  fixed-bed
              microreactors.  Product identification and  analysis will be carried out using
              a combination of gas  chromotography and mass spectrometry.  The production of 
              deeper oxidation products than epoxides such as alcohols,  aldehydes, and
              ketones will be of scientific and industrial  interest.  Such products could
              indirectly establish the  nature of the surface intermediates in the
              propylene-oxygen  reaction network on these metallosilicate materials.  The 
              nature of the partial oxidation product slate could direct  readily implemented
              catalyst or reaction condition  modifications. ***
