Title       : U.S.-Argentina Workshop: Molecular Cell Biology of Endocytosis and Intracellular
               Transport; Mendoza, Argentina,October 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9505083

Award Number: 9505083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Stahl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95005083  Stahl    This U.S.-Argentina Workshop award supports travel expenses 
              of  the P.I., Dr. P. Stahl, Washington Univ. , Saint Louis,  MO., five other
              senior scientists, and three post-doctoral  fellows to the workshop which will
              be held at the  Universidad de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina, in October, 1995. 
              Travel expenses will also be provided for five South-  American Fellows, from
              countries that are not covered under  bilateral agreements  with NSF.  Some
              expendable supplies and services related to  the workshop will also be covered.
               The Argentine co-  organizer is Dr. Luis Mayorga of the Universidad de Cuyo, 
              Mendoza; other Argentinean scientists involved in the  workshop are Drs. Lopez
              and Sosa, also from the Univ. of  Cuyo, and Dr. Maccioni, from Cordoba
              University.    Over the past decade significant progress has been made in  the
              understanding of  the cellular and  molecular basis of  intracellular
              transport.   Fundamental processes, such as  secretion, endocytosis and
              mitosis, processes requiring  selective and  specific membrane fusion events,
              are  increasingly open to study.  Applications of new techniques  to a variety
              of cellular systems, both in plants and animals  provides unique opportunities
              to further expand the level of  understanding of vesicular transport.    The
              workshop  will provide a unique opportunity  to explore  these developments, by
              gathering  a small group of  scientists from several laboratories from North
              and South  America to exchange ideas about their work on the cell and 
              molecular biology of intracellular transport.   The workshop  will
              substantially enhance and extend a very productive  international collaboration
              between U.S. and Argentinean  scientists, as well  as scientists from other
              Latin American countries.  The  workshop will also provide an opportunity to
              engender  long  term interactions among faculty and students. This is 
              particularly attractive, since the students will be, for the  most part, in the
              formative years of their training, and  wi ll be in an optimal position to
              benefit from potential  international exchange.      ***
