Title       : Survey of the Biodiversity of the Kuril Archipelago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9505031

Award Number: 9505031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1530103            (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore W. Pietsch twp@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9505031  Pietsch   The islands of the Kuril Archipelago form the eastern
              boundary of the Okhotsk Sea and a bridge between Hokkaido, the northernmost
              island of Japan, and the Russian peninsula of Kamchatka.  They are a natural
              Laboratory for investigations into the origin, subsequent evolution, and
              long-term maintenance of insular populations.  Although considerable
              information is available for wide-ranging, commercially important species, such
              as salmon and marine mammals, the flora and fauna of the Kurils as a whole are
              poorly known.  At the same time, the current political situation poses a
              serious environmental threat to the islands.   This project will allow a team
              of Russian, Japanese, and American scientists to conduct a survey and inventory
              of the plants, insects, spiders, freshwater and terrestrial mollusks,
              freshwater fishes, and terrestrial vertebrates of the Kuril Islands.  With
              financial support already committed to the project by the Russian Academy of
              Sciences and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, the cost of the
              work will be shared by all three nations.  With experience gained in 1994
              collection on the four primary island of the southern Kurils, it is now
              proposed that the work be extended over the next five years to include all
              major islands of the Archipelago.  Using standardized survey methods, modern
              computer-based inventory procedures, and dissemination of information through
              the Internet, the results of the survey will provide important baseline data on
              patterns of species diversity that can be compared accurately with other
              regions sampled in similar ways.  Working cooperatively with universities and
              the national and local governments of the host country, the project will
              provide training for faculty, students, and government biologists.  Finally,
              the work will provide a foundation of information that will promote long-term
              future research as well as conservation of these unique island biota's.
