Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Bifurcations of Forced Oscillator Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9505051

Award Number: 9505051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Peckham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Peckham       A periodically forced oscillator is a prototypical example of  a
              nonlinear mathematical model that is used to explain past  behavior and predict
              future behavior of physical, chemical, and  ecological systems.  The
              investigator continues studies of  two-parameter families of maps of the plane
              that are generated by  periodically forced oscillator systems.  The broad goal
              is to  understand the qualitative behavior of these systems and how that 
              behavior changes, or "bifurcates," as parameters in the models are  varied. 
              The project focuses on discrete dynamical systems rather  than differential
              equations.  It aims to explain parameter space  phenomena as projections of
              "more natural" objects in the  cartesian product of the phase and parameter
              spaces.  The project  includes further development of tools for "local"
              bifurcation  phenomena, such as the birth of periodic orbits, but concentrates 
              mostly on extending existing tools and results for local phenomena  to
              analogous tools and results for "global" phenomena, such as the  birth of
              homoclinic orbits.  Study involves software development,  numerical simulation,
              and analysis of both the numerics and the  mathematics of global bifurcations. 
              The project enables a more  complete understanding of a wide variety of
              bifurcation problems,  including periodically forced oscillators.  It also
              provides tools  for a more automatic bifurcation study of other families of 
              discrete dynamical systems.       The investigator continues studying a
              prototypical class of  systems that is used to model a variety of physical,
              chemical, and  ecological systems.  The goal of the project is to study
              changes,  or "bifurcations," in the qualitative behavior of these systems as 
              parameters are changed.  For example, the number of hunting  licenses issued
              could be a parameter in a mathematical model of an  ecosystem.  There might be
              a critical number of licenses below  which deer would survive, and above which
              the deer would die out.  This critical number would  be called a bifurcation
              value of the  parameter.  An incredibly complex scenario of bifurcations is 
              possible, even for models that are described by very simple  mathematical
              formulas.  Hence, some level of numerical  investigation is absolutely
              necessary.  The project includes  software development, numerical simulation,
              and analysis of both  the numerics and the mathematics of the bifurcations
              involved.  The  project enables a more complete understanding of a wide variety
              of  models.  This leads to a better understanding the past and a better  chance
              of predicting the future of systems behaving like these  models, as well as for
              many other seemingly unrelated systems.
