Title       : A 3D Data Base for Electron Microscopy and Related Fields ofUltrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9505600

Award Number: 9505600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Frank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Several techniques of three-dimensional imaging are about to  revolutionize the
              study of macromolecular assemblies, subcellular  structures, and their
              interactions. 3D electron microscopy and  confocal light microscopy are obvious
              examples. These techniques  produce large amounts of data stored in various
              formats and  accessible only through special arrangements with the authors. 
              Only few aspects of a structure represented by a low-resolution  density
              distribution can be captured in scientific publications.  There is a large
              potential for "data mining" by other researchers  within the same field or
              overlapping fields that is currently  unused because the data are virtually
              inaccessible.    With this application to the Databases Activities Program of
              NSF,  the PI wishes to continue and expand a joint US-Europe initiative  for
              the establishment of a distributed database that would  accommodate ANY
              low-resolution (non-atomic) 3D data produced by  using various experimental
              methods (EM, LM, x-ray, etc.). The  proposal builds on an existing prototype
              that was developed  jointly by the PI and Dr. Jose Maria Carazo in Madrid and
              that is  already publicly accessible through Mosaic/WWW. According to the 
              proposal, Dr. Carazo will visit the Wadsworth Center twice, for a  period of
              five months each, to continue the design and testing of  the distributed
              database and associated software tools, in close  interaction with the PI and
              his group. A graduate student in  Computer Science, who will be supervised by
              the PI and Dr. Daniel  Rosenkrantz at SUNY, will design new tools allowing
              segmentation  data to be entered and used in complex 3D data queries, as for 
              instance required in docking of two low-resolution structures, or  in the
              comparison of two structures that have a part-whole  relationship. We plan to
              organize a workshop in mid-term (to be  jointly funded by the European
              Government) that will bring  together scientists from centers of 3D
              ultrastructural imaging  and specialists in the areas of scienti fic databases
              and  networking. With the workshop we seek to solicit critical input  and start
              a discussion on how responsibilities might best be  shared in the screening of
              data and how to ensure continuity of  the endeavor.
