Title       : Fabric of Granular Materials Studied by DEM and MRI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9505340

Award Number: 9505340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Priscilla P. Nelson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61807              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eiichi Fukushima   (Principal Investigator current)
              Masami Nakagawa  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lovelace Institutes
	      2425 Ridgecrest S. E.
	      Albuquerque, NM  871085129    505/262-7043

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9505338  Ng  The objective of this research is:  1) to non-invasively  visualize
              the  interior and the behavior of a suitable mass of granular  material by MRI 
              (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), and 2) to verify the  microscopic observations 
              obtained by DEM (Discrete Element Method) simulations.  Available  macroscopic
              DEM results on random arrays of ellipsoids  produced by others  are very
              promising.  They provide qualitatively correct  results and some  good
              quantitative predictions for a wide range of strains,  drained and  undrained
              loading, and static as well as cyclic loading.  However, 3-D  observations are
              needed for verification.  This research is  feasible with  the availability of
              MRI.  The results will provide a general  theoretical  framework for modeling
              the constitutive relations of  granular soils.  ***      9505340  Nakagawa  The
              objective of this research is:  1) to non-invasively  visualize the  interior
              and the behavior of a suitable mass of granular  material by MRI  (Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging), and 2) to verify the  microscopic observations  obtained by
              DEM (Discrete Element Method) simulations.  Available  macroscopic DEM results
              on random arrays of ellipsoids  produced by others  are very promising.  They
              provide qualitatively correct  results and some  good quantitative predictions
              for a wide range of strains,  drained and  undrained loading, and static as
              well as cyclic loading.  However, 3-D  observations are needed for
              verification.  This research is  feasible with  the availability of MRI.  The
              results will provide a general  theoretical  framework for modeling the
              constitutive relations of  granular soils.  ***    9503462  Ghaboussi  A new
              method will be developed to determine constitutive  models of soils  directly
              from the results of soil tests.  The primary  objective is to  develop and
              experimentally verify this method of  determination, with the  results applied
              to the determination of the constitutive  properties of  soils from the results
              of in situ tests and n ew types of  laboratory tests.  After developing
              appropriate computational aspects utilizing  neural  networks to model behavior
              and using the FEM, a series of  experiments will  be conducted to simulate the
              in situ tests.  Unlike  conventional soils  tests, in the proposed method it is
              essential that the  sample be subjected  to a non uniform state of strain so
              that different points  within the sample  can be subjected to as many different
              stress paths as  possible.  New soils  tests, including a relatively simple
              punched test, will be  developed and  tested in the laboratory.  These results
              will be used to  train the neural  network.  The development of methodology and
              the  computational aspects will  be conducted at the University of Illinois. 
              The  experimental part of the  proposed research will be conducted at the Johns
              Hopkins  University.  ***          9503697  Lade  A new method will be
              developed to determine constitutive  models of soils  directly from the results
              of soil tests.  The primary  objective is to  develop and experimentally verify
              this method of  determination, with the  results applied to the determination
              of the constitutive  properties of  soils from the results of in situ tests and
              new types of  laboratory tests.  After developing appropriate computational
              aspects utilizing  neural  networks to model behavior and using the FEM, a
              series of  experiments will  be conducted to simulate the in situ tests. 
              Unlike  conventional soils  tests, in the proposed method it is essential that
              the  sample be subjected  to a non uniform state of strain so that different
              points  within the sample  can be subjected to as many different stress paths
              as  possible.  New soils  tests, including a relatively simple punched test,
              will be  developed and  tested in the laboratory.  These results will be used
              to  train the neural  network.  The development of methodology and the 
              computational aspects will  be conducted at the University of Illinois.  The 
              experimental part of the  proposed rese arch will be conducted at the Johns
              Hopkins  University.  ***
