Title       : Development of a Pacific Paleoethnobotanical Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9505917

Award Number: 9505917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda S. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi A. Lennstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Allen    With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Melinda Allen and  Heidi
              Lennstrom will expand the archaeobotanical research  laboratory located at the
              Bernice P. Bishop Museum in Hawaii.  They will hire a technician to help to
              prepare and process  samples and will purchase both a new flotation device and 
              photographic equipment. Because botanical materials are usually  lighter than
              their surrounding earthen matrix, it is possible to  use water separation to
              collect them. A larger device will  increase the productivity of the
              laboratory. Photographs permit  the production of guides or keys which can
              facilitate  identification at the Bishop and also be used by other 
              laboratories.    Botanical remains are often preserved in archaeological sites
              in  Oceania. Few archaeologists are qualified to identify such  materials
              however and the development of a specialized laboratory  will further research
              in a number of areas. Botanical remains  serve two principal goals because they
              provide insight into both  the nature of prehistoric environments and human use
              of it.  Archaeological deposits often include both plants used by  prehistoric
              inhabitants and other remains which are accidently  incorporated into the
              sediments. With such information, it is  possible to reconstruct how different
              human populations subsisted  and made use of their environments. It is also
              possible to  understand how people affected these environments and how they 
              changed over time. Many islands in the Pacific have been occupied  for
              thousands of years and provide excellent laboratories to  study
              human-environment interactions.    This research is important because it will
              help to provide an  important archaeological service. It will increase our 
              understanding of human behavior and how people and environments  interact over
              time.
