Title       : Collaborative Research: Integrated Eocene-Oligocene Stratigraphy of Alabama and
               Mississippi Boreholes: Comparison with the NJ Transect and Global Sea-Level
               Proxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9505957

Award Number: 9505957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Miller kgm@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Feigenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9505957  Miller         The processes of global sea-level, local tectonics, and 
              changes in sediment supply control passive continental margin  sedimentation. 
              Determining the role of each requires continuous  sampling and dating of
              stratigraphic sections in different tectonic  settings.  Global sea level
              studies are a fundamental component of  global change programs and sea level
              studies require drilling  transects of boreholes on passive continental
              margins.  These  transects will first focus on the Oligocene-Recent "Icehouse"
              with  future drilling to address sea-level changes during the Paleocene- 
              Eocene "Greenhouse" and "Doubthouse" when ice-volume changes were  not
              apparent.  The principal investigators are currently  developing, with NSF
              funding, a firm chronology of New Jersey  coastal plain Eocene to middle
              Miocene sequences, but require well-  dated sections on other passive margins
              to evaluate the role of  eustatic versus local effects.  Previous and ongoing
              studies show  that continuous cores from western Alabama and eastern
              Mississippi  provide fresh, unweathered material from the middle Eocene to the 
              "middle" Oligocene.           The principal investigators will conduct
              integrated magneto-,  bio-, and isotopic (Sr, oxygen, and carbon) studies of
              three  recently drilled boreholes in Mississippi.  Preliminary results  funded
              by ARCO show that these boreholes contain expanded upper  Eocene to lower
              Oligocene sections suitable for magneto-, bio-, and  Sr-isotope studies.  These
              sections should compare well with the  principal investigator's ongoing studies
              in New Jersey.  The  Alabama and Mississippi studies will provide an "Icehouse"
              transect  of the Oligocene to compare with sequences in New Jersey and other 
              proxies of global sea-level change and a detailed transect of the  "Greenhouse"
              early Eocene and "Doubthouse" middle-late Eocene.  ***
