Title       : Microtubule-Dependent Transport of Cell Surface Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9505855

Award Number: 9505855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Travis jefft@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9505855  Travis    The granuloreticuloseans (e.g., the Foraminifera) provide a 
              window into understanding the motility of  domains of the  plasma membrane.  In
              the past, this surface motility on the  pseudopods (reticulopods) of these
              large protists has been  assessed using relatively large surface-attached
              particles  as visible markers. The particles move on a "raft" comprised  of a
              membrane domain.  The present proposal examines the  transport of specifically
              labeled intrinsic components of  these domains.  Much of the knowledge on cell
              motility comes  from studies on intracellular organelle transport. Cell 
              surface domain transport and intracellular organelle  transport share many
              characteristics including bidirectional  and saltatory excursions that occur
              exclusively along  microtubules. Correlative light and electron microscopy can 
              demonstrate that both plasma membrane domains and organelles  are directly
              linked to microtubules by structurally distinct  crossbridges. In addition, the
              velocity profiles of these  two transport phenomena are virtually
              indistinguishable.  Consequently, cell surface domain transport and 
              intracellular organelle transport may share a common  mechanochemical mechanism
              and may be, in fact,  manifestations of the same basic cellular process. This 
              proposal outlines a series of experiments designed to test  this hypothesis by
              comparing directly the enzymatic  properties of organelle and cell surface
              transport in  Reticulomyxa, a freshwater granuloreticulosean. Experiments 
              designed to characterize the mechanochemical signature of  the motor ATPase
              include assaying these specific enzymatic  parameters of the transport motor:
              ATPase kinetics,  nucleotide specificity, and inhibitor specificity. The 
              stated hypothesis predicts that these fundamental properties  of the cell
              surface transport motor must be identical to  those of organelle transport and
              will be refuted or  confirmed by direct comparison in the same cell models. 
              After completion of the first set of studies , the putative  bidirectionality
              of  transport along individual microtubules  is studied by reevaluating
              transport in microsurgically  prepared pseudopod fragments. This approach
              addresses  serious frame-of-reference questions that have arisen in  previous
              Reticulomyxa reactivation studies. These two sets  of experiments provide
              necessary information about the  mechanochemistry of the cell surface transport
              system and  serve as a prelude to the third set to identify, isolate,  and
              characterize that system's components. Reticulopodial  motility and cell
              surface transport are cell physiological  processes whose significance can be
              appreciated on a  planetary scale.  Since the Cambrian, forams and other 
              granuloreticuloseans have used their pseudopods in the  deposition of limestone
              shells and the structuring of marine  sediments -- geological processes that
              have caused dramatic  changes in the oceans and atmosphere. The proposed 
              experiments have been designed to elucidate the mechanism of  cell surface
              transport, arguably the most fundamental  physiological process of this
              important taxon, since it  mediates feeding, reproduction and shell
              construction.  %%%  Granuloreticuloseans (e.g., the Foraminifera) are protists 
              which have pseudopods which appear granular and net-like  (reticular). The
              study choses a representative  granuloreticulosean, Reticulomyxa, to serve as a
               window  into understanding the motility of  domains of the outer  membrane of
              the cell.  In the past, this surface motility on  the pseudopods (reticulopods)
              has been observed by labeling  the surface with visible particles. The
              particles move on a  "raft" comprised of a membrane domain.  The significance
              of  this transport can be appreciated on a planetary scale.  Since the
              Cambrian, forams and other granuloreticuloseans  have used their pseudopods in
              the deposition of limestone  shells and the structuring of marine sediments --
              geological  processes that have caused dramatic changes in the oceans  and
              atmosphere. The proposed e xperiments have been designed  to elucidate the
              mechanism of cell surface transport,  arguably the most fundamental
              physiological process of this  important taxon, since it mediates feeding,
              reproduction and  shell construction.  Much of the knowledge on cell motility 
              comes from studies on intracellular organelle transport,  which is mediated by
              "motor" proteins which run along  filamentous protein "tracks".  The tracks
              make up the  internal support network of the cell, the cytoskeleton, and  have
              a polarity which can determine the direction of  movement along them because
              most motor proteins move in a  polar, unidirectional fashion.  Cell surface
              domain  transport and intracellular organelle transport may occur  exclusively
              along one kind of cytoskeletal protein  structure, the microtubule. Correlative
              light and electron  microscopy can demonstrate that both plasma membrane
              domains  and organelles are directly linked to microtubules by  structurally
              distinct crossbridges. In addition, the  velocity profiles of these two
              transport phenomena are  virtually indistinguishable.  Consequently, cell
              surface  domain transport and intracellular organelle transport may  share a
              common mechanochemical mechanism and may be, in  fact, manifestations of the
              same basic cellular process.  This proposal outlines a series of experiments
              designed to  test this hypothesis by comparing directly the enzymatic 
              properties of  motor proteins responsible for organelle and  cell surface
              transport.  The stated hypothesis predicts that  the motor proteins for cell
              surface transport are identical  to those of organelle transport and will be
              refuted or  confirmed by direct comparison in the same cell models.  After
              completion of the first set of studies, the observed  bidirectionality of 
              plasma membrane domain transport along  individual microtubules is studied by
              reevaluating transport  in microsurgically prepared pseudopod fragments. Is
              there  one motor protein responsible for bidirectional transport or  two motor
              prote ins responsible for oppositely-directed  transport?  This approach
              addresses serious frame-of-  reference questions that have arisen in previous 
              Reticulomyxa reactivation studies. These two sets of  experiments provide
              necessary information about the  mechanochemistry of the cell surface transport
              system and  serve as a prelude to the third set to identify, isolate,  and
              characterize that system's components.  ***
