Title       : PaleoBank, a Relational Data Base for Paleontology: Subfamily Muricinae
               (Gastropoda) and Order Labechiida (Stromatoporoidea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9505100

Award Number: 9505100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. Kaesler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks support for two pilot studies to develop and test the
              prototype of PaleoBank, an electronic, relational data base for invertebrate
              paleontology.  Plans for PaleoBank involve its eventually encompassing all
              invertebrate organisms with a fossil record or, for extant genera, with a
              reasonable likelihood of becoming a part of the fossil record.  This effort
              will develop and test data-capture software that can be used by taxonomists to
              enter information into the data base.  PaleoBank will not involve retrofitting
              outdated taxonomic information from the literature into an electronic format. 
              Instead, it will be based on the latest information provided by specialists,
              who will contribute information through user-friendly, data-capture software
              written with the FoxPro data base management system.  PaleoBank will focus on
              genera, but contributors will also be encouraged to enter information on
              species.  They will be  required to enter taxonomy, morphology,
              biostratigraphy, biogeography, and bibliography.  In addition,  they will be
              encouraged to enter a number of kinds of e cological and environmental
              information.  PaleoBank will be distributed through such means as World-Wide
              Web and CD-ROM.  Two groups of  organisms have been selected for the pilot
              studies.  The subfamily Muricinae, is perhaps the most  thoroughly studied
              major group of snails.  The other taxon is the order Labechiida of the class 
              Stromatoporoidea, a group of extinct, calcareous, spongelike organisms.     The
              research will be  important in advancing knowledge in two ways.  First, the
              number of taxonomic specialists with a  synoptic view of the evolution and
              systematics of a large group of organisms is rapidly dwindling.  Specialists
              die, retire, change fields, and narrow the scope of their investigations to
              cope with the  explosion of knowledge.  When it is developed, PaleoBank will
              provide a means of capturing the  taxonomic knowledge of these specialists and
              of allowing  a broad range of biologists,  paleontologists, and nonspecialists
              to use that information in their studies.  Second, although the  principal
              purpose of the proposed research is to develop and test data-capture software,
              data bases on  the Muricinae and Labechiida will be interesting in their own
              right.  The muricine snails are  important biostratigraphically and
              paleoenvironmentally, and a comprehensive data base will facilitate  their use
              in solving geological problems.  Moreover, they occupy a high position in the
              food web of  reef ecosystems and can be use to assess the deterioration of
              those environments as a result of  pollutional stress.  One of the most active
              areas of research in paleontology is the study of mass  extinction.  The
              Labechiida, having survived a major mass-extinction event, can provide
              important  information on the role of mass extinction in the history of life
              and the patterns of life s recovery  from such decimating events.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
