Title       : Annual Meeting of the Society for Developmental Biology (SDB) August 26-29, 1995
               University of California San Diego
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9505723

Award Number: 9505723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Blau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadia Rosenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Dev Biol
	      9650 Rockville Pike
	      Bethesda, MD  208143998    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9505723  Blau    Funds are requested to help support expenses for invited
              speakers  for the 54th annual symposium of the Society for Developmental 
              Biology (SDB), entitled, "Genes, Development and Cancer", which  will be held
              August 26-29, 1995 at the University of California at  San Diego. This year's
              symposium is organized by Helen M. Blau,  current President of SDB, together
              with Nadia Rosenthal, Associate  Professor at Harvard Medical School, and will
              be attended by  researchers and teachers interested in the study of
              development,  including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. They expect
               that the meeting will be of medium size (300-400 registrants), and  they
              encourage junior level attendance by providing them some  financial support.
              The meeting will include a broad range of  topics, following the extremely
              successful organization of talks  and posters that was newly established for
              the past two years' SDB  annual meetings. Plant, animal and microbial systems
              will all be  represented in sessions organized around "themes" rather than 
              specific systems or organisms. A particular focus will be the  control of the
              cell cycle and its relationship to developmental  processes and cancer. They
              plan 60 scientific talks, beginning with  an opening evening keynote address.
              Highlighted during the next  three days will be a series of one keynote and six
              plenary sessions  that include eighteen exciting invited speakers.
              Additionally,  there will be eight "minisymposia" arranged in two sessions
              (four  minisymposia running in parallel during each session). The  minisymposia
              will be organized and chaired by experts in the areas  and at least two talks
              will be given by junior people in each, thus  providing them with an
              opportunity to speak at the national level.  Poster sessions will also provide
              opportunities for young people to  present their work. They will be available
              for viewing during most  of the meeting providing ample time for discussion.
              Reflecting the  growing role of the SDB in th e affairs and concerns of its 
              membership, this year's meeting will include three issue-oriented  workshops on
              education, the concerns of women, and on the concerns  of minorities.  ***
