Title       : Collaborative Research: Mathematical Sciences; Transitions and Defects in
               Ordered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9505078

Award Number: 9505078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274992             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Kinderlehrer davidk@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              950578  Kinderlehrer     This interdisciplinary group will investigate nonlinear
              material behavior  and related issues in analysis and computation. Its focus is
              materials which  undergo martensitic and magnetic phase transitions, with
              particular  application to shape memory and giant magnetostrictive materials.
              The theories  and computational methods under development by the authors will
              be applied to  the design of new actuator materials and composites. The authors
              propose to  design a composite that exhibits a strong two way shape memory
              effect, design  small scale, large-force actuators with low hysteresis, and
              formulate a  strategy for finding a magneto-memory material, a material which
              would combine  the most useful aspects of a shape memory (large strain) and
              magnetostrictive  (actuated by a magnetic field) material. The quantitative
              description of these  phenomena rests in the framework of nonlinear analysis,
              in particular within  the context of non-convex potentials whose equilibria are
              highly oscillatory  across widely varying length scales. Innovative numerical
              methods and codes  will be developed to compute the dynamics of complex
              microstructure in  response to a variety of environmental changes.   Active
              materials, that is,  materials whose structure transforms dramatically when
              subjected to external  stimuli like heat or electromagnetic fields, have
              enormous potential for use  as actuators and sensors across the spectrum of
              technology, from aerospace to  communications to medicine. This project
              addresses basic research directed  toward the improvement and optimization of
              these materials and the discovery  of new ones. The interplay between their
              microstructure and macroscopic  properties is fundamental to their exploitation
              and the study of these  properties leads to the frontiers of nonlinear theory,
              nonlinear analysis, and  scientific computation. The interdisciplinary training
              of graduate students  and postdoctoral associates is an integral part of this
              project.
