Title       : Ion-Molecule Reactions in Gas-Phase Clusters and Buffer Gas Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9505444

Award Number: 9505444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88988              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hales hales@hendrix.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hendrix College
	      1600 Washington Avenue
	      Conway, AR  72032    501/329-6811

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Prof. David Hales of Hendrix College will study the dependence   of of
              gas-phase ion-molecule reactions on ion internal energy.  To   accomplish this
              task two different experimental techniques will be used.    In the first,
              evidence will be sought for reactions which take place   within ionized
              clusters of molecules produced in a supersonic expansion   and ionized by
              electron impact.  Collisional relaxation of an ion in a   cluster involves
              potentially reactive interactions.  The second technique   involves discharge
              ionization within a high pressure flow tube prior to   expansion of the gas
              mixture into a vacuum.  In the pre-expansion   environment the ions undergo
              many thermalizing collisions with the buffer   gas for each collison with a
              potenntially reactive molecule.  The ions   which exit the flow tube are probed
              with a time of flight mass   spectrometer.  Differences in the results between
              the two techniques will   be analyzed in terms of the different environments in
              which the reactions   take place.  This research involves the participation of
              undergraduate   students.  Ion-molecule chemistry is one of the intensely
              pursued areas of   contemporary reaction chemistry.  This research will
              contribute to a   better understanding of the reaction processes that occur in
              different   gas phase environments, and the results will be of use in
              applications   such as atmospheric chemistry and others.  This research will be
                conducted in an undergraduate college and will involve undergraduate  
              students.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
