Title       : Efficient Extensions of Well-Founded Semantics for Functions, Aggregation and
               Collection Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9505036

Award Number: 9505036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80433              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Van Gelder avg@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Recent research has demonstrated that the well-founded  semantics  and its
              equivalent, the alternating fixpoint semantics, can be  implemented efficiently
              on deductive databases (relational  databases with  additional function free
              logical rules, which may  introduce intertwined  negation and recursion). Logic
              programming  is a natural candidate for a  database programming language 
              because it shares the relational paradigm. This  project is  studying
              extensions to traditional logical languages that are  likely to be useful for
              database programming, including nested  relations and  aggregation.   
              Deductive rules involving aggregation as a primitive operation  permit a
              natural and concise expression of several well-known  optimization  problems,
              such as shortest paths in a graph.  However, implementation of  such primitive
              operations is  complicated by the fact they they occur inside  recursion; that 
              is, the relation being aggregated within a deductive rule is  also  being
              defined in part by that same rule. Greater complications  are added  if the
              rules may contain negation. This project is  developing algorithms to 
              implement aggregation efficiently within  recursion and negation.    Collection
               types are a valuable adjunct to deductive  database languages, and are 
              closely related to aggregation,  nested relations, and complex objects.  A
              collection  type is any data type suitable for representing  a finite  set.
              With collection types, a language can manipulate relations  (and  nested
              relations) directly. This research is designing a language to  integrate 
              collection types with deductive database rules, with  sufficient restrictions
              on  the collection-typed objects to make  efficient implementation possible.  
              For example, the language  excludes unification among partially instantiated
              sets.  Integration of the functional programming paradigm and  the relational 
              paradigm of logic programming is also being  studied. Data typing plays a 
              central role. In logic programming  functional terms are normally 
              uninterpreted, and specific data  types are not declared. The main idea is to 
              establish contexts in  which functional terms are interpreted as user-defined 
              functions.  The objective is to provide a high level language that can 
              manipulate sets and relations in a convenient and understandable  way, with 
              sufficient power to solve practical applications.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
