Title       : Protein Assemblies Controlling Muscle Contraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9505458

Award Number: 9505458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Vibert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9505458  Vibert  The goals of this project are to determine the structures of
              muscle  thick and thin filaments and to interpret them in terms of the 
              recently determined atomic structures of the cmmponent proteins.   The head
              region of the myosin molecule, which contains its  enzymatic site and which
              interacts with actin to produce force, can  now be produced in native or
              modified form by molecular biological  techniques, and the atomic structure of
              a myosin head has been  determined by x-ray crystallography.  The structure of
              native and  mutant myosin heads attached to actin filaments will be determined 
              by electron microscopy of frozen-hydrated samples combined with 
              three-dimensional image reconstruction.  Structure determination at  10-15A
              resolution permits elements of protein secondary structure  such as  -helices
              can be recognized, but even at lower  resolution, fitting known atomic
              structures into the envelope of  the reconstructions allows them to be
              interpreted in detail.  Of  particular interest is the conformation of the
              regulatory domain of  the myosin head and how this changes when regulatory
              switching  occurs.  These structural methods will also be employed to study 
              regulation of contraction by the tropomyosin-troponin complex bound  to actin
              in the thin filaments; reconstructions will be interpreted  in terms of atomic
              models of actin and tropomyosin.  Of particular  interest is establishing the
              location and possible movements of  troponin in thin filaments at different
              stages of regulatory  switching.  Electron cryo-microscopy and image
              reconstruction will  also be used to determine how myosin subfilaments are
              incorporated  into native thick filaments.  Among the proteins known to
              associate  with myosin are those of the titin family; vertebrate titin plays 
              an elastic role in the muscle cell, and may also define how thick  filaments
              align during muscle development.  Co-assembly of myosin  and smaller titin
              isoforms believed to have structural and  regulatory roles will be exami ned by
              electron microscopy to  establish which features of native filament structure
              depend on the  interactions between these proteins.   %%%  Muscle contraction
              requires the organization of contractile and  regulatory proteins into large
              complex assemblies.  To understand  contraction in molecular terms, it is
              therefore necessary to know  not only the structures of the individual
              proteins, but also how  the proteins assemble into the larger structural units
              found in the  cell.  Two aspects of muscle cell organization and of the control
               of contraction are emphasized: the mechanisms by which protein  subunits
              regulate myosin-actin interaction and thus contraction,  and the process by
              which contractile and accessory proteins  assemble to form the filaments of the
              muscle cell.  The size and  complexity of the protein filaments in muscle means
              that the method  of choice for analyzing their structures is electron
              microscopy.   In cases where the filament components are symmetrically
              arranged,  image analysis offers a further powerful mathematical and 
              computational approach to determining their three-dimensional  structure and
              arrangement.  When atomic-level information about the  separated components is
              available, it can be incorporated to  produce a highly detailed picture of the
              functional units in the  muscle cell, and thus open a path to a new
              understanding of muscle  contraction at the molecular level.  ***
