Title       : Orbitally-Induced Variations in the Diurnal Cycle of Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9121398

Award Number: 9121398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45152              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall S. Cerveny cerveny@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Interpretation of the climatic impact of variations in the                
              earth's orbital mechanisms has progressed in recent decades to                 
              the point where individual mid-monthly caloric insolation totals               
              are now available.  Each refinement of these insolation                        
              variations has produced new insights into the influence of the                 
              earth's orbital mechanisms on the climate of the planet.  This is              
              important because disagreement exists about the ability of the                 
              current Milankovitch orbital theory of climatic change to explain              
              conflicting signals found in certain climate proxy records.  The               
              problems associated with this theory can be evaluated and                      
              possibly resolved through further refinements in the orbital                   
              influence down to the diurnal level.  This study continues that                
              process of refinement by defining the variations in the diurnal                
              (daily) cycle of specific mid-monthly insolation totals by means               
              of a computer simulation model.   The results should help to                   
              resolve past discrepancies in the paleoclimatic proxy data                     
              record.                                                                        
                   By expanding previous Milankovitch insolation studies to the              
              diurnal scale, this project opens new avenues of investigation                 
              and suggests the need for re-examination of previous studies of                
              climatic change.  In particular, a more precise record can be                  
              established regarding the termination of glacial periods, the                  
              occurrence of paleomonsoon events, and the fluctuations in sea-                
              level rise.
