Title       : Cooperative Research in Surface Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1992       
File        : a9121013

Award Number: 9121013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Torgny Gustafsson gustaf@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries award will                                
              support research collaboration between Torgny                                  
              Gustafsson of Rutgers University and Patricio                                  
              Haberle of the Universidad Technica Federico Santa                             
              Maria (UTFSM) in Valparaiso, Chile.  The project                               
              aims to examine fundamental questions of surface                               
              science, including how and why atoms rearrange                                 
              themselves and how such movements can be induced.                              
                                                                                             
              The researchers will (1) determine the geometric                               
              structure of surfaces, especially reconstructed                                
              ones, to better understand factors that affect                                 
              atomic positions at an interface, and (2) use this                             
              knowledge to construct surfaces with interesting and                           
              potentially useful properties.  Their main                                     
              experimental technique will be medium energy ion                               
              scattering, a powerful but not widely available                                
              method for determining surface structural                                      
              parameters.  Rutgers' capabilities in this regard                              
              are largely unique.  By widening the group of                                  
              collaborators, Rutgers will promote more widening                              
              the group of collaborators, Rutgers will promote                               
              more efficient use of its costly equipment.  The                               
              Chileans will prepare and characterize alkali metal                            
              overlayers at UTFSM, where Chile's first program in                            
              experimental surface science is being set up.  The                             
              laboratory will include facilities for scanning                                
              tunneling microscopy, an important complement to                               
              Rutgers' experimental capabilities.  Through this                              
              collaboration, both sides will be able to                                      
              immediately work on problems of international                                  
              interest.
