Title       : Eye Movements and Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9121148

Award Number: 9121148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulker Tulunay-Keesey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bahaa E. Saleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The human eye is never still; the eyes move even when a person                 
              gazes steadily at an object.  These involuntary movements of the               
              eye are minuscule, and have been extensively studied with respect              
              to their size, frequency and how they change according to the                  
              object being fixated.  A useful method for studying these eye                  
              movements is to render the retinal image steady in relation to                 
              the light receptors--the stabilized image technique.  After an                 
              initial  period of clear visibility, the image gradually fades                 
              and disappears, despite its constant presence on the retina.                   
              Understanding how and why retinally stabilized images disappear                
              is important to clarifying how the visual system detects and                   
              adapts to steady and moving images.                                            
                                                                                             
              The present research involves development of a quantitative model              
              of stabilized-image adaptation, relating these adaptation                      
              processes to known theories of light adaptation.  Three areas of               
              research are involved:  The spatial aspects of the adaptation                  
              process are studied in detail; the response of the adaptation                  
              process to uniform lights is measured; and the use of colored                  
              stimuli should help determine the physiological location of the                
              adaptation process, itself.  The development of a general model                
              from this research will provide a framework within which the                   
              effect of adaptation to any spatio-temporal signal can be                      
              assessed, including those generated by normal motions of the eye.
