Title       : Feedback Control of the Nuclear Magnetization State (SGER Award)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1992  
File        : a9121187

Award Number: 9121187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Schiano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Magin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to improve the                               
              performance of existing nuclear magnetic imaging and                           
              spectroscopy methods of applying the concepts of                               
              feedback control.  These methods are based on                                  
              observing the fluctuations in nuclear magnetization                            
              produced by sequences of RF pulses and, in the case of                         
              imaging, applied magnetic field gradients.                                     
              Conventional imaging and spectroscopy techniques are                           
              open-loop processes in that measurements of the                                
              magnetization state are used to optimize the pulse                             
              parameters between successive RF pulses.                                       
              This project focuses specifically on contrast                                  
              enhancement in magnetic resonance imaging.  A                                  
              feedback strategy that automatically adjusts pulse                             
              parameters to enhance the contrast between specified                           
              chemical species is developed.  The control design is                          
              verified experimentally on a commercial imager using a                         
              sample of water and oil.  An adaptive control algorithm                        
              tunes the pulse parameters so that the difference                              
              between the water and oil magnetization signals is                             
              maximized.  The significance of this research is twofold.                      
              First, it introduces the imaging and spectroscopy                              
              communities to the advantages afforded by using                                
              feedback.  Second, it provides a foundation on which to                        
              consider further applications of feedback concepts to                          
              nuclear magnetic imaging and spectroscopy.
