Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research on the Development of the Continental
               Crust in the Western Province of New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1991   
File        : a9121183

Award Number: 9121183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4280               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kimbrough   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 5941      NEW ZEALAND
Fld Applictn: 0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              12        Chemistry                               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a one-year collaborative project between               
              Professor David L. Kimbrough, Department of Geological Sciences, San           
              Diego State University, and Dr. Andrew J. Tulloch, New Zealand                 
              Geological Survey.  The scientists will carry out radiometric dating           
              of crystalline basement rocks of New Zealand, with a view toward               
              obtaining more information about geological events in New Zealand              
              associated with the fragmentation of the Gondwana supercontinent,              
              and, more generally, contributing to a better understanding of                 
              continental crustal evolution in the circum-Pacific region.  The               
              activity takes place under the U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science            
              Program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The researchers will measure uranium-lead (U-Pb) isotopic abundances           
              in the mineral zircon, a common trace constituent in the granitic              
              rocks to be studied here.  The zircon U-Pb method is a reliable and            
              widely applied technique for determining age relations of geologic             
              events.  It is especially useful in studying the plutonic rocks of             
              New Zealand, where other isotope systems in these rocks may have               
              been "reset" by thermal and hydrothermal events subsequent to the              
              initial crystallization of the granite bodies.  Facilities for                 
              carrying out U-Pb dating of minerals exist at San Diego State                  
              University, though not in New Zealand, and so this aspect of the               
              ongoing cooperation between the scientists will be carried out                 
              during a research visit by Dr. Tulloch to San Diego.  Funds from this          
              award will assist in providing for necessary materials and supplies,           
              as well as for undergraduate student involvement in the research.
