Title       : Quantile Regression, Smoothing, and Robust Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9121776

Award Number: 9121776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Koenker Rkoenker@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Portnoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Classical statistical and econometric methods underpin almost all              
              empirical and some theoretical research in economics.  But these               
              methods are subject to restrictive assumptions that often do not               
              hold in real-world economic problems.  Applied estimates using                 
              classical statistical tools are sometimes very sensitive to small              
              changes in the assumptions about underlying economic                           
              relationships or to a few "outlier" observations.  Robust                      
              inference is a very active field of research in statistics and                 
              econometrics that provides tools for applied economic research                 
              that do not easily breakdown because they are relatively                       
              insensitive to outlier observations or changes in assumptions.                 
              The contribution of this project comes in three areas of robust                
              inference: (1) conditional quantile methods for parametric linear              
              models, (2) nonparametric estimation of conditional quantile                   
              functions, and (3) global versus local measures of robustness for              
              statistical procedures.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project extends work on regression rank-scores to a broad                 
              range of new estimation and testing problems.  Regression rank-                
              scores defined from the dual solution to the regression quantile               
              problem provide a natural foundation for rank based methods of                 
              estimation and inference for the linear model.  Applications to                
              testing for heteroscedasticity and to time-series models are                   
              proposed.  A new method for forming confidence and prediction                  
              intervals for quantile regression is introduced, and                           
              investigation of its efficacy is proposed.  Efficient computer                 
              algorithms for application of regression quantile and regression               
              rank-score methods are developed.                                              
                                                                                             
              Several approaches to nonparametric estimation of conditional                  
              quantile functions are studied.  Computation is carried out                    
              within the linear programming framework of ordinary regression                 
              quantiles; moreover the solution for various bandwidths can be                 
              formulated as a parametric linear programming problem and is thus              
              amenable to efficient solution.  Other approaches may be based on              
              weighted regression quantile estimates and provide a general                   
              kernel-based approach.  Substantial theoretical, methodological,               
              and applied work concerning these approaches is carried out.                   
                                                                                             
              Further investigation of estimation and test breakdown is                      
              proposed.  The project develops versions of regression rank-score              
              tests with improved breakdown properties.  The research                        
              investigates the general concept of breakdown, its relationship                
              with the tail behavior of estimation procedures, and general                   
              methods of combining high efficiency with high breakdown                       
              robustness.
