Title       : Studies of Plasma Structure in the Ionosphere Using Scintillation and
               Tomographic Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9121660

Award Number: 9121660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Franke s-franke@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. C. Yeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chao H. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              We propose to investigate the ionospheric plasma structures using              
              two techniques: tomographic technique and scintillation                        
              technique.  Each is summarized in the following.                               
              1.   Tomographic technique: Our simulation studies over the past               
                   several years, as well as several studies by others, have                 
                   demonstrated the potential and capability of imaging                      
                   ionospheric structures of horizontal scales from tens of                  
                   kilometers to hundreds of kilometers.  We propose to set up               
                   a network of stations to receive Doppler shifted signals                  
                   from the navigation satellites NNSS for the purpose of                    
                   imaging the equatorial ionosphere using the tomographic                   
                   technique to learn about the dynamics of the equatorial                   
                   anomaly region.  This project has associated tasks in repair              
                   and modification of donated JMR geodetic TRANSIT receivers,               
                   development of a low-cost PC based data acquisition system,               
                   development of receivers at selected field sites, data                    
                   management and processing, further development of computer                
                   algorithm, and data interpretation.                                       
              2.   Scintillation technique: This project is concerned with                   
                   analyzing already collected scintillation data at various                 
                   sites of geophysical interests.  One station (Spitzbergen,                
                   77.00oN, 15.55o, geomagnetic dip 73.43oN) is a polar cusp                 
                   station.  The small structures observed by the scintillation              
                   technique can be related to the presence of auroras, the                  
                   configuration of the interplanetary magnetic field,                       
                   electromagnetic omissions, etc.  In the Pacific-Asia region               
                   data from a network of stations have been collected to                    
                   analyze the relation of scintillation with the traveling                  
                   ionospheric disturbances.  At equator the scintillation data              
                   can be correlated with the radar data to investigate the                  
                   relation between ionospheric motions and the production of                
                   small ionospheric structures.
