Title       : Hydrocarbon Trace Gases in ASTEX/MAGE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9121739

Award Number: 9121739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257800             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Sherwood Rowland rowland@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In  this Mage proposal, the PIs propose to determine the                  
              hydrocarbon and  hydrocarbon composition of air samples collected              
              during the ASTEX/MAGE campaign.  Proposed measurements include                 
              approximately 25 chlorocarbon compounds containing one or two                  
              carbon atoms and 50 or more hydrocarbons ranging in molecular                  
              weight from methane to the terpenes (C4 - C10).  The overall                   
              objective is to provide information for the construction and                   
              testing of detailed photochemical models to examine the chemical               
              cycles controlling each of the measured species and of the                     
              unmeasured reactive free radicals such as OH and Cl.  The Pis                  
              propose to set up a remote laboratory in Miami, Florida where gas              
              chromatographic analyses of grab samples obtained from aircraft                
              will be conducted.  (Note: this is a change from the originally                
              proposed remote site of Santa Maria; see new work statement and                
              budget sheets.)                                                                
                   In this MAGE proposal the PIs plan to determine the                       
              hydrocarbon and halocarbon composition of air samples collected                
              during the ASTEX/MAGE campaign.  With knowledge of these                       
              concentrations, detailed photochemical models can be constructed               
              and tested for the chemical cycles controlling each of the measured            
              species, and also of the unmeasured reactive free radicals such as             
              HO and Cl.  Specifically, the measurements will provide data (or               
              upper limits) on the concentrations of approximately 25                        
              chlorocarbon compounds containing  one or two carbon atoms and                 
              numerous hydrocarbons.  In particular, the chlorofluorocarbon                  
              compounds and carbon tetrachloride are very long-lived (>50 years)             
              in the atmosphere and are entirely anthropogenic.  These compounds             
              are excellent markers for air contaminated by recent injections                
              from urban or industrial areas.  Shorter-lived chlorocarbons are               
              also excellent markers of anthropogenic activity, and the                      
              correlations among such species are useful for distinguishing                  
              between air masses mixed from multiple urban sources and                       
              homogeneous air masses subjected to different HO  radical                      
              exposures.  Additionally, several alkanes appear to have their                 
              primary origin in anthropogenic activities, and on occasion furnish            
              through multiple correlations enough information to identify                   
              particular source regions.
