Title       : RUI: Acquisition of high speed centrifuges, a liquid scintillation counter, and
               an automated sequence reader/ densitometer for isolation and characterization
               of macromole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1992   
File        : a9121716

Award Number: 9121716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54863              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Grady   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Braedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary J. Clancy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lehman L. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,9141,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests $100,750 for acquisition of four                        
              major, multiuser equipment items: two high speed                               
              centrifuges, a liquid scintillation counter, and an                            
              automated sequence reader/scanning densitometer. The                           
              five research programs that support this application                           
              encompass a diverse assortment of basic biological                             
              research, including the areas of cell biology,                                 
              evolutionary genetics, molecular biology, molecular                            
              genetics, and microbial genetics. A primary objective                          
              of each of these programs and many others within the                           
              Department of Biological Sciences is isolation,                                
              purification, and characterization of protein and                              
              nucleic acid fractions. The requested items are basic                          
              instrumental requirements for modern techniques in cell                        
              and molecular biology that are used to achieve this                            
              objective. As such, each of the five research programs                         
              rely heavily on the instrumentation requested in this                          
              proposal.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research projects that support this request involve                        
              undergraduate student research projects, M.S. thesis                           
              topics, and faculty research efforts. The equipment                            
              will significantly enhance the research, training, and                         
              instructional capabilities of the Department of                                
              Biological Sciences. Most of the faculty and graduate                          
              students in the department will require the                                    
              instrumentation in their research. Undergraduate                               
              students working under faculty supervision will receive                        
              training and research experience with the equipment.
