Title       : Functional Limit Theory in Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9121914

Award Number: 9121914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project encompasses four distinct, but interrelated areas of              
              research in probabilistic functional limit theory.  They are: (1)              
              optimal tests of parameter constancy, (2) median unbiased                      
              estimation and confidence interval construction for nonstationary              
              time series, (3) empirical process limit theory for dependent                  
              non-identically distributed random variables, and (4)                          
              semiparametric econometric methods.  The results of this research              
              will provide powerful, new tools for applied economic analysis                 
              including research on the economics of global environmental                    
              change.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The proposed work on parameter constancy covers tests of                       
              structural change with an unknown change point and tests of                    
              regime switching.  This part of the project is important because               
              there currently are no asymptotically optimal tests available for              
              testing for parameter constancy when the standard regularity                   
              conditions fail.  The proposed research on median unbiased                     
              estimation and confidence interval construction is significant                 
              because current tests have low power.  The new tools developed                 
              under this project can be used to provide analysts more                        
              information for the types of time series problems that are                     
              frequently encountered in empirical economics.  The basic limit                
              results for dependent non-identically distributed random                       
              variables also have applications in a wide variety of time series              
              econometric problems.  In the fourth area of research the project              
              develops tests for heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation,                        
              asymptotic normality for semiparametric and nonparametric                      
              estimators.  Semiparametric estimators are widely used by                      
              economists because the data for many economic problems do not fit              
              the assumptions required for standard parametric analysis and                  
              these new tests can be used for a very wide range of                           
              semiparametric estimators.  These methods are especially                       
              appropriate for the type of forecasting and empirical analytical               
              problems encountered in the economics of global change because of              
              the poor quality of the data, the uncertainty about many of the                
              underlying economic relationships, and the possibility of changes              
              in the structure of the economic system being studied.
