Title       : Sex, Gender, and Values in Biological and Behavioral Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9121772

Award Number: 9121772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeri A. Sechzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vita C. Rabinowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florence L. Denmark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pace University
	      Pace Plaza
	      New York, NY  10038    212/346-1200

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1148,1193,7915,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the extent of sex bias in selection              
              of research subjects in biological and behavioral research.  For               
              animal studies, scientific journals will be surveyed and data                  
              coded to determine the number of single sex studies, sex-                      
              comparative studies, observed sex differences and where                        
              generalization of research findings occurred from single-sex                   
              studies to the opposite sex of the same or other species without               
              apparent justification.  Then, the extent of sex bias in clinical              
              research with human subjects will be documented through a similar              
              survey of clinical research journals.  This inquiry will focus on              
              four major disorders affecting men and women:  AIDS/HIV                        
              infection, concer, coronary heart disease, and depression.  Once               
              relevant human studies have been identified, the investigators                 
              will look back to the animal experiments on which the clinical                 
              tests and trials were based, to determine if sex differences were              
              studied or whether generalizations were made from single sex                   
              animal studies.  This investigation would identify the extent,                 
              nature, and appropriateness of generalizing research findings                  
              from single sex studies and ultimately stimulate awareness of the              
              problems inherent in generalization and of the need for rigorous               
              sex-comparative research.  The investigators and advisors are                  
              well qualified; the project plan is good; the budget is very                   
              reasonable; results are likely to have intellectual and practical              
              significance.  The proposal is recommended for support with high               
              priority.
