Title       : Frontal Brain Asymmetry, Emotion, and Self-regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9121137

Award Number: 9121137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Tomarken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              For a number of years, there has been a wide-ranging interest in               
              the biological basis of personality and temperament.  However,                 
              few reliable biological markers of temperament have been                       
              identified.  Recent research has shown that resting                            
              electroencephalographic (EEG) asymmetry recorded from frontal                  
              regions of the brain is a biological marker that predicts                      
              individual differences in emotional reactivity and in emotional                
              traits.  This research has shown that individuals characterized                
              by relative activation of right hemisphere frontal regions have                
              an increased predisposition for negative affect and a decreased                
              predisposition for positive affect.  The opposite pattern appears              
              characteristic of individuals with relative left frontal                       
              activation.  However, the research has left unclear precisely                  
              what predisposition are linked to frontal asymmetry.  In                       
              addition, prior work has not linked anterior asymmetry to known                
              functions mediated by the frontal lobes.  On the basis of                      
              evidence concerning functions mediated by the frontal lobes and                
              evidence concerning affective traits that are linked to anterior               
              asymmetry, it is proposed that the critical predispositions                    
              linked to frontal asymmetry are individual differences in                      
              cognitive and related processes that serve to regulate or                      
              modulate emotional reactions or goal-directed performance on                   
              tasks that elicit significant emotion.  It is hypothesized that                
              relative left anterior activation promotes access to cognitive                 
              processes that serve to amplify or sustain positive affect and to              
              inhibit or dampen negative affect.  It is hypothesized that                    
              relative right anterior activation is linked to the opposite                   
              pattern.  To test these hypotheses, four experiments will be                   
              conducted to assess the relation between resting frontal                       
              asymmetry and: 1. various components of a "state" vs "action"                  
              orientation in response to experimentally induced failure; 2.                  
              self-focused attentional responses to success and failure; 3.                  
              selective memory for affectively toned events; and 4. selective                
              attention to affective stimuli.  These studies will help                       
              elucidate the critical predispositions linked to resting frontal               
              asymmetry and will have more general implications for models of                
              the  contribution of the cerebral cortex to individual                         
              differences in  emotion-related personality traits.  In addition,              
              because few studies have assessed the relation between the                     
              prefrontal cortex and the regulation of emotion, the present                   
              studies will contribute to knowledge concerning the functions                  
              served by this clearly important, yet largely uncharted, region                
              of the brain.
