Title       : Development of an Optical Laser Trap for the Study of Biological Media and
               Cellular Interactions (Resubmission of DIR-9102304)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9121325

Award Number: 9121325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Sonek gjsonek@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Berns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The technique of optical laser trapping is, potentially, a powerful            
              tool for studying fundamental interactions of light with biological            
              media on a microscopic scale.  The ability to interprete, quantify,            
              and predict the effects of coherent radiation forces, will be key              
              to its effective use and development as an analytical tool in                  
              biomedical and surgical applications.  Herein, we describe the                 
              development of a single beam, infrared optical trapping system, and            
              its use, as a micromanipulation tool and a noncontact force                    
              transducer, in the study of biological media and cellular                      
              interactions,  The system, consisting of a tunable laser source, a             
              high resolution microforce transducer, forward scattering detector,            
              and data acquisition system, is to be used in the (1)                          
              quantification of trap generated forces and thermal contributions              
              to the confinement process; and (2) basic study of red blood cell,             
              chromosome, and organelle micromanipulation behavior in a single               
              beam optical potential.  Other potential applications for the                  
              optical trapping system to be developed herein are also described.             
              An artificially engineered organic liposome model is presented as              
              a way of determining, in a controlled fashion, the physical and                
              optical characteristics of cell and cell membrane samples, and                 
              their effect on optical trapping performance.  In addition, a light            
              scattering model, and set of experimental measurements, is to be               
              used in the correlation of theoretical and experimental results.               
              This quantitative theory is applied, in one case, to the cell                  
              biology study of transport mechanisms along microtubules.  A                   
              working knowledge of the physical parameters that are responsible              
              for generating and maintaining an optical trap, and their effect on            
              host biological samples, should be useful to both researchers and              
              practitioners of optical trapping systems.
