Title       : Electron Transfer in the Cytochrome c - Peroxidases Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9121414

Award Number: 9121414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Erman jerman@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lidia B. Vitello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1166,9104,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The cytochrome c-cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) system provides an              
              exceedingly rich opportunity to investigate the intimate details of            
              protein-protein interactions and long-range electron transfer                  
              between physiologically related heme proteins.  The objectives of              
              this research proposal lie in two areas.  This first area is to                
              characterize the interaction between both horse and yeast iso-1                
              cytochrome c with yeast CcP.  Experiments designed to clarify the              
              stoichiometry of binding between cytochrome c and CcP will be                  
              performed to determine if, and under what conditions, more than one            
              cytochrome c may bind to CcP. The high-affinity cytochrome c                   
              binding site on CcP will be mapped through site-directed                       
              mutagenesis.  The role of individual amino acids at the binding                
              site will be assessed through thermodynamic measurements of the                
              binding affinity.  The location of any secondary interaction sites             
              will also be determined through site-directed mutagenesis.  The                
              second area of interest is to characterize electron transfer                   
              between the heme groups of cytochrome c and CcP.  Transient-state              
              kinetic techniques will be used to investigate the rate of electron            
              transfer from ferrocytochrome c to the oxidized intermediate of CcP            
              and the rate of redox equilibration between the heme iron and Trp-             
              191 in CcP compound II.  The specificity of the reaction dynamics              
              and the electron transfer pathway will be explored through site-               
              directed mutagenesis of CcP.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This work should lead to a better understanding of protein-protein             
              recognition in general, and of heme proteins, which include                    
              hemoglobin and the proteins in energy metabolism, in particular
