Title       : MOA Between NUSC and NSF
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1991 
File        : a9121047

Award Number: 9121047
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Patrick D. Smith                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 31,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Katan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Navy/Nusc-Conn
	      New London Laboratory
	      New London, CT  06320    /   -

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5182,
Abstract    :
              This proposal represents the first specific task definitions and               
              associated funding increments under the general scope of the                   
              Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between the National Science                     
              Foundation Division of Polar Programs (NSF/DPP) and the Naval                  
              Underwater Systems Center (NUSC), New London Laboratory, New                   
              London, CT.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The purpose of the MOA is to provide a framework for NUSC to                   
              provide analytical and experimental investigations into the                    
              applicability of burst mode communications techniques via meteor               
              trails and ionospheric mechanisms and via high frequency (HF) radio            
              using state-of-the-art link management technology (automatic link              
              establishment, or ALE).                                                        
                                                                                             
              NUSC will utilize its resources and research into similar issues               
              in the Arctic to the benefit of both agencies.  The work will                  
              characterize the performance of the significant HF propagation                 
              channels used for communications in the United States Antarctic                
              Program (USAP), rigorously evaluate the performance of ALE                     
              technology in the souther polar region over USAP channels, make                
              recommendations to the USAP suitable for use in medium range                   
              communications planning for HF systems modernization, and                      
              rigorously evaluate the absolute performance of burst mode                     
              communications and provide a relative comparison of the performance            
              of competing burst mode technologies to assist the USAP in long                
              range communications planning for the improvement of field party               
              and inter-base communications for the USAP within Antarctica.                  
                                                                                             
              The MOA outlines a broad definition of the problem areas that NUSC             
              will investigate for NSF/DPP, and it does not define specific tasks            
              or task funding levels.  The specific tasks and associated funding             
              are to be identified by the NSF/DPP as the need arises, and these              
              tasks shall be managed under the framework of the MOA.                         
                                                                                             
              This proposal represents the first explicit tasking to NUSC under              
              the MOA.
