Title       : Jumping the Gun: Intertemporal Instability in Two-Sided Matching and Related
               Markets, Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1994  
File        : a9121968

Award Number: 9121968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin E. Roth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves parallel theoretical and empirical                       
              investigations into the behavior of two sided matching markets,                
              and related markets.  It focuses on the phenomenon of "jumping the             
              gun," in which market transactions come earlier and earlier, in                
              response to competition, and resulting in various types of market              
              failure.  Preliminary indications are that this may be a much more             
              common form of market failure than is generally recognized.  The               
              empirical part of the investigation will focus on a number of other            
              markets which appear to have experienced this phenomenon.  In this             
              regard, some of the markets which present promising targets for                
              this investigation are labor markets in medicine (for specialty                
              positions), law (for associate positions in law partnerships and               
              clerkships in Federal courts in the U.S., and for "articling                   
              positions" in Canada), dentistry (particularly oral surgery),                  
              clinical psychology (pre-doctoral internships), the entry level                
              market for new graduates of elite Japanese universities, and the               
              market for post-season college football bowls.                                 
                                                                                             
              Preliminary indications are that most if not all of these markets              
              have at some point in their histories experienced similar market               
              failures, and have in many cases adopted specific institutional                
              arrangements to deal with these failures.  One focus of the                    
              investigation will be to examine these market failures and the                 
              institutional arrangements developed in response.  Another focus               
              will be the degree and manner in which participants in these                   
              markets engage in strategic behavior adapted to particular                     
              institutional arrangements.  These issues also raise new                       
              theoretical problems, which will be pursued.
