Title       : Geomorphological Investigations in the Naco Valley, NW Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9121386

Award Number: 9121386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45016              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Schortman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, Drs. Edward                    
              Schortman, Patricia Urban and their colleagues have conducted                  
              archaeological survey and excavation in the Naco Valley in                     
              Honduras.  This work has revealed the presence of a complex                    
              prehistoric polity which flourished during the first millennium                
              A.D.  The central site of La Sierra contains large numbers of                  
              both monumental platforms as well as smaller constructions.  The               
              surrounding region also has many sites, all significantly smaller              
              than La Sierra itself.  This suggests that La Sierra represents                
              the capital of a state level polity which encompasses the entire               
              Naco Valley and possibly extends beyond these physiographic                    
              limits.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Between ca 950-1000 AD, a dramatic change took place in the Naco               
              Valley.  Population rapidly declined and drastic settlement                    
              shifts occurred.  Drs. Schortman and Urban wish to understand the              
              reasons for this and speculate that environmental change and                   
              depletion may be the cause.  They will thus collect data through               
              geomorphological investigation.  They will reconstruct ancient                 
              patterns of land use, hydrology and erosion.  Field and                        
              laboratory studies will construct a geologic and soil map of the               
              region, assess the fertility and crops grown in ancient                        
              agricultural fields and determine the extent and intensity of                  
              prehistoric hill slope erosion.                                                
                                                                                             
              The research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              increase our understanding of how complex societies develop, are               
              maintained and eventually collapse.  The project will also                     
              provide data from a relatively unknown area and these will be of               
              interest to a large number of archaeologists.  Finally, because                
              the research is based at an undergraduate institution and                      
              students will be taken into the field, it will provide a first                 
              hand introduction to how science is conducted and hopefully                    
              encourage these individuals to pursue careers in this area.
