Title       : Natural Casual Induction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9121298

Award Number: 9121298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia W. Cheng cheng@psych.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research project is concerned about how ordinary people                   
              induce the causes of events.  There are two aspects to this                    
              question:                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The first is what is computed in the covariational component of                
              causal induction.  Covariation, the difference between the                     
              probability of an effect given the presence of a potential causal              
              feature and that probability given the absence of that feature,                
              has generally been regarded as a necessary although insufficient               
              criterion of normative causal induction.  Contrary to prior                    
              research, recent work by Cheng and Novick has shown that a single              
              reliable mechanism probably underlies this essential component.                
              Uncertainty remains, however, regarding what exactly this                      
              component computes.  In particular, Rescorla and Wagner's                      
              associationist model, the dominant model in animal conditioning,               
              can account for many of the findings in human causal induction.                
              Project I involves three predictions that differentiate between                
              Rescorla and Wagner's model and Cheng and Novick's model, to be                
              tested in three experiments.  This project may yield a unified                 
              account of the covariation component in humans and animals.                    
                                                                                             
              Project II aims at resolving a puzzling finding about the type of              
              information gathered to test a hypothesis and the type of                      
              information used in evaluating a causal hypothesis.  Recent                    
              evidence indicates that in evaluating a causal hypothesis, people              
              spontaneously make use of the frequency of the effect in the                   
              absence of a potential cause.  Research on the gathering of                    
              information for hypothesis testing, however, indicates that                    
              people do not search for this type of information.  Project II                 
              will consist of three experiments that address two issues.                     
              First, are people in fact able to obtain indirectly and to use                 
              such information despite failing to directly gather it?  The                   
              revision of hypotheses is one way of obtaining such information                
              indirectly.  Second, is there a dissociation between what people               
              think they do in testing causal hypotheses and what they in fact               
              do?  Project II may provide an explanation of this puzzling                    
              finding and lead to the discovery of two distinct types of causal              
              reasoning.
