Title       : Household Economic Organization and Community Integration: The Basis of Social
               Complexity in the Central Maya Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9121701

Award Number: 9121701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anabel Ford ford@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the inhospitable lowland regions of Middle America,                         
              prehistoric Mayan peoples evolved a civilization which produced                
              dramatic large scale architecture, a highly centralized class                  
              stratified society and which integrated large areas through well               
              developed trade mechanisms.  Although this phenomenon has                      
              intrigued archaeologists for almost a century, they still do not               
              understand the processes which led to the emergence and                        
              maintenance of this society.  Dr. Anabel Ford has worked for many              
              years in the Belize River area of Belize.  Based on extensive                  
              survey and the analysis of recovered materials, she has                        
              postulated a model of economic specialization in which household               
              units living in slightly different environmental zones focussed                
              on slightly different activities and then traded across these                  
              zones.  This, she believes, provides the underlying basis for                  
              Mayan development in this area.                                                
                                                                                             
              With NSF support, Dr. Ford will excavate a series of small                     
              household sites located in one remaining zone which she has not                
              studied in detail.  This will set her survey data into a broader               
              and more meaningful context and will provide a basis for cross                 
              zone comparison.  She will conduct large scale horizontal                      
              exposures to uncover entire household units.  The ceramics, chert              
              and obsidian remains will be collected and analyzed to address                 
              three major questions: the character of the domestic economy; the              
              kinds and degree of craft production and distribution; and the                 
              influence of local, regional and inter-regional exchange.  Since               
              both "elite" and peasant" households will be included in the                   
              sample, it should be possible to determine how such strategies                 
              are related to class.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  Although                      
              archaeologists have excavated many Mayan sites, the primary focus              
              has been on large ceremonial centers.  Dr. Ford's project, which               
              concentrates on household structures will help to remedy this                  
              situation.  The project includes an undergraduate student and                  
              will contribute to the development of a promising young                        
              scientist.
