Title       : A Multiple Input 90 Millimeter Spectrograph
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9121730

Award Number: 9121730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy D. Newman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chromex Inc
	      2705-B Pan American Fwy.
	      Albuquerque, NM  87107    505/344-6270

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project                
              is in the general area of spectrometry in the subfield of                      
              chemical instrumentation.  Recent years have seen significant                  
              advances in light detection technology and computer processing                 
              power.  Very sensitive two-dimensional array detectors, e.g. CCD               
              arrays, and fast computers capable of processing vast quantities               
              of near real-time data are available at moderate cost.  The                    
              missing building block in the design and development of a                      
              spectrometer that can take advantage of these technologies is an               
              optical system capable of two dimensional imaging of high                      
              quality, particularly in a compact short focal-length                          
              configuration.  Chromex has developed a method of producing high               
              quality aspheric optics, the essential optical components for                  
              stigmatic imaging capability.  This technology will be applied in              
              the investigation of a full-spectrum multiple-input stigmatic-                 
              imaging spectrograph design.  The spectrograph will be small                   
              (100mm focal length) and extremely rugged.  Fiber optic                        
              interfaces will be investigated that will allow up to eight                    
              simultaneous inputs.  The Phase I research established that the                
              concept is feasible.  Further, the Phase I results showed that an              
              imaging spectrograph of this concept can be expected to provide a              
              significant gain in signal-to-noise over conventional designs.                 
              The research in this Phase II project will result in a                         
              spectrograph with unprecedented capabilities.                                  
                                                                                             
              This research will result in the development of a spectrometer                 
              with capabilities that are not currently available.  The ability               
              to measure spectra from multiple in-situ sources will provide an               
              instrument useful in remote applications employing multiple                    
              sensors such as process and combustion monitoring.
