Title       : Mathematical Sciences: 1992 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar on "Exploiting Symmetry in
               Applied and Numerical Analysis"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9121007

Award Number: 9121007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63080              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Georg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Symmetry plays an important role in nearly all branches of                
              science.  This is particularly evident in theoretical physics,                 
              where representation theory has long been a primary tool.                      
              Symmetry aspects have only recently been exploited in certain                  
              branches of mathematics.  In particular, symmetry has only begun               
              to be exploited in any systematic way in numerical analysis.  In               
              applied analysis, the study of symmetry is much more well-                     
              developed.  In the area of classical differential equations, the               
              understanding of symmetry groups as a central tool has been                    
              realized since the last century.  In the relatively more recent                
              area of bifurcation theory, symmetry has been exploited                        
              systematically only in recent years.  There is a growing                       
              collection of researchers in numerical analysis who are currently              
              attempting to use symmetry groups as a fundamental tool in their               
              work.                                                                          
                   This project will support the 1992 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar                
              in Applied Mathematics to be held from July 26 - August 1, 1992                
              at Colorado State University.  The topic of this conference (the               
              twenty-second in this series) is Exploiting Symmetry in Applied                
              and Numerical Analysis.  The major aim of the conference is to                 
              provide a wide-ranging survey of the exploitation of symmetry in               
              applied and numerical analysis.  A purpose of the seminar is to                
              stimulate interaction between aspects of applied mathematics                   
              (e.g., partial differential equations, integral equations,                     
              bifurcation), numerical mathematics (e.g., numerical linear                    
              algebra, boundary and finite element methods), core mathematics                
              (e.g., representation theory of groups), and classical physics                 
              (e.g., Taylor and Benard problems).  The seminar will have both                
              an entry level summer school component intended for junior                     
              researchers and a frontier research level aspect.
