Title       : Mobility and Sedentism at Southwestern Pit Structure Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9121254

Award Number: 9121254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Gilman pgilman@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Patricia Gilman will conduct one season of archaeological                  
              excavation in the San Simon drainage, located in Southeastern                  
              Arizona.  She will focus on the Pit Structure period which dates               
              from ca. AD 500-1050 and excavate a series of habitation                       
              structures of varying size.  Entire structures as well as                      
              immediate surrounding areas will be completely opened to provide               
              a full picture of settlement pattern.  A wide range of recovered               
              materials will be analyzed to determine chronology, subsistence                
              practices and degree of mobility.  An attempt will also be made                
              to determine the season when each site was occupied.                           
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to reconstruct the settlement and                  
              mobility pattern during the Pit House period.  For decades                     
              archaeologists have studied the large pit house structures which               
              give this period its name.  These semi-buried houses have been                 
              interpreted as "permanent" structures and taken to imply a                     
              settled way of life.  Dr. Gilman, however, has noted that in                   
              other regions of the world similar structures are used on a                    
              seasonal basis and she hypothesizes that the same may hold true                
              in the U.S. Southwest.  This position is supported by the                      
              observation that smaller sites from the same time period are also              
              found in the region and these may represent a different part of a              
              seasonal round.  The planned excavations and analyses are                      
              designed to test this possibility.                                             
                                                                                             
              In the Southwestern United States archaeologists have traced the               
              transformation of prehistoric groups from small scale hunting and              
              gathering societies to large polities with year round settlements              
              and centralized political organization.  However, the process                  
              which lead to this change is not well understood.  Increasing                  
              sedentism probably played a role, but just what is uncertain.                  
              This research should help to resolve this question.  It will also              
              produce data of interest to many archaeologists.
