Title       : Political Stability, Security of Tenure, and Natural Resource Conservation in
               Developing Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1992     
File        : a9121859

Award Number: 9121859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38418              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Deacon deacon@econ.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to investigate the general                      
              proposition that stable political and legal institutions are key               
              ingredients for the secure property rights needed to induce                    
              investment in and conservation of natural resource and                         
              environmental assets.  The focus of attention will be on the way               
              tropical forests are used in developing countries and the primary              
              goal is to assess, empirically, the importance of stable                       
              political and legal institutions to observed measures of the way               
              these resources are used.  This work will be carried out first by              
              developing a theoretical framework that relates insecurity of                  
              tenure to the conservation incentives of private resource owners               
              and public resource managers.  Empirical analysis, based on the                
              theoretical framework, will compare the principal hypothesis to                
              two alternatives, that tropical deforestation and similar                      
              phenomena are caused by the process of economic growth, and that               
              the primary cause of these outcomes is population pressure.                    
                                                                                             
              Principal data sources have been identified to provide the                     
              information needed for the empirical work.  These sources provide              
              data of three types that are needed to examine the hypothesis of               
              interest: (1) indicators of tropical forest and other natural                  
              resource use in developing countries;  (2) measures of legal and               
              political conditions in these countries;  (3) information on                   
              social and economic conditions.   Major effort will be directed                
              to data collection and exploratory econometric analysis.
