Title       : The Effects of Extra-Legal and Legal Sanctions on the Prevalence of Criminal
               Offenses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9121856

Award Number: 9121856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold G. Grasmick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Bursik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              BURSIK                                                                          
                                                                                            
              Deterrence research related to criminal behavior has focused                   
              traditionally on the effectiveness of legal sanctions in the form              
              of physical and material deprivations.  The research of Grasmick               
              and Bursik is embedded in a new line of inquiry that emphasizes                
              the role of extra-legal factors in controlling anti-social                     
              behavior.  Theoretically, the study will contribute to deterrence              
              research by linking the moral dimension of controlling anti-social             
              behavior emphasized in sociology with the utilitarian paradigm of              
              rational actors, a notion drawn from the expected utility models               
              associated with economics.  Their approach will expand the                     
              utilitarian paradigm by incorporating personal moral beliefs and               
              community standards in the calculation of expected costs that                  
              rational actors weigh in assessing the utility of anti-social                  
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Specifically, their proposal will make use of a cross-sectional                
              survey conducted in 1982 in Oklahoma City that is to be replicated             
              in 1992.  The survey is designed to measure relationships between              
              perceived certainties and severities of shame, embarrassment and               
              legal sanctions, and self-reports of littering, tax cheating, drunk            
              driving, assault, illegal gambling, and petty theft.  During the               
              ten years since 1982, offense-specific legislation, social movement            
              activity, and appeals to conscience have occured at the national               
              and local levels, and are expected to have changed the levels of               
              perceived threats in the community.  The merged dataset will be the            
              basis for testing hypotheses that changes in the perceived threats             
              of shame and embarrassment might be more powerful explanations of              
              changes in offense prevalence than is change in perceived threat               
              of legal sanctions.
