Title       : 3-D E-M Particle Simulation on the Solar Wind Energy Transfer into the
               Magnetosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9121116

Award Number: 9121116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ken-Ichi Nishikawa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                 3-D Electromagnetic Particle Simulation on the                              
              Solar Wind Energy Transfer into the Magnetosphere                              
              Recently developed particle code techniques and                                
              faster computers have made possible have made                                  
              possible 3-D and fully have made possible 3-D and                              
              fully electromagnetic simulations.  These new                                  
              techniques will be applied to the global                                       
              interaction of the solar wind with the Earth's                                 
              magnetosphere to investigate energy transport                                  
              through the bowshock and magnetopause and on into                              
              the magnetosphere.  Evolution and configuration of                             
              the magnetopause is handled through dynamic                                    
              particle-field pressure balance.  Applicable plasma                            
              instabilities will be studied using the code,                                  
              thus complementing analytical theories of the                                  
              magnetopause.  Resulting nonlinear phenomena,                                  
              namely heating and diffusion of particle due to                                
              excited waves, will be compared with relevant                                  
              observations.  The new 3-D electromagnetic (E-M)                               
              code is already operational and preliminary results                            
              show how the magnetopause is created.  Energetic                               
              solar particles enter the forward magnetic cusps                               
              and descend into the auroral zones.  The bunching                              
              of plasma due to kinetic instabilities is seen at                              
              the magnetopause near the equatorial plane.                                    
              Heating of both ions and electrons is observed and                             
              dawn-dusk asymmetry is also seen.  The same code is                            
              capable of simulating the effects of changes in                                
              various solar wind conditions such as: wind density                            
              and velocity, electron and ion temperatures, cross-                            
              field flow component of the flow, and                                          
              interplanetary (IMF) strength and orientation.  A                              
              variety of diagnostics is ready to apply to code                               
              results, including novel 3-D graphics techniques,                              
              monitoring of excited waves by tranform methods and                            
              the measuring of diffusion rates.
