Title       : Global Seismograph Network Improvements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9121008

Award Number: 9121008
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Hutt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Survey
	      Mail Stop 970
	      Reston, VA  22092    /   -

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Earth's deep interior remains a major scientific frontier that             
              holds the key to understanding the origin of the planet, its                   
              evolution through geologic time to the present structure, and the              
              internal causes of plate dynamics, earthquakes, volcanism, and the             
              geomagnetic field. Inaccessible to direct observation below a few              
              kilometers (the limit of drilling and exposure by erosion) the                 
              Earth's crust, mantle, and core are primarily studied through their            
              interaction with seismic waves. Recent developments in seismic                 
              sensor design, digital data acquisition, transmission, and storage             
              techniques make possible dramatic improvements in the resolving                
              power of seismic imaging methods.                                              
                                                                                             
              The Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology, or the IRIS             
              Consortium, is composed of 70 U.S. universities with research and              
              teaching programs in seismology. It serves as a national facility              
              for the development, deployment, and support of modern digital                 
              seismic instrumentation, and its mission is organized into three               
              major program elements: (1) The Global Seismographic Network (GSN)             
              program provides the U.S. contribution to an international network             
              of 128 permanent, standardized, very-broad-band (VBB), wide dynamic            
              range digital seismic stations at a spacing of approximately 2000              
              km around the globe. (2) The Program for Array  Seismic Studies of             
              the Continental Lithosphere (PASSCAL) aims to establish a U.S.                 
              national resource of 600 portable seismometer systems available for            
              field deployment in specific seismic imaging experiments and for               
              rapid response to earthquake studies. (3) The IRIS Data Management             
              System (DMS) aims to provide the national and international seismic            
              research community with timely access to data from the GSN and                 
              PASSCAL programs. It archives and distributes the data from these              
              programs and facilitates the standardization and exchange of data.             
                                                                                             
              During its initial five years of operation from 1986 to 1990, the              
              IRIS Consortium accomplished the following specific tasks: (1) It              
              developed the IRIS-1 and IRIS-2 lines of standardized permanent                
              station instrumentation employing VBB sensor technology for the                
              GSN. Two IRIS operations and maintenance facilities for the GSN                
              were installed at the U.S. Geological Survey's Albuquerque                     
              Seismological Laboratory and at the University of California, San              
              Diego. Currently, 25 GSN VBB stations have been installed world-               
              wide and are returning data. (2) The PASSCAL program has developed             
              two lines of standardized portable seismographic instrument                    
              packages. One hundred of these  are currently housed at the first              
              PASSCAL Instrument Center, located at the Lamont-Doherty Geological            
              Observatory. PASSCAL instruments have already been used in a number            
              of planned field experiments, and were rapidly deployed for                    
              aftershock studies of the 1987 Armenia and 1989 Loma Prieta,                   
              California earthquakes. (3) The DMS has established GSN data                   
              collection nodes at the Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory and               
              at the University of California, San Diego. An IRIS central data               
              archive and distribution center is temporarily operating at the                
              Center for High Performance Computing at the University of Texas.              
              Through Internet, U.S. users (and European users via the ORFEUS                
              data center in the Netherlands) have access to the continuous data             
              streams from most of the existing GSN stations, to major-event                 
              waveform data in near-real time, and to special datasets from                  
              important earthquakes as well as from PASSCAL field experiments.               
                                                                                             
              This award provides FY-1991 funding for the participation of the               
              U.S. Geological Survey's Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory in               
              establishing the IRIS Global Seismographic Network and for related             
              data management activities.
