Title       : Choice Behavior in Everyday Life: Rules, Outcomes, and Modifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9121346

Award Number: 9121346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Nisbett nisbett@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              This research is intended to show support for several                          
              propositions about choice behavior in everyday life.  (1) There                
              are individual differnces in rules concerning choice, and these                
              differences are associated with different life outcomes.  (2) The              
              rules that are associated with preferable outcomes are lay,                    
              intuitive versions of the normative cost-benefit rules of                      
              microeconomic theory.  (3) These lay versions of cost-benefit                  
              rules can be highly abstract, in that they apply across an                     
              extremely broad range of content domains.  (4) An implication of               
              the abstract, domain independent nature of cost-benefit rules is               
              that they can be taught quite effectively, with small amounts of               
              instruction, both as abstract rule systems and as rule systems in              
              a particular domain that will spontaneously generalize to other                
              domains.  (5) Therefore it should be possible to teach cost-                   
              benefit rules in an efficient fashion and improve people's life                
              outcomes.                                                                      
                   This research program will also begin exploratory work                    
              attempting to find out what problem-solving strategies and                     
              behaviors might mediate between knowledge of cost-benefit rules                
              and superior choice outcomes.                                                  
                   This work has implications for descriptive and normative                  
              theory as well as practical implications.  The major implication               
              for descriptive theory would be that highly abstract rules, at a               
              level shown by the Principal Investigator and his colleagues to                
              mediate inference, also mediate choice behavior.  The normative                
              contribution would be to add empirical data to the currently                   
              purely mathematically-based assertion that cost-benefit rule use               
              improves outcomes.  The major practical implication would be that              
              it may turn out to be possible to improve both personal and                    
              professional life outcomes with relatively small amounts of                    
              instruction -- substantially less than characterizes a course in               
              microeconomics.
