Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Task Force on Employment of Mathematicians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9121741

Award Number: 9121741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard R. McDonald                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26400              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project partially supports the work of a task force of               
              the American Mathematical Society to study the current employment              
              opportunities for new doctorates in the U.S.  Long term demographic            
              studies by the National Science Foundation indicate potential                  
              shortfalls by the end of this decade in our nation's science                   
              personnel base.  One the other hand, in 1990 declines in the number            
              of jobs available and increases in the number of applicants were               
              noted in the mathematical sciences community.  Follow-up surveys               
              indicated disturbing signs pointing to a shortage of employment                
              opportunities in the short term.                                               
                   This project supports a task force of the American                        
              Mathematical society to assess the current situation, make                     
              recommendations on ways to mitigate what may be a short-term supply            
              and demand imbalance in the academic employment market, develop                
              long-term strategies to reduce some of the current inefficiencies              
              in the employment-seeking process, and report their finding to the             
              mathematical sciences community.  The project is timely and                    
              important for the vitality of the U.S. mathematical sciences                   
              personnel base.  The results will be made available to the                     
              scientific community, the professional societies, and interested               
              government agencies.  In the latter case, the results may help in              
              developing appropriate strategies for the support of postdoctoral              
              researchers.
