Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Influence of Thyroid Hormones on the Behavior of Larval
               Flounder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1991   
File        : a9121814

Award Number: 9121814
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37492              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Burke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NOAA-Marine Fisheries
	      
	      Washington, DC  20242    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5959,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Japan JSPS Program:  Influence of Thyroid Hormones on                          
              the Behavior of Larval Flounder                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will provide supplementary support to enable                        
              Dr. John Burke of the National Marine Fisheries Service                        
              Beaufort Laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric                          
              Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, to conduct                        
              collaborative research with Dr. Masaru Tanaka for 12                           
              months at Kyoto University in Japan.  Utilizing Dr.                            
              Burke's knowledge of American flounder, the team will                          
              study the effect thyroid hormones have on larval                               
              flounder immigrating from the sea to coastal nursery                           
              gounds.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Flounder, like most marine fish, spawn at sea and their                        
              larvae are carried by tidal streams to coastal nursery                         
              grounds.  During this migration, flounder larvae undergo                       
              a metamorphosis which is controlled by thyroid hormones.                       
              Burke's previous research has indicated that thyroid                           
              hormones induce eye migration as well as muscle                                
              development in flounder.  Together, Burke and Tanaka                           
              will investigate whether the thyroid hormones actually                         
              initiate the flounders' inshore migration and will                             
              predict the impact of water toxicants which disrupt such                       
              thyroid activity.  Dr. Tanaka's technique for producing                        
              flounder larvae year round and his expertise in the                            
              early life of flounder will complement Dr. Burke's                             
              experience with studying the effects of thyroid hormones                       
              on the American flounder and will facilitate the                               
              controlled recruitment of flounders in the United States                       
              and Japan.
