Title       : Electoral Cycles in Federal Government Prime Contract Awards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9121931

Award Number: 9121931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74216              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Mayer kmayer@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is an investigation into the timing of federal                    
              government prime contract awards, and has two main thrusts.  First,            
              it attempts to refine knowledge of carefully timed economic                    
              expansions; scholars over the last decade have suggested that                  
              governments may attempt to stimulate the economy in an attempt to              
              bolster the election prospects of incumbents (the Political                    
              Business Cycle).  Despite the plausibility of such cycles, attempts            
              to find consistent patterns have failed, largely because so few                
              macroeconomic policies are easily controlled by incumbents; as                 
              such, it is very difficult for them to orchestrate economic                    
              expansions to coincide with elections.  Prime contract awards,                 
              however, are easily timed, and they also have immediate economic               
              effects.  A plausible hypothesis that will be evaluated in this                
              project, then, is that contract awards will increase before                    
              elections.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Second, the literature on Congressional-bureaucratic relations is              
              clear on the importance of executive branch officials maintaining              
              good relations with members of Congress, particularly those who                
              have influence over agency budgets.  Carefully timed contract                  
              awards are likely to be seen as an excellent way to maintain                   
              goodwill on the Hill, particularly since contract timing strategies            
              are legal, and easily implemented.  Past work on government grant              
              programs has suggested that agencies time grant awards to coincide             
              with elections in the districts of influential legislators, this               
              project will extend that work to include prime contract awards                 
              which invlove hundreds of billions of dollars annualy.                         
                                                                                             
              The project will use monthly data on contract awards for the twelve            
              federal agencies most active in procurement activity, with accurate            
              data on the location of the recipient individuals of firms; these              
              data have rarely been subjected to rigorous analysis.  For nearly              
              twety years, scholars have been lamenting the lack of such accurate            
              data.  The objective is to determine whether contracts are in fact             
              timed to coincide with elections, and to identify who benefits from            
              the practice.  The project will show more clearly patterns not only            
              of the distribution of prime contracts, but also patterns of                   
              timing.  The results will extend our understanding of the                      
              Political-Business Cycle phenomenon, as well as theories of                    
              congressional-agency relations.
