Title       : Colloborative Research on Market Structure and the Nature of Trade in Business
               Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9121851

Award Number: 9121851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Krmenec   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The market structure of business services normally adheres                
              to hierarchical principles, but trade in business services                     
              exhibits far less regularity with flows often extending from                   
              smaller to larger centers.  This incongruity between market                    
              structure and patterns of trade remains a critical obstacle to                 
              understanding how business services function in the space                      
              economy.  This project investigates how the market structure of                
              business services affects patterns of trade within a system of                 
              cities.  It develops a model of market structure and market                    
              interaction for business services, and it uses the model to                    
              devise a taxonomy of business services that identifies their                   
              relative locational dependence.  Survey data from a sample of 600              
              establishments are used to identify the trade of ten different                 
              business services located in ten midwestern cities.  A spatial                 
              interaction model is calibrated with these data to model flows of              
              trade among business services within a hierarchy of urban places.              
                   This project shows how the characteristics of business                    
              services shape market structure.  The model also distinguishes                 
              the exchange of services, occurring within a system of cities,                 
              from the trade of services which occurs with centers outside of                
              the city system.  With the increasing importance of business                   
              services in advanced economies like that of the United States,                 
              this research should add important new knowledge on how these                  
              services fit into the hierarchy of cities, and on how trade among              
              them circulates through the city system.
