Title       : Synthesis and Reactions of Strained Molecules and Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1996   
File        : a9121852

Award Number: 9121852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Shea kjshea@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research will involve the synthesis of a number of organic                
              molecules that contain carbon-carbon double bonds severely                     
              twisted out of planarity.  These distortions produce profound                  
              changes in both the chemical and spectroscopic properties of                   
              the double bond.  The structure (x-ray crystallography), strain                
              energy (computational) and reactivity (kinetics) of these                      
              strained double bonds will be examined in order to understand                  
              how mechanical distortions of the olefin linkage are translated                
              into chemical reactivity.  The analysis will also include                      
              distorted amides (quasi-double bonds), the results of which can                
              provide insight regarding the mechanism of activation of the                   
              peptide bond towards hydrolysis by enzymes.  The synthesis of                  
              new families of molecules containing the double bond in novel                  
              topologies is also planned.  These species will enable the                     
              evaluation of the chemical response of the double bond to                      
              various torsions and out-of-plane bendings, leading to the                     
              possibility of identifying alkene reaction manifolds that may                  
              be particularly sensitive to specific molecular distortions.                   
              The third component of this research utilizes high-energy,                     
              twisted alkenes as monomers for the synthesis of strained                      
              polymers.  The reactions employ metathesis catalysts to achieve                
              polymerization.  New methodology is described to form these                    
              novel, high energy materials.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the                
              research of Dr. Kenneth J. Shea at the University of                           
              California, Irvine.  The research explores the influence of                    
              structural deformation on the reactivity of the carbon-carbon                  
              double bond and the amide group which may also considered a                    
              quasi-double bond.  Strained polymers will also be made from                   
              strained monomers.  This will generate new methodology and                     
              materials that should benefit research in biochemistry,                        
              medicine, as well as in the chemical industry.
