Title       : Dissertation Research: Differential Selection in Different Environments in a
               Polyphagous Herbivore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1990      
File        : a9001391

Award Number: 9001391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Mark Scriber scriber@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Tiger swallowtails use a number of plant species that vary                
              in their chemical composition.  These host species differ in                   
              their attractiveness to egg-laying females and their suitability               
              for caterpillar growth.  In addition, genetically different                    
              individuals show dissimilar responses on identical host plants.                
              Potentially, the differential ability of swallowtails to                       
              recognize or grow on different plant species serves to maintain                
              much of the genetic variation observed in natural swallowtail                  
              populations.  Although selection  tends to eliminate certain                   
              genotypes on certain hosts, it tends to increase their frequency               
              on other hosts.                                                                
                   The proposed research is designed to assess the genetic                   
              basis for the physiological and behavioral patterns of host plant              
              usage by the tiger swallowtail.  The investigators hypothesize                 
              that this subspecies is comprised of a complex of differentially               
              adapted genotypes and populations.  Experiments will compare the               
              responses of three geographic populations and families within                  
              populations on three different host plants.  Complementary                     
              analyses will determine the genetic substructure of these                      
              populations.  Information obtained from these laboratory and                   
              field studies will elucidate the role of host diversity in                     
              maintaining genetic variability among and within populations of a              
              single species.  Such knowledge will help in understanding how                 
              insects adapt to their food sources and will prove useful in                   
              developing pest management programs for commercially important                 
              crop species.
