Title       : Dissertation Research: Outcrossing Effects on Seed Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1990      
File        : a9001065

Award Number: 9001065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Thomson jt@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa P. Rigney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Plants produce many more ovules than develop into seeds.                   
              Some ovules may not develop into seeds because pollen tubes fail               
                                                                                             
              to reach the ovary and fertilize ovules; other ovules are                      
              fertilized and then aborted.  The failure of an ovule to develop               
                                                                                             
              into a seed can also depend on the genotype of the pollen donor.               
                                                                                             
              In general, seeds sired by foreign pollen are more likely to be                
              developed over seeds sired by self pollen when both types of                   
              seeds are competing in the same fruit.  There have been few                    
              investigations attempting to determine the mechanism of                        
              preferential development of outcrossed seeds although many                     
              authors have hypothesized that variation in pollen tube growth is              
                                                                                             
              important.  Pollen tubes of certain donors may simply not get to               
                                                                                             
              the ovary and fertilize any ovules.  Patterns of preferential                  
              development could also be caused by selective abortion if seeds                
              sired by self pollen are aborted with greater frequency than                   
              seeds sired by foreign pollen.                                                 
                   Despite the possible role of seed abortion in determining                 
              patterns of preferential development, abortion of seeds sired by               
                                                                                             
              specific pollen donors has not been examined in any plant.  The                
              proposed work differs from previous studies because it will look               
                                                                                             
              at both variation in pollen tube growth and seed abortion.  The                
              PIs have developed a technique that enables them to determine the              
                                                                                             
              genetic makeup of ovules as they begin to abort.  Preliminary                  
              data suggest that seeds sired  by self pollen are aborted with                 
              greater frequency than seeds sired by foreign pollen.
