Title       : Conference on: Chromosome Replication and Segregation in Yeast, August
               5-10,1990, Saxton's River, VT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9001045

Award Number: 9001045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol S. Newlon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip Hieter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Koshland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This application is for partial funding of a conference on                     
              Chromosome Replication and Segregation in Yeast to be held under               
              the auspices of the Federation of American Societies of                        
              Experimental Biology (FASEB) from August 5-10, 1990 at the                     
              Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont.  Participation in the                
              meeting will be limited to 155 scientists who will be chosen from              
              applicants on the basis of their expertise and interests as being              
              the most likely to help create a stimulating and informative                   
              meeting.  The topic of the meeting emphasizes research on the                  
              chromosome replication and segregation in yeast.  While most                   
              participants will use baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as              
              an experimental system, scientists using other filamentous fungi               
              will be encouraged to participate.  The conference will consist                
              of nine scientific sessions, each with approximately 9 speakers;               
              in addition, one or two afternoons will be devoted to poster                   
              sessions and/ or informal group discussions.  Approximately half               
              of the speakers from each session will be invited in advanced;                 
              the remaining half will be chosen from the pool of applicants.                 
              Three sessions will be devoted to DNA replication (cis elements                
              and their associated factors, enzymology, and in vivo analysis of              
              origin usage).  Four sessions will be devoted to chromosome                    
              segregation (centromeres and their associated factors, the                     
              mitotic apparatus, nuclear architecture  and new  mutational                   
              approaches to chromosome transmission).  The last two sessions                 
              will be devoted to the analysis of the coordination of chromosome              
              replication and segregation during the cell cycle.  This meeting               
              will fill an important niche for scientists interested in yeast                
              chromosome replication and segregation by allowing extensive                   
              communication between laboratories at the important time this                  
              rapidly developing field.
