Title       : An International Research Conference on Women, Law, and Social Control; July
               1991, Montreal, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9001046

Award Number: 9001046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Daly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Until relatively recently, there has been little research on                   
              gender differences in the social organization and social contexts              
              of crime and on issues of gender and gender bias in social                     
              control, penal practice, and the administration of justice.                    
              Scholarship in this area is growing rapidly and is recognized by               
              many as making some of the most significant advances in                        
              contemporary criminological research.  The theoretical and policy              
              contributions of the research are of global importance.  However,              
              researchers working in this area remain isolated and there has                 
              been little international communication or coordination.                       
                                                                                             
              This award is for an international scientific conference of                    
              scholars from different countries to discuss gender issues in                  
              crime, law, and social control.  The conference participants will              
              critically examine theory, methods, and empirical data in an                   
              effort to disentangle gender assumptions and biases, gender                    
              differences, and what is known about the role of women in                      
              different systems of law and social control.  Further, and                     
              equally as important, the conference seeks to examine the                      
              implications for future research and theory in criminology of                  
              bringing gender perspectives to bear and doing so in an                        
              international, non-ethnocentric way.  Approximately thirty                     
              participants from 18 countries will attend the conference to be                
              held in Montreal, Canada in July 1991.  An edited volume of                    
              papers, together with relevant summaries of conference                         
              discussions, will be produced.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This conference will provide a unique opportunity to pool                      
              findings and interpretations, from an international perspective,               
              on concepts of gender in the field of criminology.  The products               
              of this conference should have a major effect on the development               
              of scientific research by broadening the conceptual base of what               
              and how the field studies social control, deviance, and crime.
