Title       : Basic and Applied Statistical Inference and Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1991       
File        : a9001458

Award Number: 9001458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Gastwirth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Over the last decade statistical data and inference have                  
              played an important role in establishing the basic facts used for              
              public policy, e.g.estimating the prevalence of AIDS or HIV                    
              infection,  determining the risk of cancer from occupational or                
              environmental exposures,  assessing changes in the income                      
              distribution and in the legal setting,  e.g. tax assessment                    
              inequality.  The purpose of this project is to study statistical               
              problems arising in these contexts and to develop appropriate                  
              probability models and statistical methodology for their                       
              solution.  Research on procedures for estimating the prevalence                
              of a rare disease which preserve anonymity by combining                        
              individual samples into batches prior to testing is a major goal.              
              These  methods should enable health specialists to obtain the                  
              cooperation of the public as infected individuals and non-                     
              infected persons who are misclassified (false positive) will not               
              be identified.  Robust methods which lead to statistically valid               
              inferences when several scientifically plausible models may                    
              underlie the data or when a few observations may be erroneous                  
              will continue to be emphasized.  Recent legal decisions in the                 
              equal employment area have raised new questions concerning the                 
              measurement of discrimination.  It is planned to investigate the               
              statistical approaches used in Watson v. Fort Worth Bank and to                
              examine the implications of the Ward's Cove case for more refined              
              data and methods of analysis.  Related problems arising in legal               
              and economic applications, e.g. the analysis of group data,  also              
              will be investigated.
