Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9001183

Award Number: 9001183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8726               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Rincon-Mautner  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Historical perspective is essential in order to understand the            
              nature of the relationship between human activity and the environment          
              and to evaluate long-term productivity of sustainability or impact.            
              The introduction of livestock into Mexico in the sixteenth century             
              modified the subsistence strategies of the indigenous population as            
              well as the pre-existing dynamic equilibrium among the population,             
              production systems, and the environment.  This doctoral dissertation           
              research will document the development of the livestock industry in the        
              Coixtlahuaca Basin of northwestern Oaxaca, Mexico, and it will examine         
              that industry's impact on the way of life of the population and on the         
              regional environment over the last 450 years.  This project will               
              combine data from field observations with information derived from             
              archival research.  The investigator will map current and past land            
              uses and will establish and date depositional sediment and paleosol            
              sequences along several stream channels.  He will review                       
              ethnohistorical sources from which information on land uses, economic          
              activities, community boundaries, resource availability, droughts, crop        
              failures, diseases and populations of the area will be extracted, and          
              he will compare these data with those of the present.                          
                                                                                             
                   Our understanding of long-term processes relating to environmental        
              and cultural systems remains limited.  This study is unusual in its            
              effort to delineate the man-land relationship in the past and to carry         
              the relationship through to the present.  The research will contribute         
              to the scientific basis of our understanding of human-environmental            
              relationships.  The project also will provide an excellent opportunity         
              for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent               
              research skills.
