Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1990  
File        : a9001243

Award Number: 9001243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9794               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl W. Butzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Alluvial terrace and valley deposits are important sources of             
              information about environmental changes, but the complex ways in which         
              processes operate within river valleys and also in upstream and                
              downstream areas makes interpretation of sediments difficult.  Also            
              troublesome are problems in assuring that the dating of sediments is           
              accurate.  Radiocarbon-dating methods have somewhat alleviated the             
              latter difficulties, but comprehensive analyses of the dynamics of             
              valley sedimentation based on more accurate chronologies have not been         
              undertaken in many settings.  This doctoral dissertation research              
              project will develop a detailed chronology of alluvial change over the         
              last 25,000 for the lower Colorado River valley of the Texas coastal           
              plain.  The chronology and analyses will be based on field mapping, on         
              radiocarbon dating of important stratigraphic sections, and on                 
              reconstruction of depositional environments and sedimentary provenance         
              for all stratigraphic units.  The lower Colorado alluvial record will          
              be compared with radiocarbon-controlled sequences from the upper               
              Colorado River drainage basin and with records of sea-level rise and           
              shoreline change along the Gulf of Mexico to address the relative roles        
              of upstream, downstream, and internal factors as influences on the             
              development of fluvial landforms in the lower Colorado valley.                 
                   This project will provide valuable information about the timing           
              and processes of landscape change in the study area.  Because research         
              methods to be used in this locale have been used elsewhere, this case          
              study will contribute toward comparative analyses of regional landscape        
              evolution and paleoenvironmental change.  It also will provide an              
              excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to             
              develop independent research skills.
