Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Lie Theory to Control, Computer Science
               and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1990      
File        : a9001760

Award Number: 9001760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hermann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn Physical&Systms Math
	      
	      Brookline, MA  02146    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research will focus on four areas: 1) integrability                  
              theory for linear differential systems and perturbation theory                 
              for the feedback linearization equations of nolinear control                   
              theory.  This work will support the program of engineering                     
              research of nonlinear control of air-space-craft at NASA-Ames                  
              Research Center directed by Dr. George Meyer.  This research was               
              cited in the recent NSF Report on Control Theory as a prime                    
              example of the practical success of the application of geometric               
              methodology.  2) Geometric and sheaf-theoretic methodology in the              
              knowledge-representation and computation theory side of computer               
              science.  This will provide mathematical support for the Discrete              
              Event System and Artificial Intelligence research.  3) Lie-                    
              theoretic methods in numerical analysis developing new geometric               
              and Lie-theoretic methodology for the numerical algorithms of                  
              linear algebra and differential equations.  4) Infinite                        
              pseudogroups in elementary particle physics looking for the                    
              ntural mathematical synthesis of String and Standard Model gauge               
              theories, utilizing the Cartan-Matshushima-Guillemin-Sternberg-                
              Conn theory of structure of infinite Lie pseudogroups.
