Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1990  
File        : a9001220

Award Number: 9001220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Much of the economic activity in cities located in developing             
              nations is conducted by persons who operate informally.  These people          
              work independently or in small organizations in ways that circumvent           
              formal government control or supervision.  The share of urban                  
              populations engaged in these types of activities has grown rapidly in          
              recent decades, leading scholars to debate whether the informal                
              economic sector functions as a separate unit or whether it performs            
              within a broader framework within which formal economic establishments         
              still maintain primary power.  This doctoral dissertation project will         
              examine the form and function of informal economic activities in Quito,        
              Ecuador, in order to describe the structure and diversity of activities        
              and to analyze how persons engaged in informal activities interact with        
              each other and with other individuals and institutions.  Labor-force           
              data in Ecuador's three largest cities will be analyzed to compare             
              formal-informal economic patterns, and interviews with persons engaged         
              in informal activities will be conducted to examine links among persons        
              in the informal sector, the formal sector, and the government.                 
              Attention also will be given to identifying how working relations              
              affect the economic mobility of persons engaged in informal activities.        
                   This project will provide valuable data and analyses of the               
              operations of persons engaged in informal economic activities.                 
              Although focusing on an Ecuadorian case study, the insights from this          
              project will be of great use to persons conducting related work                
              elsewhere.  This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for        
              a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research          
              skills.
