Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Recursive Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9001513

Award Number: 9001513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia F. Knight knight.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Knight intends to continue to work on problems in recursive               
              model theory, and to analyze methods for organizing and thinking               
              about nested priority arguments.  There are now several such                   
              methods:  the method of "workers", developed by Harrington, two                
              versions of "alpha-systems", both developed by Ash, and a method               
              of Lemmp and Lerman.  The method of workers and the original                   
              alpha-systems have each yielded quite a number of results in                   
              recursive model theory.                                                        
                   Knight has a metatheorem for workers, similar to the one Ash              
              proved for his original alpha-systems, except that not so much is              
              assumed to be r.e., and the conditions are more complicated.                   
              Knight hopes both to simplify and to improve the metatheorem for               
              workers.  In Knight's metatheorem, as in Ash's original                        
              metatheorem, the object produced on the bottom is recursive.                   
              Ash's new alpha-systems (simpler than the old), and the method of              
              Lemmp and Lerman, are designed to produce an r.e. object on the                
              bottom.  There are many problems in recursive model theory                     
              (existence of recursive presentations of groups, etc.), as well                
              as in recursion theory, on which these new methods ought to yield              
              results.                                                                       
                   Recursion theory as a topic in the foundations of                         
              mathematics is motivated by a desire to formalize the property of              
              being computable by an algorithm.  The algorithm need not be a                 
              practical one, but it must exist and terminate in principal after              
              some finite number of steps.
