Title       : csgA Gene and Cell Interactions in Myxococcus xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9001755

Award Number: 9001755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Shimkets   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Myxococcus xanthus development is regulated by the Csg                         
              intercellular communication system. The C signal appears to be                 
              the polypeptide product of the csgA gene. The preliminary results              
              suggest four directions for future work. First, random                         
              mutagenesis of csgA followed by DNA sequencing of developmental                
              mutants is expected to determine the important functional domains              
              of the protein. Second, examination of the regulation of csgA in               
              response to moderated levels of nutrients is expected to reveal                
              how nutrient levels are assessed in this organism and used to                  
              regulate gene expression. This project will involve a) random                  
              mutagenesis and DNA sequencing of the regulatory region to                     
              identify nucleotides that play a critical role in regulation, b)               
              cloning of genes encoding regulatory proteins using recognition                
              site probes, c) characterization of the protein-DNA interactions               
              with gel mobility shift assays and DNA foot printing, and d)                   
              quantitation of the expression levels in vivo using a reporter                 
              locus. Third, continued analysis of the csgA suppressor mutations              
              is expected to reveal other steps in the signaling process.                    
              Several suppressor alleles have been cloned and these will be                  
              sequenced and studied by other functional assays.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The life cycle of the myxobacterium, Myxococcus xanthus,                       
              contains the basic elements found in the development of higher                 
              organisms including directed cell movement, multicellular                      
              morphogenesis, regulated gene expression and cellular                          
              differentiation. It can therefore serve as an experimentally                   
              accessible model for the study of these processes.
