Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9001411

Award Number: 9001411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene B. Fabes fabes@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Four areas of mathematical research are represented in this               
              project.  In general terms, the work reflects the application of               
              methods of harmonic analysis to problems in the theory of partial              
              differential equations and operators.                                          
                   One theme concerns what are now called Fatou theorems for                 
              classes of nonlinear elliptic equations, including the important               
              p-Laplacian.  The object is to determine, for nonnegative                      
              solutions, the extent to which the solution has nontangential                  
              boundary values.  A primary goal is to obtain basic estimates on               
              solutions which depend on the shape of the boundary but do not                 
              depend on the smoothness of the coefficients in the equation.                  
                   In the same spirit, work will also be done investigating                  
              existence questions for second order elliptic systems and higher               
              order elliptic operators defined in nonsmooth domains.  By this,               
              one usually means domains which occur in the physical world, but               
              which do not have very smooth boundaries.  Corners and edges are               
              allowed for example.  It is only in the last decade that any                   
              major progress has been made toward understanding the extent to                
              which one may establish a good existence and regularity theory.                
                   In the preceding, the major results obtained used techniques              
              of classical double layer potential theory mixed with modern                   
              operator theory.  Work will continue on the operators developed                
              for the above purposes.  The focus here will be to analyze the                 
              spectrum of the operators and read from it information about the               
              operators.  The spectrum is known to consist of real numbers for               
              classical operators and the conjecture to be studied is that it                
              lies in a symmetric interval of length one-half about the origin.              
                   Finally, work will be done on the Dirichlet problem for                   
              second order nondivergence form elliptic operators.  Although a                
              highly developed theory for such operators has existed since the               
              early 1950's, there has always been a standing assumption that                 
              the coefficients of the operator be smooth.  This work breaks                  
              with that tradition in seeking to define what one would mean by a              
              reasonable solution when the operator is formed from merely                    
              bounded coefficients.  Even though one must expect solutions with              
              discontinuities and distributional derivatives, the potential for              
              application of this work is very high.
