Title       : SGER: Multi-scale Investigations of Disturbance and Impacts of Hurricane Hugo on
               an LTER Coastal Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1989  
File        : a9001807

Award Number: 9001807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1989  
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard R. Gardner gardner@epoch.geol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bjorn Kjerfve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. Blood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Michener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Hurricane Hugo struck the coast of South Carolina just after              
              midnight on Friday, September 22, 1989.  The eye of the hurricane              
              came ashore just north of Charleston, SC and moved northward                   
              through the state to Charlotte, NC.  Hugo's landfall was near the              
              Baruch Institute's coastal field facility and the North Inlet                  
              Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site.  The site received                  
              extensive storm damage and a tidal surge that was 4 meters above               
              mean high tide.                                                                
                   Salt marsh ecosystems and their adjacent coastal forests                  
              have evolved under a regime of gradually rising sea level.  A                  
              major hurricane such as Hugo may occur only 1-3 times per                      
              century.  And this kind of disturbance may trigger sudden                      
              expansion of marsh into forested areas.                                        
                   To assess the short and long term effects of Hurricane Hugo,              
              researchers at the University of South Carolina will:                          
                                                                                             
              1.   Map the spatial distribution and elevation of the storm                   
                   surge in the forested portion of the North Inlet ecosystem.               
                   And they will gather information on the storm surge height                
                   and the deposition of Spartina detritus (wrack) and marsh                 
                   mud in the forest floor.                                                  
                                                                                             
              2.   Map ground water salinity in forest soils, changes in soil                
                   and ground water chemistry, and relate this information to                
                   tree mortality and other changes in vegetation.                           
                                                                                             
              3.   Establish study sites where decomposition of wrack and its                
                   effect on underlying soil can be studied.                                 
                                                                                             
              4.   Acquire low altitude, false-color infrared aerial                         
                   photographs and multispectral Thematic Mapper (satellite)                 
                   images to document geomorphic and botanical changes caused                
                   by Hugo.  Follow-up photographs and satellite imagery should              
                   be made several times during the next several years to                    
                   detect changes and recovery of the ecosystem.                             
                                                                                             
                   Work on effects of large disturbances such as Hurricane Hugo              
              address important issues about the response, resilience, and                   
              recovery of complex coastal ecosystems. Information gathered by                
              this research should provide data on mechanisms of salt marsh                  
              expansion and forest recession in response to salinity and wind                
              stresses. And the work should provide valuable landscape level                 
              information on the response of the North Inlet LTER ecosystem to               
              a major disturbance.                                                           
                  Dr. Gardner is a very experienced and productive scientist                
              who is well qualified to conduct and direct this research on the               
              impacts of Hurricane Hugo on the North Inlet ecosystem. He will                
              be assisted by Co-Principal Investigators, Kjerfve, Blood,                     
              Michener, and Williams. Although the Baruch Institute's field                  
              facilities were destroyed by Hugo, field research has continued.               
              In particular, sampling transects and established piezometer                   
              networks facilitate the objectives of this research.  The                      
              University of South Carolina has excellent facilities to support               
              this research effort.
