Title       : Dissertation Research: Neighborhood Effects on Seed Dispersal of a Neotropical
               Mistletoe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9001172

Award Number: 9001172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Winkler dww4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Sargent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Fruiting plants that rely on frugivorous birds for seed                   
              dispersal may experience important fitness consequences resulting              
              from neighborhood influences on bird foraging movements.  Birds                
              respond to spatial patterns of fruit resource availability; thus               
              these patterns will influence seed deposition patterns.                        
              Neighborhood effects on seed dispersal have not been studied.                  
              This research examines these effects on a tropical mistletoe                   
              species in pasture trees at Monteverde, Costa Rica.  Neighborhood              
              effects from the individual plant perspective, on three stages                 
              of dispersal; bird visitation, behavior during visits, and post-               
              visitation movements, using an array of high and low density host              
              and mistletoe neighborhoods (ca. 1 ha) will be determined.                     
              Mistletoes provide good systems for examining seed dispersal                   
              because bird deposition of seeds can be observed directly, and,                
              as parasites, they have unique dispersal requirements.                         
                   The study system provides a unique opportunity to examine                 
              these effects because of the arrangement of hosts and mistletoes               
              at the site.  The study will also enhance general knowledge of                 
              these little-studied tropical species.  Disturbed habitats, such               
              as the proposed site, are of increasing importance in the                      
              neotropics with the continuing loss of forests, and an                         
              understanding of ecological interactions in these habitats is                  
              likewise of increasing importance.  Mistletoes can be serious                  
              pests in deforested areas where mostly susceptible trees are left              
              standing; thus, this study is of both basic and applied                        
              interest.
