Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Variable Coefficient Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1990       
File        : a9001792

Award Number: 9001792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Sogge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award provides additional support for research                       
              by a Presidential Young Investigator working on problems of                    
              Fourier analysis related to the microlocal analysis of                         
              partial differential operators and the theory of Fourier                       
              integral operators.                                                            
                   Work will be done in developing a microlocal version                      
              of the maximal theorem of Bourgain.  The result concerns                       
              the maximal operator associated with the Radon transform (over                 
              spheres) which was shown to preserve the Lebesgue spaces for                   
              powers greater than two.  The averaging may be viewed as a                     
              Fourier integral operator of negative order one-half.  Efforts                 
              will be made to determine if the same result holds for any family              
              of nondegererate operators of the same order, depending smoothly               
              on a linear parameter.  Some additional conditions have to be                  
              established since a total generalization is known to be                        
              impossible.                                                                    
                   A related type of operator studied by Carleson and Sjolin is              
              known to preserve the fourth-power Lebesgue spaces.  In this                   
              project, work will be done in expanding the operators to integral              
              transforms involving exponential of the Laplace-Beltrami                       
              operator.  If this is possible then the Carleson-Sjolin theorem                
              for Bochner-Riesz summation in the plane can be extended to                    
              compact manifolds.                                                             
                   Other work involves the question of embedded eigenvalues for              
              Schrodinger operators.  If the potential is bounded by the                     
              reciprocal of the variable, then Hormander showed that                         
              eigenfunctions which are small at infinity actually vanish                     
              everywhere.  The next step in analyzing this phenomenon is to                  
              determine exact conditions on the potential to guarantee the same              
              result.  An immediate goal will be to find the correct function                
              space (one of the local Lebesgue spaces) for embedding the                     
              potential.
