Title       : Studies of Molecular Orientation and Conformation of Mixed Monolayers at
               Electrode Surfaces by Nonlinear Optics and Vibrational Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1992     
File        : a9001876

Award Number: 9001876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Corn corn@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant is in the general area of analytical and surface                    
              chemistry and in the subfield of laser spectroscopy of liquid                  
              solid interfaces.  Professor Robert Corn will develop the                      
              theoretical and experimental description of monolayers of mixed                
              molecular species at metal electrode interfaces.  The second                   
              harmonic generation and sum frequency generation methods                       
              developed by Professor Corn will be combined with infrared                     
              spectroscopic measurements of mixed monolayers of molecular                    
              species controlled by electrochemical potential on a metal                     
              electrode.  These studies will allow fuller understanding of                   
              the role of interfacial molecular structure on electron                        
              transfer processes which occur at these interfaces.  In                        
              addition, the methodology will allow more complete description                 
              of other liquid solid interfaces of import in a variety of                     
              chemical and technological processes.                                          
                                                                                             
              By combining second harmonic generation (SHG) on and off                       
              resonance analysis and theoretical description of the response                 
              using Pople-Pariser-Parr formalism to describe the molecular                   
              polarizability tensors, the first measurements of molecular                    
              orientation response in SHG have been made.  Professor Corn                    
              will extend these measurements in combination with infrared                    
              reflection absorption and sum frequency generation to fully                    
              characterize mixed monolayers of molecular species at single                   
              crystal electrode liquid interfaces.
