Title       : Learning Search Control Strategy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9001936

Award Number: 9001936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131370             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Epstein susan.epstein@hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The best current programs for two-person perfect information                   
              games play only a single game; they search exhaustively and they               
              do not learn.  The goals of this project are to demonstrate                    
              further the viability of a weak theory as a search paradigm and                
              to facilitate the construction of computers that learn entire                  
              categories of tasks, rather than requiring individualized                      
              instruction.  This research develops a program, HOYLE, that can                
              play any such game correctly and, with experience, can learn to                
              play it extremely well.  Instead of extensive search, HOYLE                    
              learns a search control strategy for each new game under the                   
              guidance of its weak domain theory:  a combination of procedural               
              knowledge about game playing, declarative knowledge about                      
              specific games, a language and framework for strategic elements,               
              and a set of narrow but expert perspectives called Advisors.  As               
              it plays a new game, HOYLE selectively constructs, organizes, and              
              reformulates a knowledge base for each game from its playing                   
              experience.  Under a novel architecture that employs a variety of              
              control strategies for move selection, HOYLE combines that                     
              knowledge base with its Advisors to produce a coherentr,                       
              incisive, steadily improving strategy for the game.  A prototype               
              of this multifaceted learning has proved itself remarkably                     
              effective in a varied but limited domain.  HOYLE addresses, both               
              in its design and in its implementation, important questions in                
              theory formation, collaboratin of experts, conflict resolution,                
              experimental design, and operationalization.
