Title       : Taxonomic Revision of Generic Segregates of Pithecellobium sensu lato, Excluding
               Abarema and Macrosamanea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9001375

Award Number: 9001375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rupert C. Barneby isb@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Grimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The mimosa group of tropical legumes are woody plants that                
              range in stature from small prickly shrubs of Mexican and                      
              Argentine deserts or Caribbean coral reef-shores to gigantic                   
              emergent forest trees of Brazilian Amazonia.  They enter all                   
              woodland shrub communities of the Neotropics below about 2000                  
              meters elevation, and are an almost ubiquitous element in the                  
              flora of forest margins.  Numbered among them are the stately                  
              saman (Albizia saman), which fills in urban Latin America the                  
              role of the banyan in India, and in rural Latin America provides               
              shade and a crop of nutritious fruits for cattle; and the                      
              guamuchil (Pithecellobium dulce), a staple of rural markets, the               
              seeds of which are enveloped in sweet pulp esteemed as a fruit                 
              and as basis for summer drinks.  Most of them, however, are                    
              appreciated primarily by local people, for whom they provide                   
              nursery shade trees in the coffee orchards, timber used in                     
              construction, furniture, and as fuel, and are a rich source of                 
              honey.  In these roles the mimosas of the Americas have acquired               
              a large vocabulary of vernacular names, both in Amerindian and                 
              Latin languages, testifying to their importance in the lives of                
              the people who use them.                                                       
                   The last comprehensive taxonomic inventory of the mimosa                  
              group dates back to 1875.  Since then much has been learned about              
              them, and many new species have been discovered and described.                 
              Most of these exist, so far as retrievable information goes, only              
              as names in obscure technical publications, and no one can say                 
              for sure how many are truly distinct species, or where they are                
              to be found, or how they should be named according to current                  
              rules of botanical nomenclature.  There is no modern inventory                 
              other than the patchwork of accounts that have appeared in floras              
              of political units, many of which are mutually contradictory, one              
              species appearing under different names in different countries,                
              and several distinct species often masquerading under one name.                
              Without a reliable inventory, no rational decisions can be made                
              about the management, exploitation, or conservation of woody                   
              floras on which the function of ecological systems and the                     
              prosperity of mankind depend.  Drs. Rupert Barneby and James                   
              Grimes of the New York Botanical Garden are providing this modern              
              inventory, for the woody tropical legumes of the large genus                   
              Pithecellobium and its relatives.  The results will serve as a                 
              source of verified information on which the writers and users of               
              floras can depend, for practical identification of species, for                
              correct scientific nomenclature, for indication of geographical                
              ranges and habitat occurrences, and for documentation of economic              
              uses by local peoples.
