Title       : "Strategies and Mechanisms for the Construction and Refinement of Programming
               Knowledge: A Unified Computational Model of Learning."
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9001233

Award Number: 9001233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Pirolli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a cognitive model addressing human                   
              learning in the domain of computer programming.  Building on                   
              prior research and additional psychological studies to be carried              
              out, the comprehension of instructional text is formulated as a                
              problem solving process in which the goal is to construct mental               
              models of domain entities, process principles, and problem                     
              solving heuristics.  New concepts introduced in these texts may                
              be given meaning by explaining their relation to examples                      
              presented in instruction.  One major goal of this project will be              
              to model differences among learners in the self-explanation of                 
              examples.  Specifically, preliminary studies show that learners                
              differ in the way that they explain examples to themselves, and                
              these differences have significant correlations with subsequent                
              programming performance.  Another major goal will be to study and              
              develop a model whereby learners reflect on their problem solving              
              and generate new strategies.  Both of these areas have received                
              little study in cognitive science.  Our results should be                      
              important to the psychology of learning in complex formal                      
              domains, the acquisition and modification of knowledge in machine              
              learning, and instructional research.
