Title       : SEARISE Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1990   
File        : a9001579

Award Number: 9001579
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Margie Campbell                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : June 30,  1990       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bindschadler bob@igloo.gsfc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA-Goddard Space Flight
	      
	      Greenbelt, MD  20771    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The stability of the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) is an issue               
              of immediate global importance because the ice sheet contains                  
              enough water to raise sea level over 5 meters.  If the ice sheet               
              experiences a rapid collapse, the accompanying rapid rise in sea               
              level will have dire consequences along coastlines worldwide.                  
              The urgency of assessing the stability of the WAIS is fueled by                
              the recent discoveries made by the Siple Coast Project (SCP) of                
              significant changes taking place in West Antarctica.  However,                 
              the SCP has had a glaciological focus and has not properly                     
              assessed the important meteorological and oceanic effects.  which              
              play a major role in determining the behavior of the ice sheet                 
              and its impact on global climate.                                              
                                                                                             
              What is needed is a multi-disciplinary study of the WAIS where                 
              studies in all relevant disciplines are conducted.  A plan to                  
              integrate these separate investigations is a necessary first step              
              to achieving the goal of understanding the global role of the                  
              WAIS and its stability.  What is proposed here is to bring                     
              together experts from the important polar disciplines for a                    
              workshop to formulate a rational plan for the study of the WAIS.               
                                                                                             
              The acronym SEARISE (Stability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet                 
              Environment) has been chosen for this program because it provides              
              an identifiable focus of public concern.
