Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorics and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9001677

Award Number: 9001677
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gary Cornell                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin Wunderlich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Security Agency
	      9800 Savage Road
	      Fort George G. Meade, MD  207556643    /   -

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the research in combinatorics and                     
              number theory of Professor Wen-Ching Li of The Pennsylvania State              
              University. Dr. Li's project is centered on questions relating                 
              modular forms to graph theory. Among the questions she will                    
              investigate are: to realize certain Ramanujan graphs as quotients              
              of trees associated to projective linear groups over p-adic                    
              fields; to continue her collaboration with Dr. F.K. Hwang of                   
              Bell Laboratories on generalized double loop networks; and to                  
              study the Galois structure of p-Sylow subgroups of ideal class                 
              groups.                                                                        
                   Non-Euclidean plane geometry began in the early nineteenth                
              century as a mathematical curiosity, but by the end of that                    
              century, mathematicians had realized that many objects of                      
              fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature.                
              The detailed study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given                 
              rise to several branches of modern mathematics, of which the                   
              study of modular and automorphic forms is one of the most active.              
              This field is principally concerned with questions about the                   
              whole numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, it                     
              retains connection to its historical roots. The work of Professor              
              Li is in this tradition, but extends beyond the traditional                    
              boundaries of the theory of modular forms in a particularly                    
              interdisciplinary thrust.
