Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigation of IronAge Sites in the Mema
               (Mali)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1990   
File        : a9001664

Award Number: 9001664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11733              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. McIntosh skmci@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Tereba Togola will               
              conduct archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead              
              Delta" region of Mali.  The results of this work will form the                 
              basis for his doctoral dissertation.  The Mema, as                             
              geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region                
              which coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River.  A                   
              change in the river's course has turned the region to desert.                  
              The small amount of archaeological research which has been done                
              in the region indicates that it contains archaeological sites                  
              which probably span several millennia.  Areal photographs,                     
              however, indicate that the region is dotted with possibly                      
              hundreds of "tells" or habitation mounds.  Past uncontrolled                   
              excavations recovered such artifacts as statuettes of horseman,                
              iron spear and arrowheads, and multi-legged vases.  However,                   
              faunal and floral remains were not collected and the subsistence               
              base for this culture remains unknown.  Likewise neither an                    
              absolute nor a relative chronology exists.  Through a combination              
              of survey, correlation of sites with ancient landforms, and                    
              excavation at several sites, Mr. Togola will collect both                      
              chronological and subsistence information.                                     
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              fill in what is almost a complete archaeological blank.  It will               
              provide information on how cultures at a very simple level of                  
              technology adapted to a rigorous Saharan environment and,                      
              hopefully, shed light on the development of agriculture                        
              pastoralism and early iron working in sub-Saharan Africa.  It                  
              should also provide information on the rise of African kingdoms.               
              Finally, it will aid in the training of an extremely promising                 
              young scientist.
