Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of Ozone on Growth of Sugar Maple (Acer
               Saccharum): Ecophysiological Mechanisms and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9001323

Award Number: 9001323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5061               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph E. Boerner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Sugar maple is one of the most widespread and abundant                    
              deciduous forest trees in eastern North America.  Populations of               
              sugar maple continue to expand in forests in the corn belt states              
              of the U.S., but at the same time appear to be declining in parts              
              of the northeastern U.S. and southeastern Canada.  A number of                 
              causes for this "sugar maple decline" have been suggested,                     
              including effects of both gaseous air pollutants (especially                   
              ozone), and acidic precipitation.  Rather than acting as the                   
              proximate cause of death of individual trees, such diffuse                     
              environmental factors act by placing trees under chronic stress.               
              Such stress-weakened trees then become more susceptible to attack              
              by insect pests or diseases which actually kill the tree.                      
                   In this study, the investigators will examine the effects of              
              ambient ozone, and of slightly elevated ozone, on a number of                  
              important, basic physiological processes in sugar maple:                       
              photosynthesis, respiration, transport of sugars among plant                   
              parts, and accumulation of starch stores for overwintering.  They              
              hypothesize that ozone injury to leaves will reduce the                        
              photosynthetic rate and force the plant to use more of the energy              
              it does obtain through photosynthesis to repair damage.  In                    
              addition, they hypothesize that the system the plant uses to                   
              transport sugars from leaves to roots may be directly damaged by               
              ozone.  These changes will have the effect of reducing the amount              
              of food (as starch and sugar) that the plant can accumulate for                
              survival over the winter.  Thus, they expect overwinter mortality              
              to increase, and growth during the subsequent spring to be lower,              
              in plants exposed to ozone.  The investigators will also extend                
              these experiments to screen individuals from populations in areas              
              of sugar maple decline and unaffected areas to determine if                    
              sensitivity to ozone varies geographically.  The results of                    
              these experiments may reveal much about the basic ecophysiology                
              of sugar maple, and will also allow insight into the more applied              
              problem of sugar maple decline.
