Title       : Dissertation Research: A Multidimensional Analysis of Geographic Variation in
               the Plain Titmouse (Parus inornatus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1990    
File        : a9001120

Award Number: 9001120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned K. Johnson neddo@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla Cicero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Plain Titmouse (Parus inornatus) varies in overall size,              
              bill size, and color throughout its range in western North                     
              America.  Ten geographic forms are currently recognized (American              
              Ornithologists' Union, 1957, Check-list of North American Birds)               
              on the basis of morphology and color.  West of the Cascade-Sierra              
              Nevada Mountains, the species occurs commonly in foothill oak                  
              woodland.  Density is lower in the Southwest and Intermountain                 
              Regions, where populations are found patchily in pinyon-juniper                
              or juniper habitat.  The goal of this project is to integrate                  
              morphologic, molecular, and behavioral data on Parus inornatus in              
              order to elucidate patterns and processes of divergence among                  
              populations.  Differences in population structure will enable                  
              testing of alternative models of gene flow.  Hypotheses                        
              concerning the role of adaptation and Pleistocene isolation also               
              will be evaluated.                                                             
                   A variety of modern systematic techniques will be used to                 
              examine patterns of morphologic and genetic variation within and               
              among populations of Parus inornatus.  Results to date indicate                
              strong genetic differentiation between Pacific slope and                       
              Intermountain populations, on the order of that found between                  
              closely related species of birds.  Patterns of variation in                    
              morphology (especially bill size and shape) and color support the              
              genetic data.  A quantitative estimate of gene flow will shed                  
              light on the process of genetic and morphologic divergence among               
              populations.  Because numerous bird species show similar patterns              
              of divergence between the Pacific slope and Intermountain                      
              Regions, this study will contribute to an emerging picture of                  
              avian speciation in western North America.  The results of this                
              study will likely lead to formal taxonomic changes by the                      
              American Ornithologists' Union Committee on Classification and                 
              Nomenclature.  The identification of genetically and/or                        
              morphologically distinct populations will provide critical                     
              information for managers concerned with the protection and                     
              management of pinyon-juniper or oak woodlands in the western                   
              United States.  The future of oak woodlands in California is of                
              growing concern because of increasing pressures for development                
              in the foothills of the Cascade-Sierra, Nevada and Coast Ranges.
