Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Dynamics and Evolution inHeterogeneous
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9001179

Award Number: 9001179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis Antonovics   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The abundances of many plant species fluctuate widely in                  
              natural populations.  Close examination of some of the most                    
              simple mathematical models of population growth has shown that in              
              addition to the effects of random environmental noise,                         
              fluctuations in population size (from periodic oscillations to                 
              chaos) may be part of the natural dynamics of many systems.                    
              These theoretical results are seldom tested because multi-                     
              generation experiments in controlled environments are often                    
              difficult and expensive to conduct.  The investigators will use                
              experimental populations to examine 15 generations of the                      
              population dynamics of Cardamine pennsylvanica, a small, rapidly-              
              growing greenhouse weed.  Using a greenhouse weed allows them to               
              do experiments in ecologically "natural" conditions with the                   
              precision and ease of a controlled environment.  Population                    
              dynamics may be affected by different environments.  Hence, some               
              experimental populations will have variable environments and                   
              others will not.  Population dynamics may be affected by the                   
              genetics of the population.  Hence, some experimental populations              
              will have little genetic variability and others will have                      
              substantial genetic variability.  Genetically uniform                          
              populations may be expected to evolve little, and exhibit purely               
              ecological responses.  These experiments are essential steps                   
              toward understanding to what extent populations dynamics are                   
              driven by ecological versus genetic processes.
