Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diophantine Approximations of Algebraic Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1990       
File        : a9001372

Award Number: 9001372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary Cornell                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Vojta vojta@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the research in Diophantine                           
              approximations of Professor Paul Vojta of the University of                    
              California at Berkeley. Dr. Vojta's project is to extend his                   
              already-productive analogy between Nevanlinna Theory and                       
              Diophantine approximation theory, so as to get information on                  
              algebraic points of bounded degree on varieties. In addition, he               
              hopes to generalize to varieties of higher dimension his                       
              independent proof of the Mordell-Faltings Theorem that arose from              
              applying his viewpoint to Dyson's sharpening of the Thue-Siegel                
              Theorem.                                                                       
                   This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic                     
              geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic                  
              geometry and number theory. In its original formulation,                       
              algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the                
              plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number                    
              theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as                    
              divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects,               
              seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from                
              the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual                 
              influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic                       
              algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern                      
              mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own              
              borders.
