Title       : Renal Function in Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1994  
File        : a9001985

Award Number: 9001985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Dantzler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed studies concern the mechanisms and the regulation of those        
              mechanisms whereby the kidneys excrete water, inorganic substances, and        
              organic substances.  They involve the regulation of the rate of                
              production of a filtrate of the blood and the mechanisms by which              
              organic and inorganic substances are moved across renal tubule cells,          
              either from the initial filtrate back into the blood perfusing these           
              cells or from the blood perfusing these cells into the initial                 
              filtrate.  The organic substances being studied are those that exist as        
              positively charged molecules (primarily the exogenous nerve blocking           
              agent, tetraethylammonium, and the endogenous product of nicotinic acid        
              metabolism, N1-methylnicotinamide) and those that exist as negatively          
              charged molecules (primarily the exogenous compound, p-                        
              aminohippurate, and the endogenous end product of nitrogen metabolism,         
              urate).  These studies take advantage of the relatively simple kidneys         
              of reptiles in which the movement (or some characteristic of the               
              movement) of some substances across the tubule cells is more pronounced        
              than in mammals, and the complex kidneys of birds, which in part               
              resemble the kidneys of reptiles and in part resemble the kidneys of           
              mammals.  The experimental approach is an integrative one that                 
              explores function at the membrane cell, and whole organ levels.                
              These studies are important for understanding the way in which the             
              kidneys permit animals to survive in specific environments and to adapt        
              to changing environments.  This understanding is particularly important        
              in terms of adopting strategies to insure the survival of animal               
              populations in the face of major changes in the earth's environment.           
              Such strategies may also be important to human populations.  These             
              studies will also provide substantial insight into the way in which the        
              kidneys in wild or domestic animals populations handle organic                 
              environmental pollutants, including many toxic compounds.  This                
              understanding applies also to human kidneys, not only in terms of              
              normally toxic substances but also in terms of therapeutic agents that         
              can be toxic when present in excess.  Finally, these studies will              
              provide information on the way in which the kidneys eliminate urate,           
              an important substance in renal stone formation in humans and other            
              animals.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                 //
