Title       : The Psychological Consequences of the Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1989  
File        : a9001615

Award Number: 9001615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1989   
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14919              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pennebaker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This work seeks to examine people's psychological and                          
              physiological reactions to the extreme stress produced by a                    
              recent natural disaster, the Bay Area earthquake of 17 October                 
              1989.  The PI has developed a theory of inhibition and                         
              confrontation with stressors, which holds that when people                     
              attempt to suppress reactions to stressful events, when they                   
              refuse to talk about the event, consciously try to stop                        
              thinking about it, etc., they put themselves at risk for later,                
              stress related reactions, which can include the intrusion of                   
              debilitating thoughts, autonomic nervous system activity and,                  
              over time, an increase in health problems.                                     
                                                                                             
              In the first study, a sample of Bay Area residents will be                     
              surveyed repeatedly over the course of a year (via telephone),                 
              and sequential measures of their reaction to the earthquake                    
              will be taken.  It is predicted that people will differ in the                 
              ways they inhibit, or confront, the disaster, and these                        
              reactions, in turn, will have implications for later physical                  
              health status.  In addition the researchers will interview a                   
              subsample of the telephone survey respondents, and take a                      
              series of noninvasive physiological measures (e.g., blood                      
              pressure), to determine potential relationships between                        
              reactions to the earthquake (as evidenced on the survey                        
              questionnaire) and physiological status.                                       
                                                                                             
              Also, approximately 700 Bay Area residents (and a comparison                   
              group of 350 Dallas, TX, residents) will be surveyed over the                  
              course of the coming year to determine possible changes in                     
              people's reactions to, and perceptions of, the disaster;                       
              comparison of these responses with those of the repeatedly                     
              measured group will be made to determine the effects of                        
              multiple testing.  In addition, health status measures also                    
              will be taken.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Finally, various college and non-college groups who differ in                  
              terms of their plans to stay or quit the Bay Area also will be                 
              interviewed, and various health status measures will be                        
              applied.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The research will attempt to show that the form of people's                    
              reaction to a disaster, and possibly the reactions they exhibit                
              over a period of time following the disaster, will have                        
              implications for their psychological and physical health.  The                 
              PI's use of the Bay Area disaster as a natural manipulation is                 
              a smart and opportunistic attempt to make a positive gain from                 
              a terrible catastrophe.  A rapid NSF response to this request                  
              would have been very difficult without the SGER program.  For                  
              this reason alone, the SGER initiative is to be applauded.
