Title       : Dissertation Research: Fitness Consequences of Floral Nectar Production Rate for
               the Hummingbird-Pollinated Plant Ipomopsis aggregata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1990      
File        : a9001307

Award Number: 9001307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3080               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nickolas M. Waser waser@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Nectar is the most common floral reward produced by                       
              angiosperms, but little is known about the effect of nectar                    
              production rate on pollination success.  This investigation will               
              focus on this relationship for the hummingbird-pollinated                      
              monacarpic plant Ipomopsis aggregata.  The primary question of                 
              the study involves the overall effect of nectar production rate                
              on fitness:  1) Do plants with higher nectar production rates                  
              have greater pollination success?  Preliminary field evidence                  
              indicates that this does occur (at least for male function                     
              pollination success), so study of the causal mechanisms of this                
              effect will be profitable.  This question will answered by:  2)                
              How does NPR affect standing crop?  3) How does standing crop                  
              affect visitation behavior?  4) How does visitation behavior                   
              affect pollination success?                                                    
                  The study will investigate these questions with a variety of               
              mutually reinforcing approaches, including computer simulation,                
              observation of the effects of natural variation in NPR, and                    
              manipulative experiments in the field and aviary.  Estimates of                
              the effect of each mechanism in isolation can be combined to                   
              produce an estimate of pollination success that can be compared                
              with benchmark values from Question 1, testing the adequacy of                 
              the mechanisms proposed.  The research will increase                           
              understanding, not only of the fitness consequences of variation               
              in NPR, but the mechanisms through which such effects may be                   
              expressed.
