Title       : Dissertation Research: Dispersed Introgression Between Yucca baccata and Y.
               schidigera (Agavaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1990        
File        : a9001157

Award Number: 9001157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9274               (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren H. Rieseberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rancho Santa Ana Bot Gdn
	      1500 North College Avenue
	      Claremont, CA  917113157    714/626-3922

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Hybridization has long been important to plant breeding and               
              the production of crop plants.  Less well understood, however, is              
              the importance of hybridization in the evolution of wild plants.               
              In part this is because it can be difficult to detect and                      
              document the occurrence of hybridization events and to                         
              distinguish genetic novelties introduced from another species                  
              from natural genetic variation arising within a species by                     
              mutation processes.  Recently, new and powerful molecular                      
              methods for analyzing directly the DNA of plants have made                     
              possible a broad analysis of this problem.                                     
                   Graduate student Hanson under the guidance of Dr. Loren                   
              Rieseberg of the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is studying a                 
              presumptive case of repeated hybridization events (termed                      
              introgression) between two species of yuccas of the American                   
              Southwest.  Protein markers are being assayed by electrophoresis,              
              and variation in nuclear ribosomal and plastid DNA is being                    
              analyzed by enzymatic restriction-sites.  Several related yucca                
              species are also being studied to infer the phylogenetic                       
              relationships among species in this group, in order to determine               
              whether the two hybridizing species have shared a recent common                
              ancestor.  Recent ancestry can also lead to a pattern of shared                
              genetic markers that could be confused with hybridization.  The                
              range of protein and DNA markers to be studied, from both nuclear              
              and chloroplast genomes, will help distinguish between recent                  
              common ancestry and current introgression.  The study will thus                
              advance understanding of hybridization in natural plant                        
              populations, and will help in the training of a young plant                    
              scientist.
