Title       : PRF/J: The Consequences of Resource Availability and Plant Apparency on Patterns
               of Herbivory and Herbivore Defense in an Annual Tarweed, Hemizonia luzulaefolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1990     
File        : a9001535

Award Number: 9001535
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joann P. Roskoski                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. English-Loeb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Ecotypes of Hemizonia Luzulaefolia (Asteraceae) will be                   
              used to examine predictions of two theories concerned with the                 
              evolution of plant defenses against herbivores:  the resource                  
              availability and the apparency hypotheses.  The resource                       
              availability hypothesis predicts that plants adapted to low-                   
              resource environments should allocate proportionally more                      
              resources to defense than plants adapted to high-resource                      
              environments.  Two ecotypes of H.luzulaefolia (one adapted to                  
              resource-poor serpentine soil and one adapted to resource-rich                 
              sandstone soil) in 1) a reciprocal transplant garden experiment                
              to assess this prediction in terms of plant fitness and 2) a                   
              container experiment to examine underlying eco-physiological                   
              mechanisms) will be used.   H.luzulaefolia produces non-resinous               
              rosette leaves prior to flowering and resinous leaves (presumably              
              a defense against herbivores) when flowering is initiated.  In                 
              addition, two ecotypes differ in flowering time (spring vs.fall)               
              and in quantity of resins produced.  The apparency hypothesis                  
              predicts that this variation in the timing and quantity of resin               
              production is attributable to variation in vulnerability to                    
              herbivores.  This idea will be tested by placing different                     
              growth stages of the two ecotypes into the grassland at several                
              times during the season and measure herbivore damage.  It is                   
              anticipated that results generated from these experiments will                 
              provide an empirical base for modifying current theory on the                  
              evolution of herbivore defense.   //
