Title       : Problems in Discrete Pattern Matching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9001619

Award Number: 9001619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Udi Manber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene W. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Discrete pattern matching includes a large class of problems of                
              pattern matching over discrete domains.  These problems are driven by          
              several applications, mostly in the areas of molecular biology and             
              information retrieval.  There are several features that are common to          
              most of these problems.  The input is usually a sequence, a set of             
              sequences, a set of integer-weighted sequences, or even a graph of             
              sequences, over a finite alphabet.  The goal of the problem is to              
              identify common patterns (i.e., a subsequence or a set of                      
              subsequences) that satisfy several constraints and/or optimize several         
              objectives.  The problems differ not only by the constraints and               
              objectives, but also by the type of input.  This project mainly                
              concerns algorithmic questions in discrete pattern matching.  The              
              investigators will identify important problems, develop new algorithms         
              for a variety of problems, find common algorithmic techniques, and             
              study relationships among different problems.  The emphasis will be on         
              four kinds of problems which are identified by their domains:                  
              sequence comparisons, which involve problems of finding large common           
              subsequences of two (or more) sequences; pattern-sequence comparisons,         
              which involve finding more complicated patterns, such as regular               
              expressions of sequences, in given sequences; pattern matching in              
              hypertext systems, which generalizes the previous problems to "hyper-          
              sequences" or, in other words, pieces of sequences connected by links;         
              and hierarchical pattern matching, which involves finding patterns             
              over domains that are by themselves patterns obtained from other               
              matches.
