Title       : Dissertation Research: Influence of Resource Limitation on Plant Responses to
               Herbivory: Responses of Silphium integrifolium to Gall Insect Attack
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1990     
File        : a9001047

Award Number: 9001047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6817               (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett hartnett@lter-konza.konza.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Insect herbivores can have large effects on the performance,              
              life histories, and demography of plants, and often exert strong               
              natural selection on plant populations.  In addition, plants are               
              often exposed simultaneously to stresses from biotic (i.e.                     
              herbivory, parasitism) and abiotic (i.e. resource limitation,                  
              heat) sources.                                                                 
                   This project will use the tallgrass prairie perennial                     
              Silphium integrifolium (Asteraceae) and one of its major                       
              herbivores, the gall wasp Antistrophus silphii                                 
              (Hymenoptera:Cynipidae), as a model system to examine how                      
              herbivory, nutrient stresses, and water stress interact to affect              
              life history and physiological responses of plants.                            
                   Experiments will address two specific questions.  1. How                  
              does gall infestation affect life-history traits and fitness                   
              components of Silphium intergrifolium?  2. How do nutrient                     
              limitation and water stress influence the physiological and                    
              growth responses of plants to gall insect attack?  To answer the               
              first question, plant physiology (i.e. photosynthesis, water                   
              potential), growth, biomass allocation, and reproduction will be               
              measured over a two-year period in experimentally galled and                   
              gall-free plants growing in natural field populations.  The                    
              second question will be addressed in a common garden experiment                
              in which gall frequencies and nutrient/water availabilities will               
              be manipulated in a factorial design, and physiology, growth, and              
              reproductive output will again be measured.
