Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Problems and Inverse Spectral Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1991    
File        : a9001857

Award Number: 9001857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68701              (Estimated)
Investigator: Percy A. Deift   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is focused on three areas of mathematical                    
              analysis: (1) periods of hyperelliptic Riemann surfaces and                    
              Hamiltonian mechanics, (2) matrix problems, and (3) long-time                  
              behavior of integrable systems.  The first topic involves the                  
              investigation of a new connection between the arithmetic-                      
              geometric mean and the computation of hyperelliptic integrals on               
              the one hand, and Hamiltonian mechanics on the other.  The second              
              topic involves the analysis of high accuracy algorithms to                     
              compute the singular values of a matrix.  This part of the                     
              project is also concerned with the problem of computing the                    
              eigenvalues and eigenvectors of products of matrices.  A central               
              role in the analysis is played by integrable Hamiltonian systems               
              which interpolate the iterates of the singular value /                         
              eigenvalue algorithms at integer times.  The third topic involves              
              an analysis of the long-time behavior of integrable systems,                   
              specifically of the Toda shock problem.  Attention will be                     
              focused on the case of low shock speed, the more general case for              
              higher shock speeds, the stability problem in which a doubly                   
              infinite Toda lattice in equilibrium is perturbed locally, the                 
              question of the rate and the manner in which the eigenvalues fill              
              the "phantom" band, and the analysis of the long-time behavior of              
              the nonlinear wave equations in the Gel'fand-Dikii hierarchy.                  
                   The work in this project deals with spectral problems and                 
              inverse spectral problems.  The project is concerned with                      
              applications to Hamiltonian mechanics, with the development of                 
              algorithms which improve the accuracy of the computed singular                 
              values of a matrix, and with the study of the long-time behavior               
              of integrable systems.
