Title       : U.S. - Argentina Cooperative Research: Studies on the Robust Control of Chemical
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9001963

Award Number: 9001963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmet N. Palazoglu anpalazoglu@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5911      ARGENTINA
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports cooperative research in chemical process                   
              control to be conducted by Ahmet Palazoglu of the University                   
              of California at Davis and Jose Ramagnoli of the Chemical                      
              Engineering Pilot Plant of CONICET in Bahia Blanca, Argentina.                 
              The primary object of this collaborative effort is to develop                  
              design and analysis methods for robust process control                         
              systems.  With increasing demands on product quality,                          
              contraints on process economics and stringent environmental                    
              regulations, automatic control has undeniably become and                       
              integral pat of chemical process operations.  However,                         
              reliable under various operating regimes and demand that the                   
              controllers respond to such variations without loss of                         
              performance or stability characteristics.  The methods                         
              developed through this collaboration will be tested on                         
              various applications.  The U. S. investigators have already                    
              investigated a high purity distillation column model to                        
              demonstrate the uncertainty characterization by various                        
              methods.  The dynamic model of double effect high purity                       
              column has also been developed and its behavior has been                       
              tested under multi-loop PI control.  The research team in                      
              Argentina has studied the singular value and the structured                    
              singular value concepts in characterizing model uncertainty                    
              for chemical processes.                                                        
                                                                                             
              These two groups have complementary expertise in the area of                   
              robust control of linear and nonlinear process.  Demonstrated                  
              by a number of publications, the two linear process.                           
              Demonstrated by a number of publications, the two groups have                  
              investigated the use of various representations of the                         
              model/plant mismatch and arrived at design and analysis                        
              methods.  The UC Davis group emphasizes the use of mag-                        
              nitude/phase information as well as its extensions to highly                   
              structured cases.  In terms of applications, the UC Davis                      
              group developed rigorous dynamic models of high purity                         
              distillation systems while the Argentines work with triple                     
              effect evaporators and fixed-bed reactors, including pilot                     
              plant studies.  Development of robust control strategies                       
              ultimately benefits processing industries in both countries                    
              by assisting them to operate process units with more confidence                
              under tight control situations.
