Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Group Theory and 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1993  
File        : a9203941

Award Number: 9203941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123900             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Stallings stall@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The Cayley graph of a group G with respect to a set of                    
              generators A is the graph whose vertices are the elements of G, and            
              such that for each g in G and each generator a in A, an edge runs              
              from g to ga labeled with the generator a.  This graph has                     
              topological and geometric properties which are often related to                
              properties of the group G and independent of the set of generators.            
              Gromov's notion of "negatively curved" group, for example, can be              
              stated in terms of the Cayley graph as saying that there is a fixed            
              number c such that in each triangle of shortest paths in the Cayley            
              graph, each edge of the triangle is within the c-neighborhood of               
              the union of the other two edges.  There are various other                     
              properties which can be described in similar terms, although the               
              definitions are not quite so simple, usually.  One of the most                 
              interesting is a property invented by Stephen G. Brick which he                
              calls "qsf"; given a group-presentation, one constructs the 2-                 
              complex which is described, having the given group as fundamental              
              group; one asks whether arbitrarily large neighborhoods of the                 
              identity in the universal cover can be faithfully represented (in              
              a certain technical sense) by finite, 1-connected complexes mapping            
              into the universal cover; if so, the group is said to be "quasi-               
              simply-filtrated" or qsf.  There are generalizations of some                   
              results of Poenaru and Casson, so that one has a theorem to the                
              effect that if an aspherical, P2-irreducible, closed 3-manifold has            
              fundamental group which is qsf, then its universal cover is                    
              homeomorphic to R3.                                                            
                   These and related notions have produced a revolution in the               
              theory of infinite groups within the last few years.  The basic                
              pattern seems to be that one finds some facts in differential                  
              geometry and topology of 3-manifolds; one abstracts to the                     
              fundamental group level, and then one finds group-theoretic                    
              theorems which sometimes have a reverse application to topology.               
              In addition, the subject tends to have a connection with the                   
              computability of the Cayley graph itself; the Todd-Coxeter                     
              algorithm for finite groups thus extends to various kinds of                   
              computability questions about finite Cayley graphs.  The theory of             
              "automatic groups" involves finite-state automata and regular                  
              languages; this theory, however, does not apply to certain easily              
              understood groups such as nilpotent groups and matrix groups over              
              the integers; in order to understand these, one needs to extend the            
              notion of a finite-state machine in certain very restricted ways               
              which are not yet obvious.  Perhaps this will have implications in             
              formal language theory and other aspects of mathematics usually                
              considered to be "computer science."
