Title       : Adaptive Subspace Algorithms with Biomedical and Array Processing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9203296

Award Number: 9203296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Dowling   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick M. Roark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. DeGroat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the problem of tracking time varying                  
              subspaces to model nonstationary vector time series.  A principal              
              objective is to characterize the tracking properties and steady                
              state performance of the non-iterative Spherical Subspace (SS)                 
              tracker and associated Spherical Subspace Recursive Total Least                
              Squares (SS-RTLS) adaptive filter.  This will be done using a                  
              statistical model derived from the general theory of stochastic                
              recursive algorithms.  The non-iterative spherical updating concept            
              will be extended to develop an adaptive and non-iterative                      
              eigenstructure tracker.  Moreover, a generalized subspace tracking             
              method will be developed to optimally track the signal subspace in             
              the presence of colored noise.  Additionally, a matrix pencil                  
              tracking algorithm will be developed to reduce the computation                 
              associated with certain tracking problems.  These methods will be              
              applied to a vast data base of multichannel biomedical data                    
              consisting of synchronous electromyographic, kinematic,                        
              aerodynamic, and acoustic data in order to model the speech                    
              production process.  The biomedical work will be done in                       
              collaboration with an otolarynngology medical research team at the             
              University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas.  Other              
              methods will be used to develop vocal tract signal analysis tools              
              that model and discriminate between different types of speech                  
              disorders.  The adaptive subspace algorithms will also be applied              
              to direction-of-arrival problems using data from a recently                    
              deployed experimental array of microphones.
