Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Isolation and Characterization of Inhibitors of
               FOS/JUN DNA-Binding Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9203286

Award Number: 9203286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Molina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Isolation and Characterization of                
              Inhibitors of FOS/JUN DNA-Binding Function                                     
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Carlos Molina-Nazario to work with Dr. Paolo Sassone-                   
              Corsi at the Laboratoire de Genetique Molecularie des Eucaryotes,              
              CNRS in Strasbourg, France.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research project is to find suppressor(s) of the           
              Fos/Jun transactivating activity.  Fos and Jun are transcriptional             
              activators that belong to the early response gene class.  They                 
              mediate the translation of extracellular signals into long term                
              cellular response such as cell growth and differentiation.  They are           
              also defined proto-oncogenes because they can act as transforming              
              genes if activated.  The transforming activity seems to be related to          
              the transactivating properties.  Therefore factors involved in the             
              suppression of the Fos-Jun transactivating properties are likely to            
              be involved in the control of the cell proliferation and                       
              transformation.  The purpose of the project can be summarized as               
              follows:  to isolate and characterize the factor IP-1 (a specific              
              repressor of Fos/Jun function) and study its involvement in the                
              control of Fos/Jun transactivating properties, and to characterize             
              IP-1's role in cell proliferation and transformation.  The learning of         
              these unique methods in molecular biology and the general systems              
              of molecular carcinogenesis will help Dr. Molina-Nazario for the               
              future study of the molecular mechanism involved in the onset of               
              cancer.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover a stipend for                 
              twelve months, a dependent allowance and return airfare.
