Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9203440

Award Number: 9203440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Evans evans@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project continues mathematical research on the               
              application of viscosity solutions to problems arising in the                  
              theory of nonlinear partial differential equations.  One                       
              particularly interesting direction the research has led to                     
              involves the geometric problem of describing how a surface                     
              evolves in the direction of the normal at each point if the rate               
              of evolution is proportional to the curvature (at the point).                  
              The physical counterparts of such questions can be found in                    
              studies of phase transition and wave front propagation.  Recent                
              results show that weak solutions describe the evolution to the                 
              point where regularity breaks down.  Work still must be done                   
              analyzing solutions at the onset of breakdown.                                 
                   Other work concerns the regularity of harmonic maps.  Here                
              efforts will be made to expand a new regularity result valid for               
              maps to the sphere to one for stationary harmonic maps into                    
              general target manifolds.  As examples of regularity failure                   
              exist for domains in dimension greater than two, one cannot                    
              expect any results of complete generality here.  Work will also                
              be done on two-dimensional Euler equations with vortex sheet                   
              initial data.  Of interest is the occurrence of weak convergence               
              of sequences of solutions to the 2-D incompressible Euler under                
              physically reasonable assumptions on the velocity and vorticity.               
              The issue is whether or not a weak limit of solutions is still a               
              solution.  Informal calculations suggest that a tractable                      
              solution to this question is possible.
