Title       : The Movement and Geographic Origin of Marine Larvae: A Molecular and Genetic
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1994       
File        : a9203320

Award Number: 9203320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Hilbish hilbish@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bert E. Ely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In order to understand the role of recruitment in the population               
              dynamics of marine species which have high larval dispersal it is              
              necessary to understand the movement of the larvae, their                      
              geographic origin and the forces that control their local                      
              abundance.  Methods for tracking larval movements have been                    
              restricted to short time scales or within closed systems but their             
              application to high dispersal systems has been of limited value                
              because of the difficulties with larval recovery.  The mussel                  
              Mytilus edulis consists of a complex of sibling species that                   
              hybridize in discrete areas of contact between the parental forms.             
              Individual mussel larvae can be genetically identified as having               
              originated from either of the parental population, or from                     
              populations that contain hybrids. Hybrid larvae can only have                  
              originated from populations that contained both parent taxa or F1              
              hybrids. Using this system it will be possible to obtain                       
              information on the origin of larvae at several geographic scales.              
              New techniques are required to genetically identify individual                 
              larvae.  The methods which will be developed in this research                  
              program will allow individual larvae to be assayed directly, with              
              minimal preparation and a high rate of processing.  Once the                   
              techniques have been developed it will be possible to identify the             
              geographic origin of dispersing or recruited larvae. Once developed            
              this new technique will be employed to study larval dispersal in               
              regions of contact between Mytilus populations.
