Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: F2 and HF Photochemistry andSpectroscopy in Rare
               Gas Matrices Using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9203318

Award Number: 9203318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12250              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. G. Lawrence   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vartkess A. Apkarian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1958,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  F2 and HF Photochemistry and                     
              Spectroscopy in Rare Gas Matrices Using Synchrotron Radiation                  
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a five-month postdoctoral research visit by            
              Dr. William G. Lawrence of the University of California, Irvine                
              with Professor N. Schwentner of the Freie Universitat Berlin.  The             
              researchers will focus on the study of the photodissociation                   
              dynamics of HF and F2 in argon and neon matrices.                              
                                                                                             
              The photodissociation of halogens and halogen halides in rare gas              
              solids presents one of the simplest systems for studying molecular             
              dynamics in condensed phase.  Using vacuum ultraviolet radiation               
              from the Berlin Synchrotron facility BESSY, they propose to study              
              the photodissociation dynamics of HF and F2 in argon and neon                  
              matrices.  The synchrotron source can be used for dissociation of              
              F2 and HF and also for detection of H and F atoms using photo-                 
              induced charge transfer emmision.  Using this technique, the                   
              mobility of F and H atoms after photodissociation will be                      
              measured.  These studies will also include spectroscopy of the NeF             
              excimer in solid neon, and an evaluation of the ArF excimer in                 
              neon as a solid sate excimer laser medium.                                     
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation provides funds to cover international                
              travel and a stipend for five months.
