Title       : Dissertation Reseach: Anatomical Correlates to Behavior in the Postcranium of
               Callitrichidae (Platyrrhini, Primates)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9203884

Award Number: 9203884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lesa Davis  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Previous studies of primate evolution have demonstrated that                   
              certain aspects of evolution, ecology, and behavior have a direct              
              impact on the size and shape of the bony and muscular elements of              
              the skeleton.  However, the relationships are not always clear, nor            
              are the correlations the same across different primate groups.                 
              Several specific determinants of form have been identified, such as            
              diet and foraging behavior, size and orientation of branches used              
              in the natural habitat, locomotor movements and postures, body                 
              size, and evolutionary history of the lineage.  The goal of this               
              study is to correlate skeletal and muscular anatomy with these key             
              determinants of form in eleven species of poorly-understood and                
              highly endangered group of South American monkeys.                             
                                                                                             
              Specific measurements and descriptions of the bones and                        
              musculature of all four limbs in each of the eleven monkey species             
              will be taken.  Such data will also be collected in a group of                 
              eight additional primates, sharing ecological and behavioral                   
              similarities with the monkeys, to be used for comparative purposes.            
              Details of the behavior and ecology of each monkey species and                 
              members of the comparative group will be taken from published                  
              field studies and films of several monkeys in captivity.  The                  
              anatomical data will be analyzed for its functional  significance,             
              determining the movement capabilities of each limb joint, and then             
              will be statistically correlated with the behavioral data for each             
              species.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This integrated approach will provide a comprehensive understanding            
              of the functional anatomy of an important group of                             
              South American monkeys.  It will also serve as a rigorous test of              
              several previous suggestions of anatomy/behavior correlations and              
              will address numerous broader issues in primate anatomy and                    
              evolution.
