Title       : Bacterivorous Ciliates in Marine Food Webs: Lipid Chemistry and Copepod
               Nutrition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1992      
File        : a9203478

Award Number: 9203478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40611              (Estimated)
Investigator: George B. McManus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bacterivorous ciliates are an important component of planktonic                
              food webs.  They can consume a large proportion of bacterial                   
              production, and convert material that is low in essential lipids               
              (bacterial biomass and detritus) into lipid-rich ciliate biomass.              
              How do consumers benefit nutritionally from these ciliates, and                
              what role do they play in the biochemical transformation of ciliate            
              carbon?                                                                        
                                                                                             
              To investigate the nature of ciliate lipids and their fate and                 
              importance in the marine food web Dr. Harvey and McManus will:                 
                                                                                             
              -    identify and quantify ciliate lipids, especially ones that may            
                   be useful as group-specific biomarkers in trophic studies.                
              -    examine sources of lipids in the ciliate diet and follow how              
                   ciliates assimilate and modify dietary lipids.                            
              -    measure the assimilation and transformation of ciliate lipids             
                   by one of their principal consumers, copepods.                            
                                                                                             
              This project combines biochemical measurements with feeding                    
              experiments.  Detailed lipid analysis of a number of ciliate                   
              species will first provide additional data on the ubiquity of the              
              unique compounds they have already observed.  They will measure in             
              detail the role of diet on lipid content and distribution of                   
              several representative bacterivorous ciliates.  Finally, they will             
              conduct in-depth feeding experiments to follow the incorporation               
              and transformation of ciliate lipids by grazing copepods.                      
                                                                                             
              These results will provide substantial new information on the role             
              of bacterivorous ciliates in the marine food web, especially their             
              importance in copepod nutrition.
