Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Theory and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9203776

Award Number: 9203776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome A. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research combining                    
              general operator-theoretic functional analysis with differential               
              equations.  Three overlapping areas will be treated in the work.               
              The first concerns nonlinear partial differential equations of                 
              evolution which are of mixed type in the space variable.  Initial              
              work will focus on a concrete example, the Kompaneetz Equation of              
              plasma physics.  It can be written as an abstract Cauchy problem.              
              The first task is to determine properties of the resolvent; in                 
              particular whether or not it has a dense range.  The second area               
              involves semigroups of operators, particularly those whose                     
              infinitesimal generators split into a linear and locally smooth                
              nonlinear part.  The object is to determine conditions for a                   
              globally defined semigroup of operators determining the solution               
              for all time and to bound the difference of any two solutions as               
              a function of time and the initial function norms. Finally, work               
              will be done on spin polarization Thomas-Fermi theory involving a              
              minimizing problem for pairs of functions.  One main obstacle to               
              finding extrema is the functional involving the two unknowns is                
              not convex.  By topological arguments, one can show that extrema               
              exist.  The next step will be to find a method which will produce              
              the minima in a concrete fashion.                                              
                   The project combines abstract mathematical concepts with                  
              models of various phenomena in the physical world.  Among the                  
              goals of the research is one of fitting models into the proper                 
              generalized structures and apply the existing theory.  In this                 
              way one gains insight into the models and, at times, discovers                 
              hidden properties.
