Title       : Bacteriolytic Activity in the Guts of Deposit Feeders: Distribution,
               Environmental Influences, and Mechanisms of Differential Susceptibility in
               Ingested Microbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9203063

Award Number: 9203063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. King GKing@Maine.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Invertebrates living in marine sediments and feeding on bacteria               
              alter the biomass, metabolism, growth, and community structure of              
              sedimentary microbes.  This project will test and refine present               
              models of bacterial associations within the gut of sediment deposit            
              feeders.  Bacteria ingested into the gut and exposed to lytic                  
              activity of gut enzymes, both in terms of space and time, will be              
              examined in the two deposit feeders, Arenicola marina and                      
              Amphitrite johnsonii.  Controlled experiments will be employed to              
              clarify the influences of temperature, enzyme concentration,                   
              exposure time, and the interactions among these variables on the               
              lysis of bacterial strains within the gut.  Further experiments                
              will determine to what degree quantity, as opposed to composition,             
              of extra-cellular capsular layer dictates resistance to digestion.             
              Also, lysis of bacterial strains devoid of capsular material will              
              be compared to ascertain the importance of cell wall                           
              characteristics in bacterial lysis.  The goals of these experiments            
              are to determine how environmental parameters influence lysis of               
              bacterial communities and to distinguish mechanisms for                        
              differential lysis, in order to make a priori predictions of                   
              natural patterns within the guts of deposit feeders.  These                    
              predictions will then be tested in the field using epifluorescence             
              microscopy coupled with the relevant measurements of environmental             
              conditions and immunofluorescence microscopy to specifically track             
              three bacterial isolates through the guts of the two model deposit             
              feeders.  This research will also determine whether deposit feeder             
              digestion, both in terms of total biomass or selective removal, is             
              an important determinant of bacterial biomass or community                     
              composition in bulk sediments.
