Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Solvent Design for Separation of Biomolecules
               Using Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9203312

Award Number: 9203312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39696              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Tomasko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Eckert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Solvent Design for Separation                  
              of Biomolecules Using Supercritical Fluids                                     
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support an eleven-month postdoctoral research visit            
              by Dr. David Tomasko to work with Dr. Neil R. Foster at the                    
              University of New South Wales.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Separation tools suitable for use in the food, cosmetics, and                  
              pharmaceutical industries can be developed using supercritical                 
              fluids as a basis.  The stringent toxicity and purity requirements in          
              these fields require highly specific designs which must be based on            
              exact experimental data.  Solubilities of fatty acids, triglycerides,          
              and their mixtures will be measured in pure and cosolvent modified             
              SCF's to aid the separation design for this demanding application.             
                                                                                             
              The uniqueness of this application demonstrates a novel separation             
              technique applicable in an area that is dominated by conventional              
              technology in the United States.                                               
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for eleven months and a dependent allowance.
