Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Regression and Time Series Model Selection in Small
               Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1992       
File        : a9203347

Award Number: 9203347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford M. Hurvich hurvich@acf2.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In a recent series of papers, the principal investigaors                  
              have explored the use of a correction to the Akaike Information                
              Criterion, AICc, and a further-improved version AICi, for model                
              selection in linear regression and artoregressive time series                  
              analysis.  Substantial small-sample improvements in model                      
              selection performance are found in all cases as the bias of the                
              estimator for Kullback-Leibler discrepancy is greatly reduced.                 
              The investigators propose to build on the above work by                        
              developing a general theoretical and pracitcal foundation for                  
              AICc as it applies to small-sample model selection problems in                 
              time series and regression.                                                    
                   A central problem in statistics is that of selecting an                   
              appropriate model from a potentially large class of candidate                  
              models to apply in a particular situation of practical interest.               
              The selection of an inadequate model can have very serious                     
              consequences: forecasts of future events may be substantially                  
              distorted and inaccurate, resulting in incorrect decisions, and                
              financial losses.  The development of an effective decision-                   
              making process therefore depends on the ability to decide which                
              model seems best for the data at hand.  The investigators propose              
              to develop and test improved methods of selecting a model on the               
              basis of a reasonably small amount of observed data.
