Title       : Modification of the Surface Properties of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9203384

Award Number: 9203384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Ruckenstein feaeliru@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The interfacial free energy between a polymer and water is                     
              relatively large.  As a result, proteins, platelets and cells                  
              will deposit upon its surface.  By modifying the surface                       
              properties of the polymers, one can reduce the interfacial                     
              free between them and water, and thus reduce the thermodynamic                 
              driving force for deposition.  The following surface                           
              modification technique, which employs two immiscible liquids                   
              in contact, will be investigated.  One of the liquids is water                 
              and contains a water soluble surfactant, while the other                       
              liquid is an organic compound which is selected so as to be a                  
              solvent for the polymer substrate.  It is convenient for the                   
              organic phase to be more dense than water.  The substrate is                   
              introduced for a short time in the organic phase.  This                        
              softens its surface and allows the entanglement of the                         
              hydrocarbon chains of the surfactant molecules and of the                      
              surface molecules of the polymer substrate during the pulling                  
              out of the substrate through the water-organic solvent                         
              interface and the water phase.  The two-phase system provides                  
              an interface at which the surfactant molecules adsorb.  This                   
              highly oriented surfactant layer increases the efficiency of                   
              the transfer of surfactant to the substrate.  The interfacial                  
              free energy between the modified polymer surface and water is                  
              thus decreased below 1 dyne/cm.  This can reduce the                           
              deposition of proteins, cells and platelets on such surfaces.                  
              The adsorption of proteins on the non-modified and surface as                  
              well as the stability of the modified surface will be                          
              investigated to verify the effectiveness of the procedure.
