Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Knotting in 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1994     
File        : a9203522

Award Number: 9203522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin G. Scharlemann mgscharl@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darren Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Three investigators are engaged in this research project in               
              low-dimensional topology.  (i) Scharlemann intends to apply the new            
              research tools of "thin position," combinatorics of surface                    
              intersections, and sutured manifold theory to several problems in              
              the theory of knots and graphs in 3-space and of Heegaard                      
              splittings of 3-manifolds.  Of particular interest are methods for             
              determining and characterizing knotting of graphs in 3-manifolds,              
              for applying these tools to the graphs which arise naturally in                
              Heegaard splittings of 3-manifolds, and, in the relatively simple              
              case in which the graphs consist of simple closed curves,                      
              understanding how the topology changes under a process called Dehn             
              surgery.  (ii) Long plans to examine several interrelated questions            
              in the theory of low-dimensional manifolds, braid groups, and                  
              representation varieties.  The specifics concern representations of            
              the fundamental groups of 3-manifolds and applications of these to             
              boundary slopes and Property P, as well as the braid groups and                
              their representations.  (iii) Cooper intends to study ties of low-             
              dimensional topology to hyperbolic geometry.  The connection                   
              between incompressible surfaces in knot complements and the Newton             
              polygons of the SL2(C) knot polynomial provides a method of getting            
              at deep information about the topology of knot complements.  The               
              hyperbolic gluing equations for a knot complement provide another              
              means to approach the same problem.  Hodgson's formula for the                 
              hyperbolic volume form provides a closed 1-form on any curve given             
              by a polynomial in the longitude and meridian eigenvalues.  The                
              exactness of this volume form on a curve arising from a knot puts              
              strong conditions on which polynomials arise this way.  Following              
              these leads, Cooper expects to find mutant knots with distinct                 
              SL2(C) polynomials, even without being able to calculate these                 
              polynomials explicitly.                                                        
                   Knots are rather elementary geometric objects whose really                
              interesting properties are topological.  By this we mean that two              
              geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them             
              can be transformed to look just like the other without cutting or              
              untying it, just by pushing its string about to rearrange the                  
              crossings.  Nevertheless, it is not a trivial matter to recognize              
              when one complicated geometric knot is topologically different from            
              another, rather than just a different geometric realization.  This             
              problem can be addressed by computing certain numbers or                       
              polynomials which are called "topological invariants," meaning that            
              they always have the same value for different geometric                        
              realizations of the same topological knot.  The problem would be               
              reduced to pure algebra if there were one invariant which also                 
              always had different values for geometric realizations of different            
              topological knots, but life is not so simple -- no single invariant            
              achieves this ideal, nor even all the known invariants taken                   
              together.  It is therefore valuable to investigate new invariants,             
              some of the most useful being those inspired in recent years by                
              ideas from quantum physics. In particular, applications of knot                
              theory to the biology of long strands of DNA have drawn upon                   
              knowledge of these newer invariants.
