Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Several Complex Variablesand Partial
               Differential Equations.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1994    
File        : a9203973

Award Number: 9203973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda P. Rothschild lrothschild@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Salah Baouendi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project continues mathematical research into                 
              problems relating solutions of partial differential equations                  
              with mappings defined on surfaces in spaces of several complex                 
              variables.  The general Cauchy-Riemann equations which test for                
              analyticity are expressed as first-order differential                          
              expressions.  In studying these expressions one tries to decide                
              whether functions defined on surfaces and boundaries of domains                
              can be extended as holomorphic functions to regions adjacent to                
              the surfaces.  A fundamental tool in these studies is the                      
              embedding of analytic discs into complex spaces of higher                      
              dimension with their boundaries going into real hypersurfaces or               
              more general submanifolds.  The vanishing or nonvanishing of the               
              differential of such disc mappings has far-reaching implications               
              in the study of mappings of hypersurfaces as well as to the                    
              extension problem already mentioned.  Ultimately the research                  
              seeks to reveal more about mappings between manifolds, in                      
              particular to determine new geometric and algebraic invariants                 
              preserved under biholomorphic transformations. A second line of                
              investigation follows from the recent completion of a succession               
              of papers leading to the complete resolution of one of the                     
              fundamental extendibility questions raised by Lewy in the                      
              mid-50's: minimality of a generic manifold at a point is                       
              necessary and sufficient to guarantee that every Cauchy-Riemann                
              function near the point extends holomorphically to a wedge.  A                 
              description of the wedge of extendibility is unknown even in                   
              simple cases.  Work will be done in finding a geometric                        
              description of the wedge of extendibility.                                     
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
