Title       : US-Czechoslovakia Research on Dynamic Light Scattering from Block Copolymer
               Liquids near the Order-Disorder Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9203173

Award Number: 9203173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Lodge lodge@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5930      U.S.-CZECHOSLOVAKIA PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. Timothy P.               
              Lodge of the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities and Dr. P.                    
              Stepanek of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences will be to                    
              perform extensive experimental examination of the dynamics of                  
              block copolymer liquids.  Their focus will be the weak segregation             
              regime, defined to incorporate order-disorder transition and the               
              adjunct ordered and disordered states.  The researchers will use               
              dynamic light scattering to  investigate both block copolymer melts            
              and solutions, especially:  chain length and concentration; block              
              copolymer composition; the segment-segment interaction                         
              parameter; and temperature.  They will pay particular attention to             
              the number, angular dependence, and identification of the modes                
              which appear in the experimental correlation functions.  The large             
              characteristic time constants involved will pose challenges which              
              demand various exploratory stategies.  The researchers will                    
              interpret the results in the framework of emerging theoretical                 
              descriptions, anticipating that dynamical mean-field approximations            
              are unlikely to be adequate.  These measurements will complement               
              rheological, rheo-optical, tracer diffusion, and small-angle                   
              scattering studies at the University of Minnesota.                             
                                                                                             
              This project in chemistry fulfills the program objective of                    
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the              
              United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary                      
              talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and              
              competence.
