Title       : Discontinuous Grazing Pressure by Microzooflagellates on Marine Synechococcus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9203496

Award Number: 9203496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369693             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Waterbury jwaterbury@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Small phytoplankton play a major role in the primary production of             
              the oceans.  The unicellular cyanobacterium Synechococcus is a                 
              prominent and important member of this community that can reach                
              cell densities of more than 100 thousands cells per liter, achieve             
              in situ growth rates of 3 doubling per day and as a result may                 
              contribute between 5 and 25% of the total primary productivity in              
              the temperate and tropical oceans.  Studies to date indicate that              
              Synechococcus is grazed at rates comparable to its growth rate and             
              that microflagellates are the major group responsible for turning              
              over Synechococcus biomass.  Synechococcus has a characteristic                
              discontinuous pattern of diel growth both in nature and in culture             
              that can be monitored by direct and indirect methods.  Results of              
              experiments measuring both growth and grazing rates of                         
              Synechococcus in the Sargasso Sea led to the hypothesis that                   
              grazing of Synechococcus by microflagellates can be periodic,                  
              occurring primarily at night.  To test this hypothesis, Dr.                    
              Waterbury will isolate and characterize the microflagellates                   
              responsible for Synechococcus turnover and document their impact on            
              the temporal patterns of Synechococcus abundance.  The project will            
              be conducted in both inshore and open-ocean waters and will                    
              experimentally employ culture techniques, direct and indirect                  
              measurements of in situ growth and grazing rates using direct cell             
              counts, and C-14 bicarbonate incorporation.  The significance of               
              this study extends beyond simply furthering our understanding of               
              the ecology of marine Synechococcus spp.  This unicellular                     
              photosynthetic bacterium is an important component of the marine               
              microbial food web. Insights concerning the identity of                        
              Synechococcus grazers and patterns and rates of grazing on                     
              Synechococcus can act as a model for and provide important insights            
              into the workings of the "microbial loop".//
