Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9203590

Award Number: 9203590
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Bronikowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WI Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, WI  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Michael J. Bronikowski has been awarded a Postdoctoral                     
              Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Brownikowski's doctoral degree was                
              from Stanford University under the supervision of Professor                    
              Richard Zare. Dr. Brownikowski intends to continue research at                 
              Wisconsin with Professor Robert Hamers. Dr. Brownikowski's long                
              range goal is to understand an manipulate matter on the atomic                 
              and molecular scale. He has had a strong background in physical                
              chemistry through his thesis work involving the laser based                    
              study of reaction dynamics. In working with Professor Hamers,                  
              he will have the opportunity to learn the techniques of                        
              scanning tunneling microscopy. This will help him to implement                 
              his long term research plans.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as                 
              an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the                   
              knowledge and experience of new Ph.D.'s and atttract them into                 
              meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and                       
              teaching.
