Title       : Applying Histogram Contrast Analysis to Texture Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9203291

Award Number: 9203291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Chubb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many brain processes operate in parallel on sensory input to draw              
              distinctions (boundaries, gradations, modulations, etc.) in the                
              fabric of perceptual space/time.  For instance, there are visual               
              processes that operate on the spatiotemporal variations in light               
              intensity to generate brightness distinctions.  Other processes                
              operate on variations in the spectral content of light over space              
              and time to construct color distinctions.  Still other processes               
              draw distinctions based on spatiotemporal variations in textural               
              properties (e.g., texture contrast, granularity and/or                         
              orientation).  It is this last class of distinction-drawing                    
              processes, or channels, that these experiments will investigate.               
                                                                                             
              Histogram contrast analysis is a new branch of measurement theory              
              whose purpose is to (i) isolate individual perceptual channels, and            
              (ii) precisely characterize the computations those channels                    
              perform.  No one knows exactly how many distinct channels are                  
              devoted to drawing texture-based perceptual distinctions, though               
              there is general agreement that multiple channels are involved.                
              Nor is there any data to indicate what specific computations are               
              performed by any one of the putative channels used in texture                  
              perception.  Heretofore, models of texture perception have relied              
              on arbitrary, ad hoc guesses as to the nature of the channels used             
              in drawing textural distinctions.                                              
                                                                                             
              These experiments will use histogram contrast analysis (i) to                  
              isolate individual channels used in drawing textural distinctions              
              and (ii) to determine their computational characteristics.  These              
              experiments will thus make a start at the task of constructing a               
              table of the computational "elements of texture perception"                    
              analogous to the periodic table of physical elements.  Any theory              
              of texture perception precise and comprehensive enough to predict              
              performance probabilities on actual texture discrimination tasks               
              must have such a table of elements as its cornerstone.
