Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9203580

Award Number: 9203580
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hope A. Michelsen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Hope A. Michelsen has been awarded a Postdoctoral                          
              Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Michelsen's doctroal degree was                   
              from Stanford with Professor Richard Zare. She intends to                      
              continue research at Harvard with Professor James Anderson. Dr.                
              Michelsen has completed research in the dynamics of                            
              dissociativie chemisorption of hydrogen on copper surfaces. She                
              wishes to focus her career on the study of heterogeneous                       
              processes in the atmosphere. Working with Professor Anderson                   
              will give her the opportunity to learn about computer modelling                
              of the chemistry of the stratosphere and become involved in                    
              field measurements. This will be an important step towards                     
              developing her career in environmental chemistry.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemisity Program is viewed as                 
              an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the                   
              knowledge and experience of new Ph.D.'s and attract them into                  
              meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and                       
              teaching.
