Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Propagating Fronts By A Consistent Primitive Algorithm
               With Application To Bubble Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9203768

Award Number: 9203768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Smadar Karni karni@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will develop new numerical methods                       
              to model weak solutions to nonlinear hyperbolic differential                   
              equations derived from a set of conservation laws. Conservation                
              form of the system is widely held as imperative for consistent                 
              numerical capturing of shocks.  In practice, while this may be                 
              true for flows dominated by strong shocks, other flow phenomena                
              may be better modelled by different, not necessarily conservative              
              flow descriptions. In such cases, one may be prepared to                       
              sacrifice strict conservation in favor of a nonstrictly                        
              conservative model that describes better the dominant flow                     
              features. To be reliable, the model should generate acceptably                 
              small conservation errors. The investigator shows that                         
              propagating fronts is one such phenomenon. Capturing propagating               
              fronts by conservative models gives rise to oscillations and                   
              other inaccuracies near material fronts, and is in general                     
              unsatisfactory. These are not the common oscillations associated               
              with high order schemes, but rather a result of the simple wave                
              model (i.e. eigenstructure) of the conservative systems. A remedy              
              is to use a nonconservative flow description, which offers a                   
              different eigenstructure.  It becomes exact near contact surfaces              
              and produces clean oscillation-free interfaces. Near shocks, the               
              model is not exact and conservation errors are committed. A                    
              technique recently developed by the investigator offers a cure to              
              this problem. It uses viscous perturbations that render the                    
              algorithm conservative to the order of numerical approximation                 
              and generate acceptably small conservation errors. The technique               
              has been successfully applied to computing propagating fronts in               
              1D.  The investigator will study several theoretical aspects of                
              this nonstrictly conservative algorithm and its application to                 
              the computation of bubble dynamics in several space dimensions.                
                   The work of the project involves theoretical analysis and                 
              computer simulation of flows. These arise in physical phenomena                
              involving mixing of fluids, the initiation and evolution of                    
              vortices, the ignition and evolution of chemical reactions in                  
              fluids, and the propagation of flames. The aim of the project is               
              to develop analytical and computational tools to enhance the                   
              understanding of the complicated physical phenomena involved.                  
              Insight gained this way will supplement experimental data, which               
              are often expensive, difficult or even dangerous to obtain. For                
              example, wind tunnel simulations of space conditions in the upper              
              stratosphere are difficult and expensive to perform and may give               
              unreliable results; studying gun ballistics requires                           
              experimenting with strong explosions, which are both expensive                 
              and dangerous.  Potential impact of this project extends to a                  
              variety of industries including the space and aircraft industries              
              (design of space vehicles and of aicraft wings), marine industry               
              (design of boats with improved hydrodynamic properties, the                    
              effect of bubbles on submarine hydrodynamics, etc.) and the                    
              weapon industries (e.g., internal ballistics of guns).
