Title       : RUI: A General Synthesis of Cadinane Sesquiterpenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9203760

Award Number: 9203760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Howard Black   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of the investigation is the development of an                 
              efficient method for the preparation of cadinane                               
              sesquiterpenes, which comprise a growing class of                              
              biologically-active natural products.  Two different                           
              approaches, both of which employ a stereospecific beta-lactone                 
              rearrangement as the cornerstone transformation, will be                       
              examined, and their relative strengths assessed and compared.                  
              Each protocol will be investigated, first with model systems,                  
              and with particular attention to stereochemical control.  The                  
              total synthesis of several naturally-occurring,                                
              butenolide-containing cadinanes will then be attempted, using                  
              appropriately designed starting molecules.  The first route,                   
              although longer, offers the greatest potential for unequivocal                 
              stereochemical control.  However, if the second route exhibits                 
              high stereoselectivity in the key beta-lactone-forming step,                   
              its considerable brevity will bode well for wide application.                  
              Both routes allow for asymmetric syntheses by using optically                  
              enriched starting materials.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the                
              research of Dr. T. Howard Black at Eastern Illinois University,                
              which is an undergraduate institution.  The research will apply                
              the beta-lactone/gamma-lactone rearrangement of the synthesis                  
              of the cadinane class of sesquiterpenes.  This should provide a                
              stimulating introduction and training of undergraduate students                
              in research, besides producing new syntheses of the challenging                
              cadinane class of molecules.
