Title       : MCF: Molecular Analysis to Assess Genetic Change in Panicum miliaceum Resulting
               From Range Expansion and Introgression After Colonization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9203114

Award Number: 9203114
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47283              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Colosi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1175,
Abstract    :
                   Panicum miliaceum is a minor crop in the United States and                
              Canada.  Around 1970, a black-grained biotype appeared as a weed               
              of row crops in the Midwest and in Canada.  At least six other                 
              crop-like biotypes are growing as weeds in row crops in Canada.                
                   The recent colonization of North America by the black                     
              biotype where it is frequently sympatric with crop and crop-like               
              weeds affords a unique opportunity to study evolution in the                   
              early stages after colonization.                                               
                   DNA molecular techniques are more sensitive to genetic                    
              variation than are either allozyme electrophoresis or                          
              morphological characters.  The Principal Investigator will use                 
              DNA molecular techniques in Barbara Schaal's lab in Washington                 
              University to assess genetic relationships among biotypes,                     
              measure genetic change in the black biotype as it has expanded                 
              its range, and search for introgression between various weed                   
              populations and crops.  This study will shed light on the role of              
              genetic variation among populations of successful colonizing                   
              species.                                                                       
                   After this project, DNA molecular techniques will enhance                 
              the P.I.'s current research in population biology.  Molecular                  
              biology techniques will make the study of plant population                     
              biology more attractive to his undergraduate students for their                
              independent research projects.
