Title       : Dissertation Research: Warfare and Political Disintegration:A Study of the
               Classic Maya Collapse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9203386

Award Number: 9203386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeshi Inomata  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Demarest, Mr. Takeshi Inomata                
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct               
              archaeological excavations at the Mayan site of Aguateca which is              
              located in the El Peten department of Guatemala. This large Classic            
              period Mayan site contains a complex of stone structures as well as            
              what appears to be a defensive wall. Building on prior work he has             
              done at the site, Mr.Inomata will excavate residences and walls. He            
              will clear rooms in elite structures and excavate test pits in                 
              other areas of the site. The focus of the field research will be on            
              the function of walls as well as the dates of wall construction. He            
              will attempt to determine just when the site was abandoned. The                
              goal of the project is to determine the role played by warfare in              
              the development and subsequent collapse of Mayan society. The data             
              collected by Mr. Inomata will hopefully allow him to determine                 
              whether the stone walls played a defensive purpose. It will also               
              permit him to learn how social organization at the site changed                
              over time and whether occupation was abruptly terminated.                      
                                                                                             
              Mayan peoples developed a complex centralized society in the                   
              inhospitable tropical lowlands of Middle America. They built                   
              temples and other ceremonial structures, developed appropriate                 
              agricultural technologies and created societal structures which                
              incorporated tens of thousands of individuals into single political            
              units. During the late first millennium A.D. however these entities            
              disappeared - a phenomenon referred to as the "Mayan Collapse." The            
              cause for this is still uncertain. While some researchers argue                
              that ecological change played a major role, others point to the                
              possible effect of warfare. Much recent interest has focussed on               
              the El Peten region of Guatemala where defensive walls suggest                 
              large scale conflict. Mr. Inomata's work will provide valuable data            
              relevant to this question.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of adaptation to tropical regions and will assist in             
              the training of a promising scientist.
