Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Existence, Singularity & Regularity of Solutions of
               Scalar Equations & Systems in Connection with Differential Geometry &
               Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9203978

Award Number: 9203978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricio Aviles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The focus of this project is the analysis of solution of                  
              partial differential equations, systems as well as scalar                      
              equations.  The equations of interest arise in mathematical                    
              physics and differential geometry.  Emphasis will be placed on                 
              the study of the Yamabe problem in a complete Riemannian                       
              manifold, a problem of considerable interest which can be                      
              formulated in terms of semi-linear elliptic equations.  The                    
              problem is then one of finding positive solutions to the                       
              equations and analyzing their asymptotic behavior.  This work                  
              motivates in a natural way efforts to understand a larger class                
              of solutions by means of critical points of the Sobolev quotient.              
              The solutions are believed to be infinitely differentiable in the              
              complement of sets whose Hausdorff dimension is precisely                      
              estimated by means of the nonlinear term in the differential                   
              equation.  Work will also be done on harmonic maps, particularly               
              in studying the regularity of minimizing harmonic maps into                    
              singular objects like varifolds. A recent new proof of the                     
              regularity of minimizing harmonic maps between two compact                     
              Riemannian manifolds suggests that an expansion is possible to                 
              target domains which are Lipschitz graphs. Most of the attention               
              is paid to the sets of regularity for harmonic maps.  But there                
              are now some general results concerning the singular sets as                   
              well.  They may have reasonable structures, such as curves or                  
              unions of smooth curves.  Further work will be done to determine               
              what classifications of singular sets are possible.                            
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them and validate methods for                    
              expressing solutions.
