Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: The Exclusion Principle Derived from
               Nonrelativistic Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9203313

Award Number: 9203313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Robbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1455,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  The Exclusion Principle Derived                  
              from Nonrelativistic Quantum Mechanics                                         
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Jonathan M. Robbins to work with Dr. Michael V. Berry at                
              the HH Wills Physics Laboratory in Bristol, England.                           
                                                                                             
              Their research concerns the Pauli exclusion principle.  Currently              
              regarded as an independent postulate in nonrelativistic quantum                
              mechanics, or else as a consequence of quantum field theory, their             
              aim is to investigate possible connections between the exclusion               
              principle and the geometric (or Berry) phase, and to see whether it            
              can in fact be derived from the dynamics of the Schrodinger                    
              equation.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover a stipend for                 
              twelve months.
