Title       : US-USSR Workshop: Quaternary Paleozoology; October 23-27, 1993, Springfield,
               Illinois
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1993      
File        : a9203280

Award Number: 9203280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : April 29,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Saunders   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie W. Styles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ill St Museum Soc
	      
	      Springfield, IL  62706    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A joint workshop on U.S.-Russia Quaternary                                     
              Paleozoology to be held at the Illinois State                                  
              Museum in Springfield, Illinois on 23-27 October                               
              1992 will focus on topics in Holarctic taphonomy;                              
              vertebrate taxa, assemblages, paleoecology, and                                
              evolution; invertebrate assemblages; human-animal                              
              interactions; and extinctions and the modern                                   
              fauna.  The workshop, which will be co-organized                               
              by Dr. Jeffrey J. Saunders and Bonnie W. Styles                                
              of the Illinois State Museum, and by Dr. Gennadiy                              
              F. Baryshnikov of the Zoological Institute of the                              
              Russian Academy of Sciences in St. Petersburg, is                              
              intended as the first step toward a major                                      
              collaborative U.S.-Russia research program in                                  
              Quaternary Paleozoology.  The purposes of the                                  
              workshop are to disseminate baseline information                               
              on current research, methods, and concerns in                                  
              Holarctica that will nurture long-term joint                                   
              research projects and proposals; establish                                     
              research partnerships; and initiate an enhanced                                
              Holarctic faunal database suitable for studies of                              
              biogeography, human adaptations, and global                                    
              warming.  This project fulfills the program                                    
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                                 
              enabling leading researchers in the United States                              
              and the former Soviet Union to combine                                         
              complementary efforts and capabilities in areas                                
              of strong mutual interest and competence in the                                
              field of basic scientific research on the basis                                
              of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of                                     
              benefit.
