Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics in some Biological and Chemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9203299

Award Number: 9203299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123329             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Terman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator studies several mathematical models for                  
              biological and chemical systems.  These include models for                     
              electrically excitable cells such as pancreatic beta-cells, and                
              models for pattern formation on isothermal catalyst surfaces.                  
              Numerous models have been developed to test different hypothesis               
              for the biophysical mechanisms that underlie the electrical                    
              activity in these cells.  New analytic methods will be developed               
              to predict and classify the variety of different behaviors of                  
              solutions to these recent models.  Systems that model coupled                  
              beta-cells are also considered.  Very complex behaviors including              
              standing waves, rotating spirals, and chaotic dynamics have been               
              observed experimentally on catalyst surfaces.  Several models are              
              studied in order to understand the underlying mathematical                     
              mechanisms responsible for this rich structure of pattern                      
              formation.                                                                     
                   Pancreatic beta-cells are responsible for the secretion of                
              insulin.  This analysis will be used to determine the relative                 
              contributions of different ion currents to the beta-cell                       
              electrical activity.  It will help in understanding which of                   
              these currents are responsible for bursting activity in the                    
              cells, and which currents govern the duration of each burst.                   
              Moreover, this analysis will be used to identify glucose-sensing               
              mechanisms and determine the role of the electrical activity in                
              stimulating insulin release.  This work contributes to                         
              fundamental understanding of pancreatic functions.  Topics on the              
              formation of surface patterns arise in connection with studies of              
              the behavior of catalysts.
