Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Models and Methodology for Positive Dependence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1993        
File        : a9203444

Award Number: 9203444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry W. Block hwb@stat.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan R. Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Savits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Within the framework of positive dependence and reliability               
              theory, a number of major research topics in statistics and                    
              applied probability modeling are proposed.  These include: (a)                 
              development of the statistical applications of metrics and                     
              related orderings on permutations; (b) new and more efficient                  
              isotonic regression algorithms for partially ordered spaces; and               
              (c) various techniques for types of ordinal data analyses.                     
              Additional topics include reliability maintenance models, models               
              and methodology for random length multivariate normal data, and                
              combinatoric identities arising from nonhomogeneous Poisson                    
              processes.  The research approaches to these topics employ                     
              results and techniques from positive dependence, reliability                   
              theory and multivariate analysis.                                              
                   The principal investigators will explore a number of                      
              theoretical topics in the area of multivariate statistical                     
              analysis called positive dependence and consider a number of                   
              applications of these theoretical results.  In particular the                  
              investigators plan to develop new computational algorithms that                
              are more efficient than current algorithms.  The purpose of this               
              research is to develop strategies for maintaining a system in an               
              optimal fashion balancing the cost of maintenance against the                  
              cost of break-downs.
