Title       : PRF: A Developmental, Functional and Paleontological Study of Avian Tail
               Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9203275

Award Number: 9203275
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Gatesy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The tail is central to the origin of avian flight.  However,                   
              despite extensive attention to the wing,  the tail of birds has not            
              been the focus of developmental,  functional or paleontological                
              studies.  Modern flying birds possess a very short tail compared               
              to Archaeopteryx and other theropod ancestors.  Tail reduction is              
              the product of fewer caudal vertebrae and the fusion of distal                 
              segments into a uniquely avian structure,  the pygostyle,  which               
              forms a base for the tail feathers.  In this research project,  the            
              PI will combine approaches from several disciplines to study the               
              evolution of this caudal morphology in birds.  (I) The quail-chick             
              chimera technique will be employed for a description of normal tail            
              ontogeny and for experiments to elucidate mechanisms of segment                
              number regulation and pygostyle formation.  (II) The motor control             
              and kinematics of the tail will be quantified in a functional study            
              of the pigeon during eight locomotor modes.  (III) Pertinent fossil            
              birds will be reevaluated in light of the new information obtained             
              in (I) and (II).  Results from these studies will have significance            
              for each individual field.  However,  the unprecedented integration            
              of information from these three disciplines within a phylogenetic              
              framework will provide a more global perspective for evaluating                
              how developmental,  functional and phylogenetic influences                     
              facilitate or constrain the evolution of form.
