Title       : Chemical and Microbiological Characterization of Phytoplankton Decay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9203241

Award Number: 9203241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141353             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. R. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon H. Tuttle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodger Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is designed to determine fundamental information on              
              the stability of specific algal biomarkers in the water column.                
              Research questions include:  1) how do various chemical classes                
              change qualitatively and quantitatively over time; 2) what is the              
              time frame for alteration of specific compounds as well as                     
              chemically defined classes of organic matter and 3) What is the                
              role of microbial processes in mediating the changes by attacking              
              specific pools of phytoplankton carbon.                                        
                                                                                             
              This project is an integrated, multidisciplinary approach aimed at             
              predicting the fate of photosynthetically produced organic matter              
              in the marine water column.  Carefully controlled laboratory                   
              studies are tracking the changes in chemical composition of algal              
              remains (as distinct lipids, pigments, carbohydrates and amino                 
              acids) mediated by the microbial community.  Measurements of                   
              bacterial biomass, production and metabolism are being conducted in            
              tandem to provide degradation rates for specific relevant                      
              compounds.  Ongoing experiments with unialgal cultures have been               
              extended to include a dinoflagellate, currently receiving                      
              considerable attention as a major producer of organic carbon in                
              coastal marine systems.  Results with unialgal communities will be             
              compared to mixtures of laboratory cultures and field collected                
              communities whose composition can be predicted and verified.  The              
              research tests the hypothesis that the decay of highly labile                  
              species control the degradative rates for a mixed community through            
              enhanced microbial metabolism.
