Title       : RNA Metabolism in SV40 Infected Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9203293

Award Number: 9203293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay D. Gralla 2138251620  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal will determine the structure of certain mammalian                
              transcription complexes and describe their relationship to the                 
              control of both transcription and replication.  First, in situ                 
              probing methods will be used to follow changes in SV40                         
              nucleoprotein complexes as the viral lytic cycle proceeds.  Altered            
              viral templates, with specified functional defects, will be used to            
              show which structures are important for which functions.  The                  
              results will reveal the importance of the structural changes that              
              accompany the replication-dependent changes in transcription                   
              patterns.  Second, the communication between the SV40 origin of                
              replication origin and the transcription elements will be                      
              investigated.  Plasmids will be constructed that contain single and            
              multiple copies of various transcription elements in the context of            
              SV40 origin.  Transcription and replication assays in cos cells                
              will be used to learn how each process is affected by the presence             
              of both types of elements.  Cooperation of this kind is known to be            
              important, and its mechanism will be further explored by following             
              the changes in chromatin caused by the regulatory elements.  Third,            
              exploratory experiments will be conducted aimed at assessing                   
              structural changes that might accompany transcription initiation by            
              polymerase II in vivo and in vitro.                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              A virus must transcribe certain of its genes in a defined manner to            
              produce the enzymatic machinery necessary for viral development and            
              replication. First, cells will be infected with the SV40 virus and             
              at various times protein binding to specific regions of the viral              
              genome will be determined.  Once a region of the viral genome is               
              found which is involved in protein binding, it will be altered in              
              certain regions to assess the function of individual bases.  The               
              results will reveal the importance of sequence and structural                  
              changes that accompany the replication-dependent changes in                    
              transcription patterns.  Second, the interactions between the SV40             
              origin of replication and the DNA sequences involved in gene                   
              expression will be investigated.  Plasmids will be constructed that            
              contain single and multiple copies of various transcription                    
              elements in the context of SV40 origin.  Transcription and                     
              replication assays in cells will be used to learn how each process             
              is affected by the presence of both types of structures.                       
              Interactions of these kind are known to be important, and their                
              mechanism will be explored by following the changes in DNA-protein             
              structure caused by the regulatory elements.  Third, exploratory               
              experiments will be conducted aimed at assessing any structural                
              changes in the gene-protein complex that might accompany the                   
              initiation of mRNA synthesis.
