Title       : Random Excitation of Dynamic Systems with Multiple Internal Resonances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9203733

Award Number: 9203733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raouf A. Ibrahim ibrahim@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research project is to develop an approach                 
              for analyzing the dynamic behavior of general multi-degree-of-                 
              freedom nonlinear systems possessing multiple internal resonances              
              under external random excitation. The research will take the form              
              of combined analytical, numerical and experimental                             
              investigations. Multiple internal resonances frequently exist in               
              both continuous and discrete multi-degree-of-freedom systems such              
              as cable systems, plates, coupled beams, aerospace structures,                 
              and mechanisms. Systems with multiple internal resonances                      
              experimentally exhibit dangerous and complex response                          
              characteristics under harmonic excitation, as observed in the                  
              laboratory. Under random excitation, we will develop two modes                 
              for stochastic bifurcation. These modes will be used to examine                
              the conditions under which catastrophic behavior can be presented              
              in terms of system parameters space and excitation spectral                    
              density level. The analytical approach is based on the method of               
              stochastic averaging of the response energy envelope, with some                
              innovations. The advantage of this approach is that it provides                
              useful information pertaining to energy transfer among the                     
              interacting modes and their stochastic bifurcation in the                      
              neighborhood of multiple internal resonance conditions. The                    
              validity of the analytical approach will be verified by Monte                  
              Carlo numerical simulations and experimental tests of random                   
              excited nonlinear models. All approaches have the common goal of               
              improving our understanding of the mechanisms underlying                       
              dangerous nonlinear phenomena. The results of this research will               
              lead to new guidelines for engineers involved in the design of                 
              industrial machine components, cable structures, aircraft                      
              structures, liquid propellant rockets, and elevated water towers.
