Title       : Bleaching of Symbiotic Algae (Zooxanthellae) and their Invertebrate Hosts:
               Causes and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9203327

Award Number: 9203327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Fitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bleaching, the loss of symbiotic dinoflagellates)="zooxanthellae"              
              hereafter) of their pigments, of reef corals and other                         
              invertebrates has become a world-wide problem in tropical marine               
              ecosystem, linked by some researchers to global warming.  The                  
              results of bleaching have potentially devastating environmental,               
              ecological and economic effects in the Caribbean, IndoPacific, an              
              other tropical marine areas.  Though there is some experimental                
              work showing involvement of both higher than average temperature               
              and light, the mechanisms involved in bleaching are not well                   
              understood this project will test three hypotheses.                            
                                                                                             
              1.   Bleaching in nature is caused by high temperature stress                  
                   coupled with high energy blue light (and possibly UV-A between            
                   380-400nm).  Preliminary evidence shows that while high                   
                   temperature alone will induce bleaching, natural light                    
                   exposure during high temperature treatment exacerbates the                
                   effect by lowering the temperature threshold and time to                  
                   bleaching at a given temperature.  this study will determine              
                   which component of light is responsible for this effect and               
                   the mechanisms of action.  Early theories on bleaching had                
                   light playing a major role, but experimental evidence has not             
                   yet supported this contention.  Potentially harmful chemical              
                   alterations associated with high energy wavelengths of blue               
                   light (and possibly some near-blue wavelengths of UV-A, that              
                   are not adsorbed by UV-protecting pigments found in corals)               
                   are not only consistent with field observations of bleaching,             
                   but are also supported by both laboratory and field-based                 
                   preliminary experiments.                                                  
              2.   The mechanisms of temperature-light induced bleaching involves            
                   the irreversible dissociation of the chlorophyll-protein                  
                   associations in the chloroplast.  The harmful effects of high             
                   temperatures and light on algae include the irreversible                  
                   separation or inactivation of the chlorophyll-protein                     
                   complexes associated with reaction centers in the chloroplast.            
                   Electron transport activity and eventually carbon fixation                
                   decrease markedly.                                                        
              3.   High light and temperatures cause decreases in "protective"               
                   pigments which absorb ultraviolet light.  The role of                     
                   different wavelengths of light in conjunction with high                   
                   temperature in determining concentrations of UV-screening                 
                   pigments will be determined as well as their relationship with            
                   photosynthetic rates.                                                     
              These hypotheses will be tested using cultured and freshly isolated            
              zooxanthellae, and intact hosts both in the laboratory and in                  
              field-based experiments.
