Title       : Geometry and Timing of Upper Oligocene to Miocene Depostional Sequences on the
               U.S Middle Atlantic Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1992     
File        : a9203344

Award Number: 9203344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Mountain mountain@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Christie-Blick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Global cycles of sea-level rise and fall have operated throughout              
              much of Earth's history.  The exact timing and size of these                   
              eustatic changes, however, are as yet comparatively poorly-                    
              constrained, particularly for Pre-Pleistocene time.  Detailed sea-             
              level history curves are, in turn, essential to understanding the              
              complex interplay between astronomical forcing mechanisms, and                 
              glacial and sea-level maxima and minima.                                       
                                                                                             
              The geologic record spanning Oligocene to Miocene time may offer               
              key information as to the nature and timing of sea-level changes.              
              This time-span was characterized by a number of sea-level cycles,              
              reflecting ice-sheet waxing and waning.  The Oligocene-Miocene                 
              record is particularly well-preserved in sedimentary rocks of the              
              Mid-Atlantic coastal plain, and continental shelf-slope-rise                   
              region.  This project seeks to refine the sea-level history curves             
              for Oligocene-Miocene time through examination of high-resolution              
              seismic reflection, Sr-isotope, delta-Oxygen-18, and other                     
              stratigraphic data from the U.S. Mid-Atlantic coast.  It is a                  
              renewal; previous work focused on the collection and preliminary               
              analysis of the seismic reflection and biostratigraphic data.   The            
              project will impact planning and design of an upcoming Ocean                   
              Drilling Project Leg offshore New Jersey.  The principal                       
              investigators are an interdisciplinary team who are well-qualified             
              to perform this research project.
