Title       : Ultrafast Studies of Chemical Reactions in Simple Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1992        
File        : a9203970

Award Number: 9203970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professor Charles Harris is supported by a grant from the                      
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study                       
              solvent effects on reaction dynamics of polyatomic                             
              unimolecular decomposition reactions.  He plans to                             
              systematically investigate the picosecond and femtosecond                      
              unimolecular dissociation reactions of a variety of                            
              polyatomic molecules including transition metal carbonyls in                   
              liquid xenon, krypton and other simple supercritical                           
              solvents such as carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide.  The                      
              primary focus of the experimental part of the research will                    
              be to determine the quantitative effect of the solvent                         
              density and temperature on the individual steps associated                     
              with the liquid state reactions.  In addition, theoretical                     
              studies will be pursued which will include simulating the                      
              reactions using molecular dynamics and generalized Langevin                    
              dynamics.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Most chemical reactions of practical importance take place                     
              in solution.  It is known that the reactions which occur in                    
              solution are influenced by the interaction of the reacting                     
              species with the solvent molecules which tend to enclose the                   
              reactant molecules in solvent cages.  Nevertheless, the                        
              theoretical understanding of the effects of solvent on a                       
              chemical reaction are not well understood.  The research                       
              being performed by Professor Harris will help to elucidate                     
              the mechanism by which solvent molecules influence chemical                    
              reactions in solution, and will lead to improved theories                      
              for improving our understanding of this important                              
              phenomenon.
