Title       : Theory of Transient, Collision-Induced Changes in Molecular Dipoles and
               Polarizabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1992  
File        : a9021912

Award Number: 9021912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine L C. Hunt klch@tpauli.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Katherine Hunt is supported by a grant from the Theoretical                
              and Computational Chemistry Program to study the theory of                     
              transient, collision-induced changes in molecular dipoles and                  
              polarizabilities.  These studies will help spectroscopists to                  
              probe intermolecular dynamics of fluids on subpicosecond time                  
              scales which in turn will help them to elucidate solute-solvent                
              interactions critically important to chemical reactions.                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Hunt's theoretical work will help to determine transient,                  
              collision-induced changes in molecular dipoles and                             
              polarizabilities needed to extract dynamical information from                  
              observed line shapes.  For interacting molecules with slight                   
              charge overlap, she plans to perform calculations using a newly                
              developed polarizability density theory which accounts for the                 
              intramolecular distribution of polarizability and for overlap                  
              damping, as well as dispersion, higher-multipole induction, and                
              nonuniformity in the local electric field.  She will develop                   
              efficient methods for computing nonlocal response tensors,                     
              including nonlinear susceptibilities.  She will find                           
              physically-based approximations to these tensors, and carry out                
              calculations of collision-induced properties that are important                
              spectroscopically.  She plans to treat nonadditive                             
              exchange-polarization via a modified density-functional                        
              approach or exchange-perturbation theory.  Ab initio                           
              calculations will also be carried out for molecules with                       
              appreciable overlap.
