Title       : Mental Representations And Psychological Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9021648

Award Number: 9021648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger N. Shepard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research seeks general psychological laws that can be                     
              understood as adaptations to universal characteristics of the                  
              world in which we have evolved.  Universal characteristics of our              
              world include, for example, the following:  Space is three-                    
              dimensional and Euclidean.  Objects have inherent properties that              
              persist over time despite variations in their momentary                        
              positions, conditions of illumination, etc.  Objects belonging to              
              a significant natural category, although differing somewhat among              
              themselves, tend to be similar enough to each other to form a                  
              compact region (having some location, size, and shape) in the                  
              abstract "space" of possible objects.                                          
                                                                                             
              Examples of psychological principles that can be shown to be                   
              adaptive in a world with such characteristics include the                      
              following three:  First, certain particular motions of an object               
              in space are psychologically favored in the sense that those                   
              motions (a) are judged simplest or most natural when physically                
              presented, (b) are most likely to be experienced in the visual                 
              illusion of "apparent" motion, which arises when one object is                 
              suddenly caused to disappear and immediately to reappear in a                  
              different position, or (c) are most likely to be imagined when                 
              two similar objects in different positions must be compared                    
              mentally with respect to shape.  Second, colors have three                     
              degrees of freedom in the sense that any given color can be                    
              matched by adjusting just three knobs on a suitable color-mixing               
              apparatus.  Third, the probability that a response learned to one              
              stimulus will generalize to another stimulus decays uniformly                  
              according to an exponential function of the (properly defined)                 
              degree of difference between those two stimuli, while the time                 
              required to make a discriminative response indicating that the                 
              two stimuli are different decays according to a different,                     
              reciprocal (or hyperbolic) function of that difference.  Such                  
              laws cannot find their ultimate explanation in terms of                        
              neurophysiological structures, which themselves must be                        
              explained; they can however be understood as realizing an optimum              
              strategy in a world in which objects having biologically                       
              significant consequences belong to natural kinds.                              
                                                                                             
              Such results suggest that the mind operates in accordance with                 
              invariant psychological laws, not unlike the invariant laws of                 
              physics, provided that the psychological laws are formulated in                
              terms of the unique "psychological space" yielding invariance and              
              not in terms of the "physical space" defined by physical                       
              measurement.  The psychological space is presumed to be related                
              to the physical space by a psychophysical transformation that has              
              been shaped by eons of natural selection.
