Title       : Nonlinear Plasma Waves at the Earth's Bow Shock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9021985

Award Number: 9021985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Spangler srs@vesta.physics.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Iver H. Cairns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1523,
Abstract    :
                   It is intended to carry out several theoretical and                       
              observational studies related to nonlinear MHD waves and Langmuir              
              waves in the region of space upstream to the Earth's bowshock.                 
              It is planned to compare the large amplitude MHD waves, and in                 
              particular their steepened appearance, to the solutions of                     
              nonlinear wave equations such as the Derivative Nonlinear                      
              Schrondinger Equation (DNLS).  Efforts will be made to append                  
              terms to the DNLS which describe important physical effects such               
              as resonant particle interactions, realistic particle                          
              distribution functions, oblique propagation, and two and three                 
              dimensionality.  An extensive investigation, currently in                      
              progress, of the various linear and nonlinear wave processes                   
              which are important in the upstream MHD waves will be completed.               
              Twenty periods of upstream wave activity have been identified,                 
              the data acquired, and power spectra and cross correlation                     
              functions calculated.  New work will address the extent to which               
              pondermotive nonlinearities, the parametric decay instability,                 
              and three dimensional wave effects can be discerned in the data.               
              In the study of Langmuir waves, work will concentrate on further               
              numerical and analytic studies of the saturated phase of the beam              
              instability using computer simulations in part.  The goal of                   
              these studies will be to better understand such phenomena as wave              
              backscattering, generation of low frequency waves, and the long                
              time evolution of the beam-driven waves.
