Title       : A Fundamental Study of Localized Plastic Instabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9021671

Award Number: 9021671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sia Nemat-Nasser sia@halebopp.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Vecchio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Andre Meyers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research aims at developing a fundamental understanding of                 
              shear-band initiation and propagation.  The materials that will be             
              investigated, titanium and aluminum alloys, have great importance              
              in the aerospace industry; they undergo shear localization during              
              plastic deformation and this is an important practical problem.                
              Systematic and integrated experimental and theoretical                         
              investigation of the phenomenon of shear-band formation will be                
              carried out.  This will lead to the prediction and control of shear            
              instability and to the establishment of its effect on the strength             
              and failure modes of a broad class of materials.  Dynamic                      
              experiments will be performed, in order to generate shear bands                
              under controlled conditions.  The Hopkinson bar experimental                   
              technique will be used with both hat-shaped and double-notched                 
              specimens.  Pulse amplitude and shape in the Hopkinson bar will be             
              varied to control the extent of shear-band propagation.  This will             
              be followed by microstructural characterization involving optical,             
              scanning, and transmission electron microscopy.  The microstructure            
              after controlled high-strain-rate deformation stages and prior to              
              the onset of macroscopic shear localization, will also be                      
              systematically investigated in order to establish which internal               
              defects can lead to the initiation of localization and to                      
              characterize the microstructural evolution.  The microstructure at             
              the tip of the shear band will be examined in order to establish               
              the structural changes in this zone prior to shear band extension.
