Title       : ARFMP: Modernization of Environmental Science and Engineering Facility at MIT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021884

Award Number: 9021884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Gschwend pmgschwe@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rafael L. Bras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the renovation and                   
              repair of the Ralph M. Parsons Laboratory for Water Resources and              
              Environmental Engineering which houses the environmental science               
              and engineering research and research training activities of the               
              Civil Engineering Department.  This building was constructed in                
              1950 and last renovated in 1969.  The ARFMP grant of $700,000 and              
              $859,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to               
              modernize these research and research training facilities.  This               
              project will address the need to improve the current research                  
              infrastructure by (a) refurbishing the environmental chemistry and             
              biology laboratories so that state-of-the-art research can be                  
              performed and modern research equipment can be most effectively                
              used in them; (b) consolidating the hydrodynamics facilities to                
              enhance their utility; and (c) making more efficient use of the                
              space so that a new environmental microbiology laboratory can be               
              added, the capacity of computer work stations can be expanded, and             
              growth in the population of student research assistants can be                 
              achieved.  The benefits that accrue from this renovation can be                
              expected not only to improve the cleanliness and safety of the                 
              research environment but also to enhance the efficiency of                     
              research, the capacity to address environmental engineering and                
              science problems involving very hazardous substances and samples               
              containing only trace quantities of chemicals of interest, the                 
              ability to blend modern microbiology with the currently predominant            
              physical and chemical environmental research activities, and the               
              ability to train more students.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and                    
              engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct               
              of research and for the training of quality undergraduate and                  
              graduate students in a department with a strong commitment to the              
              recruitment of minority and women students.
