Title       : Isentropic Potential Vorticity Analysis of the Outflow Layerof a Typhoon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9021982

Award Number: 9021982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Merrill robertm@ssecmail.ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A tropical cyclone may be considered to be a heat engine.                 
              Its fuel is the latent heat gathered by surface air  as it is                  
              swept toward the central region of a low-level inflow circ-                    
              ulation. The heat is released by condensation during ascent of                 
              the moist surface air in the eye-wall. In any heat engine, a heat              
              sink is required for energy to be converted to the kinetic energy              
              of motion. In a tropical storm, such a sink is found in an ele-                
              vated (upper troposphere-lower statosphere) layer of outflow                   
              from the storm's central region. The temperature, pressure,                    
              humidity, and three-dimensional velocity of the  air change                    
              drastically before reaching this sink region. However, two other               
              properties are better conserved, that can serve as tracers. These              
              are its equivalent potential temperature (a measure of its                     
              entropy) and its potential vorticity (a combined measure of its                
              thermal stability and rotational motion). Calculation of natural               
              three-dimensional fields of these properties requires, however,                
              measurements of unprecedented detail and extent through the life-              
              cycle of a (preferably intense) tropical cyclone.                              
                   Four observational experiments in the summer of 1990 should               
              provide the data needed to analyze, in particular, the vertical                
              structure of the elevated outflow layer. These analyses should                 
              further our understanding of tropical cyclone outflow and its                  
              interaction with its tropospheric and stratospheric environment.               
              An ideal case is now available for analysis, since the instru-                 
              mental networks were deployed in a region (the western Pacific)                
              and during a period (10-20 September 1990) that allowed them to                
              capture Super-typhoon Flo.                                                     
                   The analyses could serve to discriminate between a few cur-               
              rent theories of tropical cyclone development and provide a                    
              basis for advancing beyond current statistical-empirical methods               
              for forecasting intensity changes. Also, it is estimated that 5-               
              10% of the global mass exchange between troposphere and strato-                
              sphere occurs in these storms. Thus, the analyses could help                   
              refine our present estimates of atmospheric chemical budgets.                  
                   Merrill has established a creditable past record in tropical              
              cyclone analyses. He is being supported by ONR and AFGL to par-                
              ticipate in the data editing, reduction and statistical cyclone-               
              track analyses of the summer 1990 measurements. The additional                 
              research supported under this award provides an opportunity for                
              complementary use of these unprecedented data sets.
