Title       : Comprehensive Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1990  
File        : a9021535

Award Number: 9021535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Williams                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis D. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eloy Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,
Abstract    :
                The Comprehensive Alliance for Minority Participation will be an             
              intersegmental program involving the University of California, Irvine          
              and over two dozen other public and private institutions.  It will             
              have a considerable concentration on the undergraduate biological              
              sciences and will also include an emphasis on chemistry, mathematics,          
              and physics.  A prototype of linkages, between each of the "pieces" of         
              the science careers pipeline, it builds upon earlier successful                
              partnerships initiated in the region by UC Irvine.  It will enable             
              close to 1,000 underrepresented minorities to participate in                   
              collaborative research activities in the sciences each year.  It               
              involves numerous senior faculty who are themselves representatives of         
              minority groups serving as role models in the conduct of research and          
              as mentors.  It includes (1) A Minority Undergraduate Research Fellows         
              Program involving students at UC Irvine and several other public and           
              private 4-year colleges and universities--a program undertaken in              
              cooperation with distinguished scientists on the campus and in the             
              region, (2) A Community College Alliance motivating minority                   
              enrollment in scientific disciplines and fostering articulation                
              between science majors in 2-year and 4-year institutions, and (3)              
              ASecondary School Outreach Program providing stimulating science               
              programs for minority students, parents and teachers.  The Alliance            
              assures that programs focused at the undergraduate level are connected         
              with a broader series of longitudinal pipeline efforts.  It draws upon         
              sizable private sector resources and includes linkages with business           
              and industry, foundations, state and Federal agencies, and                     
              professional associations.  It will be characterized by the long-term          
              commitment of participants, its high level Advisory Council creating           
              sustained cooperation among participating entities, shared governance          
              of alliance activities, coequal participation within project                   
              activities, a focused action plan with specific longitudinal                   
              objectives, and an ongoing commitment to data collection and                   
              evaluation to assess Alliance progress and effects.  Black,                    
              Chicano/Latino and Native American students will benefit substantially         
              from the program.                                                              
                Scientific discipline(s) involved:  Biological and Physical Sciences         
              program(s) to which submitting:  Alliances for Minority Participation          
              Instructional grade levels (within K-12):  Grades 12 - 16 on to                
              college.
