Title       : Detection of Coherent Motion by Synchronized Neuronal Oscillations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1991     
File        : a9021521

Award Number: 9021521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rapidly oscillating patterns of electrical potentials from nerve               
              cells have been recently reported to be synchronized across                    
              multiple regions of the visual cortex of the brain.  The origins               
              and function of the oscillations are unknown, but their                        
              specificity to certain stimuli and synchrony across regions                    
              suggest they may relate to some fundamental visual or cognitive                
              function.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project will test whether the synchronized oscillation in                 
              visual cortex is related to visual perception.  Specifically, it               
              will test the novel idea that the synchronous neural activity                  
              across a region of cortex reflects a cohesive visual image                     
              assembled from visual stimuli that move together in a "coherent"               
              way.  Single nerve cells in the cortex are known to handle                     
              specific properties of visual images, such as location,                        
              orientation, color, and temporal features.  These experiments                  
              will record from single neurons at multiple sites in visual                    
              cortex while presenting visual stimuli that are either                         
              independent, or connected into a coherently moving object.  This               
              test will determine if the coherent oscillation appears only with              
              coherent movement of stimulus pieces.  If so, further experiments              
              will explore how the coherence may be related to perception.                   
              There is a risk that if not, the excitement about such                         
              oscillations may considerably diminish.  The impact of this                    
              limited study of this novel idea will be very high on visual                   
              science and neuroscience in general, and if the outcome is                     
              positive, the impact will extend to cognitive science as well.
