Title       : A Connectionist Approach to Reading Development and Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9021997

Award Number: 9021997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Farnham-Diggory   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to identify ways in which                    
              computer simulations can be used to expedite the design of                     
              reading and spelling instruction.  In many fields, computer                    
              models serve as surrogates for real-life situations.  By running               
              the models under various conditions, it is possible to evaluate                
              theories and examine their utility, thus vastly increasing the                 
              likelihood that eventual real-life experimentation will be                     
              productive and cost-effective.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Only recently have methods been devised for simulating some of                 
              the basic operations involved in learning to read.  This research              
              will extend these models, developed by Terence Sejnowski and                   
              James McClelland, to incorporate more of the natural complexities              
              of reading than have been previously included.  For example, the               
              research will extend the models to study how the process of                    
              learning to read is affected by the way a word looks, the way it               
              sounds, by the number of syllables, by simultaneous practice on                
              spelling, and by first learning rules for pronouncing letter-                  
              sound units within words (phonics).  The research will use these               
              computer models to guide classroom experiments.                                
                                                                                             
              For over 200 years there has been controversy over the ways in                 
              which such factors influence learning to read.  As a result,                   
              "compromise" methods of teaching reading have been adopted and                 
              have proved ineffective with much of the population.  Survey data              
              have shown literacy in the United States to be at a dangerously                
              low ebb, with fewer than 5% of our citizens reading well enough                
              to handle college-level textbooks, for example.  Knowledge gained              
              by the use of advanced computer-simulation technology as a guide               
              to experimentation can help to put the practice of reading                     
              instruction on a sound scientific footing.
