Title       : Identification of North American Plant Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9021275

Award Number: 9021275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Jakes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kathryn Jakes and                
              her collaborators will develop techniques to identify fibers                   
              which were used by prehistoric Native American peoples and then                
              use the results of this work to analyze archaeological materials               
              from two archaeological sites.  They will first accumulate a                   
              comparative collection of plants which they believe were                       
              potentially used for these purposes.  The fibrous plant materials              
              will then be processed by pulling, cutting, retting and                        
              carbonizing and then examined by a variety of techniques.  These               
              include a number of different photomicroscopy approaches as well               
              as scanning electron microscopy and X ray analysis.  On this                   
              basis, criteria for species identification can be established and              
              methods developed to determine prehistoric manufacturing                       
              processes.  Finally, the results will be applied to two sites,                 
              the Middle Woodland period Seip Mound in Ohio and the                          
              Mississippian period Etowah site in Georgia.                                   
                                                                                             
              While textiles are sometimes encountered in prehistoric Native                 
              American sites, currently it is often not possible to determine                
              either how they were manufactured or the raw materials of which                
              they are composed.  Archaeologists are interested in these issues              
              not only because of the textiles themselves, but also for what                 
              they reveal about prehistoric use of the environment and the                   
              light they shed on social structure.  It is postulated that                    
              within a site, the greater the variation in the types of fabrics               
              produced and the quality and techniques of manufacture, the                    
              greater the social complexity of the group involved.  This                     
              hypothesis will be evaluated through the analysis of Seip and                  
              Etowah materials.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              an identification key which will be useful to a large number of                
              archaeologists who work at many sites.  It will examine the                    
              relationship between variation in material and social complexity               
              and increase our understanding of two important prehistoric                    
              sites.  Since graduate students will participate, it will assist               
              in the training of young scientists.
