Title       : Roles of Perception and Spatial Memory in Competitive Mate Searching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1991  
File        : a9021182

Award Number: 9021182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Schwagmeyer plsch@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In many species of mammals, males compete physically for access                
              to mating partners, and traits that confer an advantage in                     
              fighting are favored.  In other species, however, males seldom                 
              interact aggressively, yet some individuals still acquire more                 
              mates than others.  Dr. Schwagmeyer will conduct research on a                 
              species belonging to this second type.  She will investigate                   
              features of potential importance to male reproductive success in               
              a mating system in which aggression and combat play trivial                    
              roles.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              In previous research on thirteen-lined ground squirrels, Dr.                   
              Schwagmeyer found that breeding males spend most of their time                 
              simply searching for sexually receptive females.  Usually the                  
              number of mates that a male acquires is exactly equal to the                   
              number of sexually receptive females that he finds; thus, a                    
              male's skill in finding females is critical in determining his                 
              reproductive success.  Dr. Schwagmeyer will carry out a three-                 
              phase field study to examine how males actually locate a female                
              during the 4 to 5 hours that she is sexually receptive.  The                   
              study will involve (1) monitoring male visits with females to                  
              determine if males can "predict" when a particular female will                 
              become sexually available, (2) temporarily removing females to                 
              assess whether or not males remember the geographic locations of               
              females they have encountered on previous days, and (3) observing              
              how males' abilities to remember the locations of females, and to              
              learn other spatial tasks, influence their mating success.                     
                                                                                             
              This research project represents a unique combination of the                   
              behavioral ecology of mating systems with the experimental                     
              psychology of spatial learning and memory.  Thus, in addition to               
              important and novel specific findings, the work offers new                     
              perspectives for both fields of science.
