Title       : Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1990  
File        : a9021179

Award Number: 9021179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Williams                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond B. Landis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 9133,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              California State University, Los Angeles is seeking a                          
              planning grant in the amount of $39,597 under the NSF                          
              Alliances for Minority Participation (AMP) Program.  Cal                       
              State L.A. will match the NSF grant with $39,861 in "in kind"                  
              and direct financial contributions.  The objective of the AMP                  
              Program will be to substantially increase both the quantity                    
              and quality of underrepresented minorities receiving                           
              baccalaureate degrees in engineering and science from the                      
              participating universities and to increase the percentage of                   
              those students that continue on to full-time graduate study.                   
                                                                                             
              Twelve universities have agreed to enter the AMP planning                      
              phase.  These universities were selected based on their                        
              minority enrollment, commitment to minority education,                         
              geographical location in the Western United States, and the                    
              expertise they each bring to the AMP planning process.  Six                    
              to eight of these universities will form the eventual AMP                      
              alliance.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The participating universities will work together to                           
              implement a "model" AMP program on their campuses.  The model                  
              AMP program will have the following six elements: 1) a                         
              community college transition program; 2) a retention program                   
              in the engineering academic unit; 3) a retention program in                    
              the math/science academic unity; 4) a faculty training                         
              program; 5) an undergraduate research initiative; and 6) an                    
              initiative to increase the percentage of minority                              
              engineering and science graduates that continue on to                          
              full-time graduate study.  As indicated, in addition to                        
              undergraduate education the proposed AMP program will focus                    
              on two other transition: 2-year to 4-year college; and                         
              undergraduate-to-graduate study.                                               
                                                                                             
              Each university selected has at least one and some as many as                  
              three or four of the above program elements already in place.                  
              And every program element is being operated by at least two                    
              participating universities.  The proposed AMP Program will be                  
              a true alliance because participating universities will both                   
              share their expertise and work together to develop resources                   
              in support of AMP.  A strength of the proposed AMP program is                  
              that it is based on sound programmatic approaches which will                   
              take advantage of proven technologies, improve those                           
              technologies, develop new approaches where needed, and                         
              disseminate those approaches both within the alliance and                      
              across the nation.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Raymond B. Landis, Dean of Engineering and Technology, at                  
              California State University, Los Angeles and a nationally                      
              recognized expert in minority student education will be the                    
              Principal Investigator of the proposed AMP Program.  He                        
              has assembled a Steering Committee comprised of highly                         
              qualified individuals to guide the AMP planning phase.
