Title       : ARFMP: Renovation and Repair of Point Reyes Bird Observatory Palomarin Field
               Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9021863

Award Number: 9021863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nadav Nur NadavNur@prbo.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Point Reyes Bird Observ
	      4990 Shoreline Highway
	      Stinson Beach, CA  949709701    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to Point              
              Reyes Bird Observatory for the renovation and repair of the                    
              Palomarin Field Research Station which houses the Program of                   
              Terrestrial and Theoretical Ecology's research and research                    
              training activities on terrestrial birds and their habitats in                 
              the areas of population dynamics, evolutionary ecology, and                    
              behavioral and physiological ecology of resident and migrant                   
              species.  This building was constructed in 1950 and has not been               
              renovated since that time.  The ARFMP grant of $151,000 and                    
              $151,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to               
              modernize these research and research training facilities.  This               
              project will address the need to improve the current research                  
              infrastructure by correcting deficiencies in the current                       
              facility's foundation, roof, furnace, septic system, and                       
              plumbing; by upgrading the electrical system and weather                       
              equipment; reducing the danger of fire, water damage, and rodent               
              damage to the buildings; and by installing an advanced research                
              laboratory.  In this laboratory, it will be possible to obtain                 
              and process blood samples as well as to analyze avian behavior                 
              and energy budgets.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of the Point                 
              Reyes Bird Observatory's internationally-recognized, productive,               
              long-term interdisciplinary research studies and for the training              
              of graduate students from universities all over the nation with                
              needs to collaborate in terrestrial and theoretical ecology.                   
              Student interns trained in these laboratories have an excellent                
              record of professional placement nationally and internationally,               
              and, as a result of this project, they will have access to more                
              sophisticated field and laboratory techniques than are currently               
              available.  Students trained in these laboratories are in demand               
              in both basic and applied fields.  The importance of the applied               
              research conducted at Point Reyes will increase as more national               
              and international attention is paid to the ecological                          
              consequences of global warming, the biological diversity crisis,               
              and the impact of the destruction of tropical and subtropical                  
              forests on northern hemisphere migrants.
