Title       : Interactive Meteorological Computer Classroom Development Under UNIDATA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1991  
File        : a9021370

Award Number: 9021370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton M. Rowe crowe1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Leathers  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is to develop a meteorology-climatology                      
              laboratory that will allow access to real-time meteorological                  
              data for research and teaching purposes.  The laboratory will be               
              developed under the auspices of the Department of Geography at                 
              the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and will consist of a local                 
              area network (LAN) comprised of a file server and several                      
              workstations, with appropriate printers and other peripherals                  
              attached as shared resources.  This laboratory will be primarily               
              devoted to meteorological data display and analysis using the                  
              NSF-funded Unidata data stream and PC-McIDAS display and                       
              analysis software.  Through the campus computing network, the                  
              meteorology laboratory will be joined to a geographic information              
              systems (GIS) laboratory that will allow students to analyze and               
              display meteorological, climatological and geographic data in                  
              non-traditional ways.  The synergistic relationship of the                     
              laboratories will create a unique environment for innovative                   
              undergraduate education and research.  Existing courses in                     
              meteorology-climatology will be improved by the additional                     
              computer equipment and the expanded capabilities will allow new                
              courses to be developed.  The coupled meteorology-climatology and              
              GIS laboratories will allow an emphasis on the inseparable                     
              nature of the physical world and societal activities in the                    
              department's courses and will provide a model program for other                
              departments around the country.
