Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of the Geology-Mines Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021743

Award Number: 9021743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Cosart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              University of Arizona for the renovation and repair of the                     
              Geology-Mines Building which houses the Departments of Chemical                
              Engineering, Hydrology & Water Resources, Mining & Geological                  
              Engineering, and one-half of the Department of Materials Science               
              & Engineering.  Included in the research and research training                 
              activities carried out under the auspices of these departments                 
              are characterization of pollution generated by coal combustion                 
              and hazardous waste incineration, surface and subsurface                       
              hydrology, water quality and trace contaminants, global change,                
              geophysical subsurface imaging, rock mechanics, ceramics, and                  
              electronic materials.  The Geology-Mines Building was constructed              
              in 1940 and while it has been the object of several remodeling                 
              projects in the last decade and a half, it has not to date had                 
              any major renovations.  The ARFMP grant of $400,000 and $440,000               
              provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize              
              these research and research training facilities.  This project                 
              will address the need to improve the current research                          
              infrastructure by (a) providing adequate casework, fume hoods,                 
              and the plumbing necessary to convert dry labs into wet labs, (b)              
              distributing adequate electrical power to all laboratories, and                
              (c) adjusting, where necessary, the heating, ventilation, and air              
              conditioning (HVAC) system in order to balance fume hood draw and              
              air supplies.  This renovation is expected to increase the                     
              quantity, quality, and diversity of research output.                           
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and                    
              engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct               
              of research in numerous fields which share a common interest in                
              research topics associated with environmental matters and for the              
              training of undergraduate and graduate students.  Students                     
              trained in these laboratories will gain experience in important                
              areas related to national and regional needs.
