Title       : Mechanisms Underlying Spatiotemporal Response Properties in Neurons of Visual
               Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9021495

Award Number: 9021495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan B. Saul saul@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many cells in the cortex of the brain respond best to highly                   
              specific stimuli, and the neural mechanisms that "tune" the                    
              cell's response remain largely unclear.  For a given cell in the               
              visual cortex, it is possible to define its "receptive field" as               
              the area in visual space in which an appropriate visual stimulus               
              (for example a light bar, or a moving edge, or even a complex                  
              shape) causes a recordable response in the cell.  There may be a               
              particular combination of both spatial and temporal features of                
              that stimulus that elicit the "best" response from the cell.                   
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the relations between receptive                      
              field structure and responses to slowly moving visual gratings                 
              (series of light and dark bars).  Repetitive presentations of                  
              such drifting gratings in one direction cause adaptation in the                
              cell, so its response decreases to the movement in one direction,              
              but not to movement in the other.  Single cell activity will be                
              recorded to map out the receptive field to a single bar stimulus               
              before, during, and after the selective adaptation to the                      
              grating, to see how the receptive field changes.  A mathematical               
              model will be used to describe both response strength and timing               
              across the receptive field.  The results will be interpreted in                
              terms of neural inputs to the cortical cells, with an emphasis on              
              how the spatial and temporal components contribute to the timing               
              of cortical responses.  These studies provide a novel approach to              
              the important question of how visual cortical response properties              
              are generated from convergence of different types of inputs,                   
              and will have an impact across sensory neuroscience and                        
              computational neuroscience.
