Title       : Computer Productivity Aids for the Disabled
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9021111

Award Number: 9021111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald L. Engel                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Oliger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2840,
Abstract    :
                   This SGER project is to do research characterized as                      
              urgent with regard to the availability of or access to data,                   
              facilities, and specialized equipment.  Specifically, Stanford                 
              University take advantage of and build on research recently                    
              performed by the Research Assistant on this proposal, Ms. Vera                 
              Saliba-Pruznick.  As a blind computer scientist, she has both a                
              special interest and a special competence for the research.                    
              The area of research is the use of small computers as                          
              productivity aids for individuals with disabilities.                           
                   The research begins from a program to teach students both                 
              Braille and typing in Braille on a Brailler keyboard,                          
              originally developed by the project Research Assistant during                  
              her tenure in the NSF-funded Research Experiences for                          
              Undergraduates (REU) program at the Sand Diego Supercomputer                   
              Center in 1989.  At that time, Ms. Saliba-Proznick was a senior                
              majoring in Computer Science at the University of California,                  
              San Diego.                                                                     
                   In the REU program, Ms. Saliba-Pruznick took on the                       
              problem of the Blind computer programmer as a subject for                      
              research.  She investigated aids currently available for the                   
              blind and visually handicapped.  Most of these, she found,                     
              require speech synthesizers and relied on sound, rather than                   
              touch.                                                                         
                   She wrote a program for the IBM PC that would teach                       
              students to use the home keys of the PC keyboard as though they                
              were the keys of a Braille typewriter.  The program can be use                 
              by a blind student with the help of either a human reader or a                 
              speech synthesizer.  Ms. Saliba-Pruznick will continue her                     
              research by further developing the program, testing it in a k-                 
              12 school environment, and publishing the results as widely as                 
              possible in order to stimulate further research on uses of                     
              computers as productivity aids for individuals with various                    
              disabilities.                                                                  
                   The work to be accomplished include:                                      
              1.  Add quizzes for Grade 2 Braille, not yet incorporated                      
              2.  Develop printed and Braille instructional material and                     
              documentation for schoolteacher, student, and sighted helper.                  
              3.  Generalize the program by making it portable to different                  
              computers, in addition to the IBM PC, that are frequently found                
              in school classrooms.  These platforms might include the Apple                 
              IIe, the Macintosh, and Commodors/Amigas.      Additional                      
              research would include gathering further information about                     
              computer aids for the disabled, with specific reference to                     
              blind children.
