Title       : Conference on Oxytocin in Maternal, Sexual and Social Behaviors; May 20 - 22,
               1991; Arlington, VA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1991   
File        : a9021177

Award Number: 9021177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Cort A. Pedersen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Acad of Sciences
	      
	      New York, NY  11021    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Funds are provided to defray the travel costs for participants                 
              and young scientists to attend an international conference                     
              entitled "Oxytocin in Maternal, Sexual and Social Behavior" to be              
              held in Arlington, VA on May 20-22, 1991.  Oxytocin is a peptide               
              hormone that is synthesized in cell bodies localized in the                    
              hypothalamus and transported to the posterior pituitary, from                  
              which it is released directly into the general circulation.  This              
              neuropeptide is critical for parturition, lactation and changes                
              in plasma osmotic pressure.  Recently, new functions, beside its               
              classic role as a posterior pituitary hormone, has been proposed               
              for oxytocin.  The hypothalamic oxytocinergic system has been                  
              shown to undergo dramatic structural plasticity in response to                 
              normal physiological stimuli and to be directly involved in the                
              regulation of maternal, sexual and social behaviors.  This                     
              conference brings together internationally recognized scientists               
              from diverse disciplines to exchange ideas and provide a                       
              comprehensive summary of the present state of knowledge in this                
              exciting and important field.  The format of this meeting                      
              provides the atmosphere to foster meaningful interchanges between              
              an interdisciplinary group of scientists that include                          
              neuropharmacologist, neuroanatomists and psychobiologist.  The                 
              outcome of these discussions have the potential to lead to a                   
              better understanding of the integration between structure and                  
              function of which oxytocinergic neurons are particularly suitable              
              for analysis.
