Title       : Genetic and Host Plant Influences in Insect Population Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9021106

Award Number: 9021106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh Dingle rdhdingle@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Insects which specialize in feeding on only certain groups                
              of plants are important experimental organisms for addressing two              
              fundamental questions in evolutionary biology.  These are 1) what              
              factors influence the appearance of new varieties or races of                  
              organisms?  and 2) what factors determine the rate and direction               
              of evolution?  New varieties of insects have been found when new               
              plants are introduced to or invade areas where an insect is                    
              already feeding on a related plant.  Dr. Dingle proposes to study              
              an insect species that feeds on various species of related plants              
              and has switched in parts of its range to plant species that have              
              been introduced as ornamentals.  Dr. Dingle will study the                     
              evolution of the differentiation by examining the influence of                 
              genes and the environment on this evolution.  Dr. Dingle will                  
              also examine the basis of host choice in the two populations and               
              test to see if the two populations will still interbreed.  In                  
              this way Dr. Dingle will attempt to learn if the two populations               
              have differentiated enough to be separate species.                             
                   The problem of adaptation to new host plants is of                        
              considerable basic and practical importance.  Most important crop              
              plants are introduced and it is important to know how readily                  
              insects can adapt to them and become pests.  Many alien plants                 
              are accidentally introduced and may thus "escape" the insects                  
              which normally feed on them to become abundant weeds.  To control              
              them it is useful to know how readily new insects can adapt to                 
              them and replace the natural enemies they left behind.  The                    
              insect studied here is particularly useful because the effect of               
              a switch in host plants, a dramatic change in mouth part                       
              structure, is so easy to measure and manipulate.  As a result of               
              this switch, the insect has evolved changes in the structure of                
              mouth parts used in feeding on the different plants.  The                      
              research thus holds great potential for minimizing insect damage               
              to introduced crops and to maximize damage to introduced weeds.
