Title       : Ion Assisted Measurements of Trace Gases and Particle Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1993    
File        : a9021522

Award Number: 9021522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred L. Eisele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A mass spectrometer of special design is used to identify                 
              and measure ions in the atmosphere.  These ions are individual                 
              molecules of atmospheric gases bearing either positive or                      
              negative electrical charges.  The apparatus, developed over                    
              several years of laboratory work, is capable of extracting from                
              the atmosphere ions existing in concentrations well below one                  
              part in a trillion, and injecting them into the vacuum chamber of              
              a mass spectrometer.  Measurement of the masses of the ions by                 
              the spectrometer permits their chemical identification.                        
                                                                                             
                   An atmospheric-pressure flow tube into which specific ions                
              can be injected is used for the measurement of trace atmospheric               
              species, including gas-phase sulfuric, methanesulfonic and                     
              malonic acids, pyridine, and ammonia, all of which are believed                
              to be measurable at concentrations as low as 0.001 part per                    
              trillion in clean air.                                                         
                                                                                             
                   Variants of the technique will be used to search for large                
              naturally occurring ion clusters, and to study clusters formed,                
              or charged, by specific ion species such as protonated pyridine                
              or the nitrate ion.                                                            
                                                                                             
                   Ion-assisted measurements will be made of ozone, sulfur                   
              dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and possibly of the OH free radical.                 
                                                                                             
                   The extreme sensitivity of these ion measurements opens up                
              new possibilities of detecting, and measuring hitherto                         
              unsuspected low levels of atmospheric trace gases of natural or                
              man-made origin, some of which may come from biological sources,               
              e.g., pyridine.  It is expected that these studies of the                      
              properties of atmospheric ions will help to clarify the molecular              
              details of the conversions of gases to particles in the                        
              atmosphere.  Implied in this is a better understanding of the                  
              nucleation of water droplets, and this of cloud formation.
