Title       : Prediction of Probability Functions for Fluid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1992   
File        : a9021627

Award Number: 9021627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Kraichnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert H Kraichnan Inc
	      
	      Dublin, NH  03444    /   -

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1527,1577,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is centered about development and exploitation              
              of "mapping closure", a novel and powerful method for statistical              
              modeling of the properties of turbulent flow fields. Mapping                   
              closure is based on the continuous distortion of fields with                   
              known statistics into approximations of flows developing                       
              according to known physical-dynamic laws. It has several advan-                
              tages over traditional analytical approaches, particularly with                
              regard to the prediction of the statistical properties of such                 
              fields, including entire probability distribution functions                    
              (pdf's). It can give meaningful estimates of improbable events,                
              and since it can track structures in physical space it may lead                
              to more realistic subgrid-scale representations. It is proposed                
              that the method be applied to pdf's of 2-dimensional turbulence                
              and of fields governed by quasi-geostrophic dynamics. The pro-                 
              posed work also encompasses the investigation of practical                     
              procedures for the calculations required; the publication of a                 
              pedagogically oriented paper to make the method's associated                   
              tools more widely available to the geosciences community; and the              
              evaluation of its applicablity to subgrid representations.                     
                   Although the first two applications of the method are of                  
              particular relevance to large-scale meteorology and oceanography,              
              Kraichnan's work on the method has been closely followed by                    
              scientists in other disciplines. They have recognized that it                  
              can be applied to the large percentage of the fluid in the                     
              universe that is in turbulent motion in systems of all scales.                 
              These include those undergoing non-linear chemical reactions (as               
              in combustion models), those used in mechanical engineering, and               
              those considered in planetary science and in astrophysics.
