Title       : Gene Expression and Regulation of a GABA Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9021230

Award Number: 9021230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Siegel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The brain is composed of many different nerve cells (neurons)                  
              that interact through an intricate series of circuits.  Proper                 
              functioning of the brain requires appropriate cellular wiring and              
              precise cell-to-cell interactions.  This communication between                 
              cells is achieved by the release of a transmitter chemical from                
              one neuron that acts at a specific site, the receptor, on the                  
              target neuron.  The distribution of several different                          
              transmitters and their corresponding receptors have been mapped                
              in the central nervous system.                                                 
                                                                                             
              One important receptor in the brain mediates the actions of gaba-              
              aminobutyric acid (GABA).  GABA is the major inhibitory                        
              transmitter in the brain, and the binding of GABA to its receptor              
              decreases the activity of the target neuron.  Although the                     
              receptor is present on at least 30-40% of all neurons in the                   
              brain, its exact structure and regulation remain unknown.  Recent              
              studies indicate that it is composed of multiple protein                       
              subunits, each of which is actually a family of closely-related                
              proteins.  These studies suggest that multiple GABA receptors,                 
              composed of different subunit subtypes, may exist in different                 
              brain regions.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              To gain a better understanding of GABA receptor structure and                  
              function, a number of studies are being performed.  First,                     
              studies on the adult brain will determine whether all GABA                     
              receptors are identical or whether receptors having different                  
              subunit compositions are localized at different sites.  Second,                
              studies on the developing brain will investigate whether receptor              
              composition changes as the nervous system matures.  Finally,                   
              additional studies will investigate how cell-cell interactions                 
              regulate GABA receptor composition.  Knowledge of this complex                 
              and prominent receptor system will enhance our understanding of                
              normal brain function.
