Title       : A Comprehensive, Collaborative Program to Increase Minorities in Science and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1990 
File        : a9021527

Award Number: 9021527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Williams                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose F. Maldonado-Moll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reinaldo Caban  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The purpose of this proposal is to plan a systematic and                       
              comprehensive program to increase the number and quality                       
              of minority students entering and progressing through the                      
              educational pipeline in the natural sciences, mathematics                      
              and engineering.  The goals of this comprehensive program                      
              will be achieved by establishing an alliance between                           
              institutions with a strong track record of producing                           
              hispanic scientists, engineers and science and engineering                     
              educators, and which have successful experience in                             
              implementing large scale science education and research                        
              programs in Puerto Rico.  The University of Puerto Rico,                       
              through the Resource Center for Science and Engineering                        
              (RCSE), the Ana G. Mendez Educational Foundation (The                          
              Universidad Metorplitana), other two-and four year                             
              postsecondary institutions in Puerto Rico and on the                           
              mainland, and major Department of Energy National                              
              Laboratories, will join to form a broad-based Alliance to:                     
              pool and build on the resources of these institutions; and                     
              provide students and faculty with a wide range of                              
              activities designed to increase the number of students                         
              that complete an undergraduate degree and continue                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              graduate studies in the natural sciences and engineering.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The activities proposed within this Alliance will focus on                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              motivating  and preparing students, particularly at the                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              undergraduate level.  In addition, the activities will                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              broaden their awareness of career and study opportunities                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              in the sciences and engineering in order to facilitate                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              their progress through critical transition points in their                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              academic development:  the high school to college and                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              undergraduate to graduate studies transitions in the                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              education continuum.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Through the development of a broad base Alliance, the                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              participating institutions will share their strengths and                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              optimize resources in order to bring about a broad and                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              significant improvement in the infrastructure of science                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              education for Hispanics in general.
