Title       : Microencapsulated Phase-Change Materials as Heat-Transfer Media in Gas-Fluidized
               Beds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1995  
File        : a9021572

Award Number: 9021572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Brown rcbrown@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate                               
              microencapsulated phase-change materials as heat-transfer                      
              media in gas-fluidized beds.  Microcapsules are small                          
              capsules, usually between 50 and 100 m diameter, consisting                   
              of an impervious shell of only a few microns' thickness                        
              enclosing a gaseous, liquid, or solid core material.  Phase-                   
              change materials such as toluene, cyclohexane, or                              
              fluorocarbons are potential core material for these                            
              experiments.  Convection coefficients for these materials are                  
              expected to be much larger than those for gas-fluidized beds                   
              of solid particles.  Furthermore, pressure drops in such beds                  
              are expected to be small compared to conventional beds because                 
              of smaller densities for capsules compared to solid particles.                 
                                                                                             
              Our approach includes both experimental and theoretical                        
              evaluations.  An electrically heated probe is used to measure                  
              convection coefficients in temperature-controlled fluidized                    
              beds of microencapsulated phase-change material.  Several                      
              theories of heat transfer in fluidized beds will be tested                     
              against our experimental data.  Suitable theoretical                           
              refinements will be developed as appropriate for the                           
              microencapsulated phase-change materials.  The improvements in                 
              heat transfer will expand the opportunities for using                          
              fluidized beds in such diverse applications as air-cooled                      
              microelectronics equipment, where pressure drop is critical;                   
              gas-liquid heat exchangers, where gas-side heat transfer is                    
              rate limiting but difficult to enhance; and liquid fluidized                   
              beds, where heat capacities of conventional bed materials are                  
              not enough larger than the liquid heat capacity to yield the                   
              order-of-magnitude enhancements typical of gas-fluidized beds.
