Title       : Magnetospheric and Ionospheric Research Using CUPRI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1993     
File        : a9021915

Award Number: 9021915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley E. Swartz wes@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Cornell University Portable Radar Interferometer (CUPRI)              
              is a 50 MHz system that has provided a wealth of data for the                  
              study of ionospheric plasma turbulence.  The CUPRI data sets now               
              include a variety of auroral and mid-latitude-E-region                         
              observations, F_region chemical release experiments, and polar                 
              mesosphere measurements.  Most of our observations have been                   
              coordinated with other instrumentation to provide as full a                    
              characterization of the media being probed as possible in support              
              of several segments of the CEDAR initiative.  The proposed three               
              year renewal will fund the continuing analysis and interpretation              
              of these extensive data sets, the completion of an upgrade of the              
              CUPRI digitizing sub-system to improve resolution, and the                     
              acquisition and study of three new data sets.                                  
                   The first new data set  will be obtained from northern                    
              Scandinavia for multi-frequency study of polar mesospheric summer              
              echoes.  CUPRI will set up next to the EISCAT antennas and will                
              provide the 3 meter component of this study.  Although several                 
              papers have been recently published on PSME, it is clear that                  
              more data is needed, particularly of the type that CUPRI and                   
              EISCAT can jointly obtain.  The second new data set is to be of                
              mid-latitude E-region instabilities which are not at all                       
              understood as yet.  The third set will try to reproduce the                    
              remarkable mid-latitude F-region coherent echoes seen by the MU                
              Radar.  If this latter effort is successful, then we would plan                
              to add the power of the Arecibo incoherent scatter radar in an                 
              attempt to understand these intense turbulence upwelling regions.              
                   We plan to continue to involve students in CUPRI operations,              
              data analysis, and data interpretation: graduate students as part              
              of their thesis research and undergraduates as part of elective                
              courses or project regions. ***                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   //
