Title       : Dissertation Research: Social and Economic Implications of Domestic Patterning
               in the Core Region of the Tiwanaku State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1990   
File        : a9021098

Award Number: 9021098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10140              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Janusek  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, a professor of                         
              Anthropology at the University of Chicago, Mr. John Janusek will               
              collect and analyze data for his doctoral dissertation.                        
              Continuing on his previous work, he will conduct archaeological                
              excavation in the Tiwanaku region in the highlands of Bolivia. He              
              will focus on domestic areas which served as foci not only for                 
              habitation but also production and excavate at both the core site              
              of Tiwanaku itself as well as the nearby regional center of                    
              Lukurmata. His goal is to compare the two and thereby gain                     
              insight into the Tiwanakian social, political and economic                     
              organization. Through the analysis of artifactual, faunal and                  
              floral remains he will attempt to determine: 1. the extent to                  
              which occupational specialization is present at either site; 2.                
              the role the state played in the redistribution of materials; 3.               
              whether status differential is evident between sites; and 4. the               
              local variability in lifestyle and status among residential units              
              in each site.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Tiwanaku marks one of the pinnacles in the development of pre-                 
              Columbian social achievements. In a relatively inhospitable high               
              Andean environment, an empire was established which incorporated               
              large portions of present day Bolivia and Peru. At Tiwanaku                    
              itself elaborate monuments were constructed and the population is              
              estimated at between 60,000 - 80,000 individuals. It is unclear                
              however how, in the absence of a system of writing and such                    
              elements as wheeled vehicles, such an empire developed and was                 
              maintained. The goal of Mr. Janusek's work is to shed light on                 
              the social, economic and political factors responsible.                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. First, it will                 
              increase our understanding of how complex societies emerge. It                 
              will also provide data on an extremely important and little known              
              site and this will be of interest to a wide archaeological                     
              audience. Finally it will assist in the training of an extremely               
              promising scientist.
