Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Biology Research Facilities at Earlham College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021844

Award Number: 9021844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent H. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Iverson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earlham College
	      National Road West
	      Richmond, IN  47374    317/962-6561

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to                    
              Earlham College for the renovation and repair of three facilities              
              of the Biology Department that are devoted to field biology                    
              research:  the field laboratory, the greenhouse, and part of the               
              natural history museum, which is located in Dennis Hall.  The                  
              field laboratory and the greenhouse were constructed in 1968 and               
              the museum laboratory in 1953.  None of these buildings have been              
              renovated since their construction.  The ARFMP grant of $129,000               
              and $168,786 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used              
              to modernize these research and research training facilities.                  
              This project will address the need to improve the current                      
              infrastructure by providing (a) the field laboratory with room                 
              size and bench space enabling experiments and materials to remain              
              set up for longer periods of time and with better climate control              
              permitting its year round use; (b) the greenhouse with better                  
              climate control such that the plant and animal research in it will             
              be less vulnerable to temperature extremes; and (c) the museum                 
              research laboratory with structurally sound, dry space, thereby                
              relieving some of the pressure that has been displaced to the field            
              laboratory because of the inadequacy of the museum research                    
              laboratory space.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of quality undergraduate students.  The Biology               
              Department at Earlham College is nationally recognized for its                 
              excellence and as an important contributor to the human resources              
              pipeline in the biological sciences.  For many years research,                 
              particularly field-oriented research, has been a integral part of              
              its curriculum.  These renovations will help the department to                 
              maintain its productivity.
