Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Smith Engineering Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021839

Award Number: 9021839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Snyder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Busche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              University of North Carolina at Charlotte for the renovation and               
              repair of Smith Engineering Building which houses that                         
              institution's civil, electrical, and mechanical engineering and                
              computer science research and research training activities.  This              
              building was constructed in 1966 and has not been renovated since              
              that time.  The ARFMP grant of $200,000 and $200,850 provided by               
              the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these                    
              research and research training facilities and will help sustain                
              the growth in and increasing technical demands of the research                 
              program of the College of Engineering.  This project will address              
              the need to improve the current research infrastructure by (a)                 
              providing better environmental control for the building,                       
              additional wiring to upgrade the data communications system                    
              between offices and laboratories in speed and capabilities, and                
              space in the laboratories for graduate students; (b) locating or               
              reconfiguring many of the research laboratories and support shops              
              to achieve increased space with greater efficiency for use in new              
              projects; and (c) improving the security of the laboratories.                  
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and                    
              engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct               
              of research and for the training of quality undergraduate and                  
              graduate students.  Engineering research at the University of                  
              North Carolina at Charlotte has turned in recent years to several              
              areas of significant national importance, including micro- and                 
              opto-electronics and computer-controlled manufacturing.  Students              
              trained in these laboratories, which will be better suited to such             
              studies as a result of the renovation, are in demand in both basic             
              and applied research fields.
