Title       : Social Information-Processing in Malfunctioning Caregiving Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1993 
File        : a9021221

Award Number: 9021221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne B. Bugental bugental@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will test the cognitive, autonomic, and emotional                
              processes that foster malfunctioning caregiving systems.  Past                 
              research has demonstrated that women with low perceived control                
              as caregivers are more likely to show autonomic arousal and                    
              emotionally negative reactions when attempting to cope with                    
              "difficult" children.  In reciprocal fashion, children within                  
              such systems are likely to show response patterns that maintain                
              the beliefs of caregivers.  For example, they may show self-                   
              protective avoidance behaviors that are readily (mis)interpreted               
              by caregivers as showing defiance.  Research proposed here                     
              extends this line of inquiry in two directions:                                
                Do low power (caregiving) beliefs act as automatically-accessed              
              "scripts"?  The prediction is tested that women with low                       
              perceived control as caregivers readily bring to mind "threat-                 
              oriented" ideation, i.e., they easily interpret child behavior as              
              challenging their fragile sense of their own control.                          
                Do the beliefs of children about social interactions influence               
              their perception and response to the expressive behaviors of                   
              others?  The prediction is tested that children with low                       
              perceived control in their social environment are likely to                    
              manifest autonomic arousal, poor emotion regulation, and                       
              inaccurate processing of ongoing events when the expressive cues               
              of others suggests the presence of "threat."  Responses of                     
              children (aged 5 to 10) are measured in reaction to a video that               
              includes cues to potential threat (child having routine medical                
              exam).  Children with low perceived control are expected to be                 
              hypervigilant to subtle cues to "threat" (e.g., a worried                      
              expression shown by the videotaped child); they are also expected              
              to show deterioration in their perception of and response to                   
              witnessed events.  In a second study, the effects of socially                  
              empowering experiences will be tested to determine the extent to               
              which they buffer against dysfunctional responses to "threat."                 
                Implications are for feedback loops that foster and maintain                 
              dysfunctional information-processing patterns and family systems.              
              This research will provide information on controlling mechanisms               
              within such systems, as well as the extent to which such                       
              mechanisms are subject to change as a function of altered                      
              experience.***                                                                 
               //
