Title       : Dissertation Research: Intonation And Gesture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9021907

Award Number: 9021907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2040               (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn Z. McClave  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  This dissertation will explore the interrelationship between              
              intonation and gesture, thus widening the scope of recent studies              
              of cognitive functioning.  Although scholars have long suspected               
              a strong link, and believe gestures and speech to be part of the               
              same psychological structure, scientific convention has fostered               
              an artificial separation of these concurrent aspects of                        
              communication.  Current gestural-linguistic models neglect                     
              phonology in favor of the semantic, syntactic and pragmatic                    
              parallels of body movement.                                                    
                   This project proposes a new gestural-intonational paradigm                
              which will be applied to a data base of two dyadic conversations,              
              each of an hour's length, filmed on videotape.  Using specially                
              modified audiovisual equipment, gestures will be microanalyzed                 
              frame-by-frame, recorded using David McNeill's gesture coding                  
              system, and then integrated with intonational patterns                         
              transcribed using an interlinear tonetic system.                               
                   Data have been found which defy description using current                 
              models, but which can easily be handled by considering intonation              
              patterns.  Current gestural-linguistic models must, therefore,                 
              consider the findings of this study if they aim to completely                  
              represent the gestural-verbal complex.  Intonation may prove to                
              be more closely related to gesture than it is to syntax.
