Title       : Mississippi Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021553

Award Number: 9021553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Williams                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph E. Powe powe ralph@admin.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Mississippi public universities, recognizing that                              
              minorities are severely underrepresented in science and                        
              engineering degree programs at all levels in Mississippi,                      
              the South and the nation, have and are continuing to                           
              develop programs to increase minority participation.                           
              Responding to the National Science Foundation (NSF)                            
              Alliance for Minority Participation(AMP) initiative,                           
              Mississippi's eight state institutions of higher learning                      
              are proposing a state-wide comprehensive alliance and                          
              partnerships with other public and private educational                         
              institutions (public schools, junior and/or community                          
              colleges, and private colleges and universities), business                     
              and industry for the purpose of establishing cooperative                       
              efforts to increase the number of minority students in                         
              science and engineering programs at all levels but                             
              initially focusing at the undergraduate level.  This                           
              support will allow Mississippi's institutions of higher                        
              learning establish a Mississippi Alliance for Science and                      
              Engineering (MASE) center that will focus on:  (1)                             
              developing a Mississippi Alliance for Talent Enrichment                        
              (MATE) program which will be a structured partnership                          
              between secondary schools and colleges; and (2) developing                     
              a Combination of Institutions - Star Search Scholars (CIS)                     
              program.  The MASE Center will place emphasis on several                       
              of the critical bridge points in the educational pipeline.                     
              However, the primary focus will be towards increasing the                      
              undergraduate science and engineering minority enrollment                      
              population and strengthening the bridge between                                
              undergraduate and graduate minority science and                                
              engineering students enrollment trends.  The long-range                        
              impact of the MASE Center will be (1) to increase the                          
              science and engineering awareness of minority students,                        
              (2) to increase undergraduate minority participation in                        
              science and engineering programs, and (3) to increase the                      
              number of graduate degrees granted to minorities in                            
              science and engineering programs.  Over the initial                            
              five-year period the MASE Center will monitor progress in                      
              each to establish an on-going statewide process to ensure                      
              a long-term commitment to increasing minority                                  
              participation in science and engineering programs.  During                     
              NSF-AMP funding for the Mase Center, minority                                  
              participation in the sciences and engineering should                           
              increase to reflect their percentage of the population in                      
              the State.  Mississippi's population is approximately 37%                      
              African American.
