Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Facilities for Integrated Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021724

Award Number: 9021724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Marshall marshall@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn G. Vogel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Lowrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Duszynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              University of New Mexico for the renovation, repair, and                       
              replacement of a portion of Castetter Hall which houses the                    
              majority of that institution's biological research and research                
              training activities.  This building was constructed in two phases,             
              one in 1951 and one in 1969.  While scattered laboratories within              
              the building have been renovated, the area described has never been            
              renovated.  The ARFMP grant of $150,000 and $150,000 provided by               
              the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these                    
              research and research training facilities which will enhance the               
              Biology Department's existing strength in ecology and evolutionary             
              biology, promote its growing strength in cell and molecular                    
              biology, and encourage interactions among disciplines.  This                   
              project will address the need to improve the current research                  
              infrastructure by replacing the greenhouse with a modern                       
              temperature and humidity controlled facility, by replacing the                 
              growth chambers, and by appropriately configuring research                     
              laboratory space and equipping it with upgraded ventilation,                   
              plumbing, and electrical systems.                                              
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for a more balanced program of               
              biological research and for the training of quality undergraduate              
              and graduate students in a minority institution.  This project                 
              will enhance the importance for the region and for the nation of               
              the University of New Mexico's program in biology.
