Title       : Testosterone and Antisocial Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9021393

Award Number: 9021393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124902             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Dabbs jdabbs@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Prior research has found testosterone related to individual                    
              differences in aggression, dominance, and criminal violence.                   
              This research will gather detailed information on testosterone                 
              and antisocial behavior in delinquent and normal populations.  It              
              will also test a biosocial model that predicts antisocial                      
              behavior as a joint function of high testosterone and low social               
              control.  Antisocial behavior ranges in severity from unfriendly               
              facial expressions to unstable personal relationships to criminal              
              violence.  All these behaviors are correlated with testosterone,               
              but the correlations are low, and large numbers of subjects are                
              needed to have enough statistical power to determine their exact               
              size.  Other factors are needed to explain why high testosterone               
              individuals are not always violent. The model proposed here                    
              treats social control forces, embodied in attachment to family                 
              and community, as restraining the more violent effects of                      
              testosterone.  Most high testosterone individuals engage in mild               
              antisocial behavior, especially when frustrated or challenged,                 
              but are violent only when social controls are weak.  The                       
              testosterone-violence correlation should be strongest when social              
              control is weakest, as when subjects do not identify with family               
              and community or when they are young, mentally incompetent, or                 
              under the influence of drugs or alcohol.  The research will                    
              employ salivary testosterone measurements and behavioral                       
              observations of prison inmates, college students, military                     
              veterans, children, and alcoholics.                                            
                                                                                             
              The findings will help to specify exactly what antisocial                      
              behaviors are related to testosterone, how strong the                          
              relationship is, and what other factors serve to increase or                   
              decrease the size of the relationship.
