Title       : Workshop on Grammatical Foundations of Prosody and Discourse; Santa Cruz, CA;
               June 23-July 7, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9021223

Award Number: 9021223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34225              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Ladusaw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Livia Polanyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Steedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in theoretical, computational, and applied                     
              linguistics demonstrate a need to integrate information across                 
              all the individual linguistic modules that are involved in the                 
              comprehension of spoken discourse.  To facilitate this                         
              integration, a workshop on the Grammatical Foundations of Prosody              
              and Discourse will be held between June 23rd and July 7th, 1991,               
              at the University of California at Santa Cruz, during the first                
              two weeks of the Summer Institute sponsored by the Linguistic                  
              Society of America and co-sponsored by the Association for                     
              Computational Linguistics and the American Association for                     
              Artificial Intelligence.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The workshop, which will culminate in a short conference, will                 
              bring together internationally known researchers, both from                    
              academia and industry, who work at the interfaces between                      
              linguistic specializations.  It will provide the opportunity for               
              researchers in speech processing, phonetics, phonology, syntax,                
              semantics, and discourse to work together to develop a common                  
              understanding of crucial theoretical, descriptive, and                         
              computational issues in spoken language understanding across                   
              their subject areas.                                                           
                                                                                             
              An important task for the two week long meeting will be to                     
              explore how information expressed in one module of the grammar,                
              syntactic structure for example, can best be organized to convey               
              all the information needed by other related modules, such as                   
              discourse and prosody.  Such an exploration is needed for the                  
              development of more robust computational systems for natural                   
              language understanding, translation, and generation, as well as                
              being directly applicable to speech understanding and synthesis                
              technology.  Holding the meeting at the Linguistic Institute and               
              encouraging participation by Institute attendees at many of the                
              workshop functions as well as at the public conference will                    
              assure that the concerns to be addressed will be disseminated                  
              among the linguistic community at large.
