Title       : Validating the Use of Hypermedia in Elementary Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1994      
File        : a9053826

Award Number: 9053826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $830034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Feldman pfeldman@usamail.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The University of South Alabama in consortium with Vanderbilt                  
              University and the University of Alabama, Birmingham, will work                
              with the 11 regional inservice centers to integrate the use of                 
              hypermedia into the education of preservice teachers.  The                     
              regional inservice centers are associated with the teacher                     
              education institutions in the state.  Vanderbilt University will               
              be responsible for initial faculty orientation and training in                 
              the use of hypermedia and interactive videodisc technology to                  
              provide a context for the integration of mathematics content and               
              pedagogy in the education of elementary school mathematics                     
              teachers.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The purposes of the project are to develop a prototypical model                
              of interactive laser videodisc instruction for mathematics                     
              teacher education, to disseminate this model and sample material,              
              and to determine the effectiveness of the use of interactive                   
              laser videodisc instruction in the mathematics education                       
              curriculum of eleven of Alabama teacher education programs.  Of                
              particular interest is the diversity of the student populations                
              in the sample the will be part of the intensive study of the                   
              effects of the use of the technology.  Two historically black                  
              institutions are in the group and one is included in the                       
              intensive sample.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The videodiscs that will the basis for the intervention were                   
              produced by a team at Vanderbilt University with a prior NSF                   
              grant, Bridging the Gap between Theory and Practice...  This                   
              project will have state wide impact and will be a model of                     
              collaboration between universities and schools within a state.                 
                                                                                             
              At the same time, the project will allow a large scale evaluation              
              of the Vanderbilt materials.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The project will have impact on both the faculty of the eleven                 
              institution and on the perservice teachers that are in the                     
              programs at the universities. There will be 50 faculty  and 1,100              
              preservice teachers involved in the project.  In addition, the                 
              regional center will work with experienced teachers in each                    
              region to assess the use of such technology in teacher                         
              enhancement.  The number of experienced teachers reached will be               
              approximately 165, 15 per site.  Each regional center has                      
              responsibility for state sponsored teacher enhancement                         
              activities.  This gives a natural opportunity to expand the use                
              of the materials.
