Title       : A Mentoring Team Approach to Increasing Minority Participation in Technical
               Disciplines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9053790

Award Number: 9053790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenola Allen-Sommerville   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Bidney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard C. Gerstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project entails activities aimed at increasing the                        
              involvement of minority students of the Des Moines school                      
              system in science and technology.  The overall strategy is                     
              one of developing mentoring teams of private-sector                            
              professional scientists and engineers, selected secondary                      
              teachers, and Iowa State University faculty.  Each team will                   
              work with a group of six minority students who have been                       
              selected on the basis of Iowa Tests of Basic Skills (ITBS)                     
              and classroom teachers' personal evaluation which indicate                     
              that they have high ability but are not performing at the                      
              level expected. The teams will work within the school system                   
              to help students acquire and use basic skills and good study                   
              habits, to provide students insights on career possibilities,                  
              to promote supportive home environments in collaboration with                  
              parents and families, and see them through to matriculation                    
              at the college or university level.  A core group of five                      
              scientists and two educators will coordinate planning and the                  
              work of the teams.  This group will include an expert on                       
              learning strategies and a specialist on the relationship of                    
              the family to learning, as well as scientist from the                          
              university and the private sector.                                             
                                                                                             
              Program components currently under way in a pilot test                         
              include participating as laboratory associates for their own                   
              classes, half-day field trips to the ISU campus each month,                    
              four (4) all-school assemblies presented by ISU scientist.                     
              The mature program will have as many as 30 mentoring teams                     
              operating with 150 students at all grade levels.
