Title       : Comfortable Approach to Teaching Science II (CATS II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9053581

Award Number: 9053581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468158             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Yu Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three year project is aimed at elementary teachers                        
              with little or no experience in teaching science and                           
              utilizes the expertise and resources of NASA, the Jet                          
              Propulsion Laboratory and the California State                                 
              Polytechnic University at Pomona, California.  This                            
              project, based on a successful previously funded                               
              project, will increase the teachers' comfort level with                        
              science, mathematics and technology.  This newly                               
              acquired confidence will result in increased motivation                        
              and time spent in the teaching of science.  Each summer                        
              fifty teachers (two/school) and their administrators                           
              (25) will be selected from schools in California,                              
              Indian reservations in the Southwest and from Eastern                          
              and Southern sites served by several Historically Black                        
              Colleges and Universities (HBCU).  The participants                            
              will spend four weeks in intensive instruction during                          
              each of the summers, followed by academic year                                 
              meetings.  The topics of electricity, sound, light and                         
              astronomy will be covered at a pace which allows time                          
              for thinking and experimenting.  A variety of effective                        
              teaching strategies with emphasis on understanding                             
              mathematical applications will be used.  The second and                        
              third years continue with new groups of teachers and                           
              administrators with the continued support of past                              
              participants.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Administrators are required to implement a science plan                        
              including staff development at the school site.                                
              "Clone" programs will be set up at HBCU sites to insure                        
              the proliferation of this model.                                               
                                                                                             
              In addition to the NSF request, NASA, JPL, the                                 
              University and the participating schools are                                   
              contributing an equal amount of the funding.
