Title       : SGER: The Wilder Social Context of Innovation in MathematicsEducation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MDR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1990       
File        : a9053602

Award Number: 9053602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      MDR  DIV OF MATRS DEV, & INFORM SCIENCE EDUCA
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah R. Dillon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to investigate the evolution of an              
              innovative second grade problem solving mathematics project, compatible        
              with recent NCTM guidelines (NCTM, 1989), to determine how the                 
              implementation of the project is influenced by broad cultural, social,         
              and political forces.  Specifically, the perspectives held by parents,         
              community leaders (school board members), school administrators,               
              teachers, and the university project directors about what mathematics          
              instruction should look like and how teachers should be teaching and           
              students should be learning will be compared and contrasted.  These            
              perspectives (values and beliefs about mathematics) are important in           
              light of the voice and power parents, community leaders and                    
              administrators have in influencing innovative change in mathematics.           
              Using the research methodology of ethnography and the theoretical              
              underpinnings of holistic ethnography and symbolic interactionism, the         
              perceptions about this innovative project will be studied through              
              intensive observations, interviews, and document analysis.  Questions          
              guiding the data collection include, what happens when university              
              researchers and public school in general and mathematics in particular,        
              play in influencing what occurs in mathematics classrooms?  and what           
              role do parents and school board members play in informing and                 
              developing school district instructional policy and how do they                
              influence the process of educational change in mathematics?  Data will         
              be analyzed and interpreted using qualitative, inductive procedures.           
              This project may serve as a paradigm case for those who want to learn          
              more about the complexities associated with implementing innovative            
              mathematics programs that are compatible with recent reform                    
              recommendations (e.g. NCTM, 1989).
