Title       : Teaching Science in Early Childhood Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1990     
File        : a9053563

Award Number: 9053563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Iatridis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Worth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheelock College
	      200 The Riverway
	      Boston, MA  022154176    617/734-5200

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves Wheelock College with the Associated                     
              Day Care Services of Boston (ADCS), Boston Head Start, and                     
              Cambridge Head Start, to design, pilot, produce, and                           
              disseminate a comprehensive staff development program in                       
              early childhood physical science.  The materials produced                      
              will enable those individuals responsible for education                        
              quality in community-based, pre-school settings to provide                     
              staff development activities to enhance science teaching and                   
              learning in the classroom.  The project will also allow                        
              Wheelock to design and implement three institutes to train                     
              trainers in the use of the new program.  During the first                      
              year of the project the staff will work intensively with                       
              early childhood teachers in their classrooms and in workshop                   
              and seminar sessions.  As the teachers enhance their skills                    
              in teaching physical science and redesign their environments,                  
              the project staff will gather data on the nature of the                        
              teaching and learning and on the specific training needs of                    
              early childhood teachers.  Year two will be focused on the                     
              development of an extensive Staff Development Manual and                       
              accompanying training video.  During year three project staff                  
              will field test the materials and conduct three institutes in                  
              three states to train early childhood staff developers in                      
              their use.  Ongoing dissemination of the final products will                   
              occur through national and local conferences and regional day                  
              care and Head Start training networks.
