Title       : Water Water Everywhere, An Exhibition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9053660

Award Number: 9053660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Egbert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lenore H. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Staten Island Children Mu
	      1000 Richmond Terrace
	      Staten Island, NY  103011114    718/273-2060

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Staten Island Children's Museum requests support for                  
              an interactive exhibition for children on the topic of water.                  
              WATER WATER EVERYWHERE will open in April 1991 and remain on                   
              view for three years; a smaller replica of the exhibition will                 
              be ready to travel in the Spring of 1992.  The first year will                 
              allow an initial evaluation period during which both design and                
              content can be improved.                                                       
                                                                                             
                   The exhibition has dual goals: to provide family                          
              audiences, focusing on children, with the materials and context                
              that encourage experimentation and learning, and to educate                    
              visitors about an essential and widespread constituent of our                  
              world.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                   WATER will present different aspects of this varied                       
              subject in six sections: the many forms of water in our world;                 
              the properties of water; how living things use water; how water                
              works for us; experiments with water and local water issues.                   
              The exhibition will engage children imaginatively, inform,                     
              provide opportunities to experiment and learn, and stimulate                   
              creativity.  Museum public programs and activities will be                     
              offered in conjunction with WATER to both extend and enrich the                
              project.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                   WATER will contribute to both children's and inter-                       
              generational learning.  Its desired outcomes include further                   
              development of the Museum's critical thinking skills program,                  
              expansion of our renewed Informal Science Education Program,                   
              extension of our community service programs and heightening our                
              participation in community issues, such as the environment,                    
              through the ecological aspect of the exhibition.                               
                                                                                             
                   By touring the exhibition and producing educational                       
              materials based on WATER, the Museum will extend its impact in                 
              learning skills, science education and environmental awareness                 
              to a scale that is potentially national.
