Title       : Public and Private Sector Partnership Program in Engineeringfor Secondary
               Science and Mathematics Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9053830

Award Number: 9053830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ganesh P. Mohanty mohanty@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail G. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Vizzini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Egiziano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a four-year, research-oriented teacher enhancement                     
              project in engineering directed at the secondary school                        
              science and mathematics teachers.  It involves a public                        
              university, a regional school system, and local industries.                    
              The project will establish an on-going career development                      
              path for teachers by providing them an introduction to                         
              selected high priority technical areas, using a combination                    
              of tutorial sessions and participation in research and                         
              workshops.  At the heart of the project is a six week                          
              concentrated summer workshop and research experience,                          
              followed by complementary activities in the ensuing academic                   
              year.  A team of engineers and scientists drawn from the                       
              participating institutions will be responsible for the                         
              tutorial sessions and supervision of research and workshop                     
              activities.  In order to broaden and sustain its impact, the                   
              project staff will create a system of mentors and resource                     
              persons at the school level to assist teachers in the                          
              translation of their program experiences into effective                        
              educational modules and other teaching resources which will                    
              lead to measurable curricular upgrading.
