Title       : University of South Carolina System Model Project for the Transformation of
               Science and Math Teaching to Reach Women in Varied Campus Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9053892

Award Number: 9053892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue V. Rosser  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Crawford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9271,
Abstract    :
                   This project is developing a model for the teaching of                    
              science and mathematics with the specific objective of                         
              recruiting and retaining more women in science and                             
              technological careers. Research findings from Women's Studies                  
              are being utilized in designing, implementing, evaluating and                  
              disseminating the model. Since the project involves                            
              collaboration by thescience/math faculty of the nine campuses                  
              of the University of South Carolina System, ranging from                       
              two-year campuses to a major graduate/research campus, the                     
              model should be suitable for adaptation and national                           
              dissemination to a wide variety of institutions. Twenty-five                   
              science/math faculty drawn from 5 two-year, 3 four-year and                    
              one graduate/research campus areparticipating in the project.                  
              Activities take place in two settings and formats: two                         
              on-site, two-day workshops at each of the nine campuses for                    
              individualized design, and implementation of the model; and,                   
              three, two-day plenary workshops for intercampus exchange,                     
              expert consulting, contrastive analysis, and synthesis of the                  
              most successful strategies.                                                    
              Measurable Objectives to determine project effectiveness                       
              include:                                                                       
                                                                                             
                   o Evidence of positively changed pedagogy and                             
                     perceptions regarding gender by participating faculty                   
                     (as demonstrated on pre- and post-project surveys).                     
                                                                                             
                   o A statistically significant increase (when compared                     
                     with baseline figures and the control group) of the                     
                     number and proportion of women entering the science                     
                     and math courses affected by this transformational                      
                     project, the number going on to additional science and                  
                     math courses, and the number opting for graduate and                    
                     post-graduate careers in science or math (as                            
                     determined by long term tracking).                                      
                                                                                             
                   o A net improvement in faculty perceptions of the value                   
                     of inter-campus and inter-level communication (as                       
                     demonstrated on pre- and post-project surveys).
