Title       : Engineering for Kids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1994  
File        : a9053625

Award Number: 9053625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger D. Mitchell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $578011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Epstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oregon Mus of Sci & Ind
	      1945 SE Water Ave.
	      Portland, OR  972143354    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) is a                     
              progressive science and technology center.  Its philosophy                     
              toward science education is to make it enticing, enjoyable and                 
              motivating.  It accomplishes this by means of "hands-on",                      
              interactive exhibits and programs designed to provide a non-                   
              threatening learning environment, for which we are recognized                  
              nationally.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                   OMSI recognizes the important national need to assist the                 
              public in understanding and being comfortable with advances in,                
              and methodology of applied science.  It proposes to design and                 
              build a large exhibit that promotes problem solving using                      
              engineering principles.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   The exhibit will pose problems, offer basic information                   
              for the solution and provide a variety of tools and building                   
              materials from which the visitor can choose.  The visitor then                 
              devises one or several possible solutions, and constructs a                    
              prototype to be tested in one of three large scale testing                     
              laboratories.  The engineering fields addressed are                            
              aeronautical, mechanical and civil.                                            
                                                                                             
                   Our visitors will come away from the exhibit with an                      
              increased appreciation for the way engineering is done and how                 
              solutions affect their lives.                                                  
                                                                                             
                   OMSI is requesting $577,324 from the National Science                     
              Foundation as well as $427,539 from the Port of Portland to                    
              design and build this exhibit.  The Port of Portland is                        
              interested in demonstrating how its commercial activities                      
              relate to engineering.                                                         
                                                                                             
                   OMSI plans to disseminate information about the exhibit to                
              educators and other museums on a national level.
