Title       : Biotechnology Implementation Partnership: Biotechnology "Mini-Courses" for
               Teacher Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9053817

Award Number: 9053817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lowell J. Bethel                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack G. Chirikjian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on the learning component by teachers and                 
              subsequent                                                                     
              implementation of Biotechnology in the classroom.  The commitment of the       
              project staff, the National Association of Biology Teachers, EDVOTEK           
              Corporation and school districts toward that end is strong and extends         
              beyond                                                                         
              the life of the grant in order to make this a self-sufficient program          
              educationally and financially.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Four sets of "mini-courses" per year will be offered to secondary school       
              teachers of biology and chemistry from both public and private schools         
              in                                                                             
              conjunction with national, state and regional meetings (e.g. NABT, ACS)        
              as well                                                                        
              as special courses such as AP biology and chemistry training program.          
              In                                                                             
              addition to the instruction in the concept, the "hands-on" experience in       
              basic                                                                          
              procedures will be integrated.  Teachers will leave not only with the          
              experience of having done the actual experiments, but with sufficient          
              materials                                                                      
              to begin the implementation in their own classrooms.                           
                                                                                             
              This project builds on previously funded projects which offered                
              four-week                                                                      
              biotechnology workshops in several sites around the country.  These            
              projects                                                                       
              selected and worked with biology and chemistry teachers from secondary         
              schools and colleges who had the potential to become leaders and               
              mentors in                                                                     
              their communities in the implementation and integration of biotechnology       
              topics                                                                         
              in classroom and laboratories.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Cost-sharing equivalent to 80% of the NSF request is provided by NABT,         
              EDVOTEK, Georgetown University and participating school districts.
