Title       : An International Education Project Related to the IGBP Global Change Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1990      
File        : a9053620

Award Number: 9053620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47546              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie H. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The project creates a prototype set of processes and products for an           
              international team of curriculum developers to work collaboratively with       
              research scientists in the International Geosphere Biosphere Project           
              (IGBP) of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).  This         
              is a high priority area for research in teaching and learning, science         
              the large investment being made by the NSF, other U.S. organizations,          
              and other countries in IGBP research provides an unprecedented                 
              opportunity to inform science education.  The project is urgent with           
              regard to availability of data because of a special opportunity created        
              by the ICSU.  The ICSU has initiated a science education project that          
              will translate research findings of IGBP scientists and disseminate them       
              for use in the education systems of the world.  Developers from the U.S.       
              and U.K. will draft the first prototype instructional modules in a             
              workshop in 1990, as part of a two-year formative development process.         
              The project takes advantage of this opportunity to build knowledge and         
              experience that will establish infrastructure for such collaborations          
              among the scientific and educational communities.  The project will not        
              only create and test prototype learning materials, but also document key       
              factors involved in the process, such as roles of scientists in the            
              project, incentives and mechanisms for their involvement, opportunities        
              and obstacles to scientist-educator collaboration internationally,             
              multi-country testing and adaptation of learning materials, mechanisms         
              for teacher and student involvement in scientific research processes.
