Title       : Hierarchical Planning in a Pull Production Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9119621

Award Number: 9119621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace J. Hopp hopp@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Spearman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Zazanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              American manufacturers face increasing competition from abroad.                
              In addition to having low prices, being competitive  requires                  
              outstanding quality, short lead times, and increased                           
              responsiveness to customer's changing demands.  Companies that                 
              have successfully responded to this changing environment have                  
              done so by decreasing work in process (WIP) and finished goods                 
              inventory (FGI) levels, thereby allowing early detection of                    
              quality problems, shorter lead times, and less vulnerability to                
              changing demands.  In some situations, the kanban system has been              
              highly successful at reducing WIP and FGI.  However, kanban is                 
              applicable only to repetitive manufacturing environments.  In                  
              previous NSF-funded research, the investigators have developed a               
              more broadly applicable pull production control system, called                 
              CONWIP (CONstant Work in Process).  This system promises to bring              
              the benefits of kanban to a wider class of manufacturing                       
              environments.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              But a production control system cannot operate in a vacuum; it                 
              must be able to interface with the sales, customer service,                    
              quality control, product development, and capacity management                  
              functions.  In recognition of this, the PI's have developed a                  
              hierarchical planning system for a pull production control                     
              system, called Synchronized Production.  A version of this                     
              hierarchy has been designed and implemented for the case of a                  
              simple manufacturing environment without assembly operations.                  
              Although the CONWIP production control mechanism and some of its               
              supporting models can accomodate assembly operations, a                        
              consistent hierarchy for manufacturing environments with complex               
              assembly structures has not been developed.                                    
                                                                                             
              This project will extend the Synchronized Production hierarchy to              
              complex manufacturing environments with assembly operations,                   
              shared resources, and floating bottlenecks.  The ultimate goal is              
              to bring the performance benefits of pull production and the                   
              consistency provided by hierarchical planning to a much broader                
              class of manufacturing environments.  The initial development of               
              the Synchronized Production concept was jointly funded by NSF and              
              the IBM Corporation.  IBM will continue to fund aspects of the                 
              research specifically related to their needs (e.g., coding of                  
              software for a specific implementation).  By combining industry                
              and government support, this project will develop both the                     
              theoretical and applied results needed to enable Synchronized                  
              Production to play a role in restoring the competitiveness of                  
              American manufacturing.
