Title       : Population Biology of Cytoplasmic Incompatibility in Drosophila simulans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9119670

Award Number: 9119670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Turelli mturelli@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In Drosophila simulans, a vertically transmitted, cytoplasmic                  
              incompatibility factor causes reduced egg hatch when infected males            
              mate with uninfected females.  The incompatibility seems to be                 
              associated with an intracellular parasite (Wolbachia) that is                  
              spreading rapidly in California.  The goal of the research during              
              the year of recommended funding is to understand further the                   
              population biology of this system by:  1) continuing to monitor the            
              spread of the infection in California and its effect on the                    
              distribution of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants; 2) determining             
              whether the presence of Wolbachia can be assertained by progeny                
              tests; 3) obtaining additional estimates of incompatibility levels             
              and deleterious fitness effects in polymorphic natural populations;            
              and 4) using field and laboratory data to construct mathematical               
              models describing temporal and spatial frequency dynamics in the               
              field.  The new data and analyses are essential for describing and             
              understanding the rate of spread of the infection and assessing the            
              adequacy of current models.  This system offers an unusual                     
              opportunity to study rapid changes in natural populations.  The                
              rapid northward spread in California provides many replicate                   
              populations in which similar frequency changes are occurring.  A               
              central issue is whether the selection and migration parameter                 
              values that describe the dynamics in one area will accurately                  
              predict the dynamics elsewhere.  The joint dynamics of the                     
              infections and mtDNA variants provide a model system for the                   
              introduction of cytoplasmically inherited variants into natural                
              populations.  Such variants may be useful in controlling insect                
              pests.  Given the reduced funding recommended for one year only,               
              the PIs will concentrate on providing detailed maps of the                     
              infection frequency during the fall, spring and summer of 1992-93.             
              A major goal will be to have a standardized molecular assay for                
              determining whether individual field caught flies are infected, and            
              to determine the phenotypic association between the presence of the            
              infectious agent and incompatibility as revealed by progeny tests.             
              To the extent that time and money permit, the PIs also plan to                 
              continue monitoring the frequency of (mtDNA) variants that are                 
              "hitch-hiking" along with the infection, and to obtain additional              
              field estimates at different sites and in different seasons of the             
              incompatibility levels and reductions of fecundity caused by the               
              infection.
