Title       : Phylogenetics and Historical Biogeography of Otocinclus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9119651

Award Number: 9119651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Schaefer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   This project will conduct a three year study of the                       
              systematics and taxonomy, natural history, and biogeography of the             
              catfishes of the genus Otocinclus.  This group of approximately 20             
              species belongs to one of the largest radiations of freshwater                 
              fishes in the Neotropics, the family Loricariidae, which includes              
              over 600 species.  These fishes are an important component of the              
              fish fauna of the Atlantic coastal region of southeast Brazil,                 
              which includes remnants of the Atlantic Coastal Forest and has been            
              identified as a region of high biodiversity under severe threat of             
              degradation.                                                                   
                   Relevance of the  study of this particular group of fishes                
              lies in their contribution toward understanding the complex                    
              historical processes which have shaped the biogeography of                     
              organisms inhabiting the Atlantic coastal region of Brazil.                    
              Several inherent biological properties, as well as previous work               
              on the group, lend particular significance to study of Otocinclus              
              for achieving these broader goals.  Representatives of this group              
              of fishes are presently widely distributed throughout South                    
              America, with one or more species occurring in every major river               
              drainage basin.  Their small size, coupled with low capabilities               
              for dispersal and wide geographic distribution, predispose them for            
              this kind of biogeographic analysis.  Knowledge of the                         
              relationships among species of Otocinclus, coupled with similar                
              data for other groups of animals and plants having representatives             
              in the Atlantic coastal region, will provide the basic data for                
              reconstructing the biogeographic history of this particular region             
              and seeking the common causal factors responsible for producing the            
              distributional properties of groups of organisms observed today.               
              This information can then be used to formulate conservation and                
              management strategies.                                                         
                   Despite their importance, aspects of the basic biology and                
              taxonomy of these fishes are poorly known; the systematics of this             
              group must be revised, new species described and illustrated, their            
              inter-relationships determined, and present distributions defined              
              before progress in understanding the biogeography of the Atlantic              
              coastal region can be made.  Analyses of shape, coloration pattern,            
              and morphological characteristics will be used to determine the                
              taxonomic limits to the species of Otocinclus.  Expeditions to two             
              poorly known areas of the Atlantic coastal and neighboring river               
              systems will be undertaken to sample previously undocumented                   
              species and to define their distributions.  General ichthyological             
              collections will be made and specimens deposited in major museums              
              in both North and South America, forming the material basis for                
              continued study.  Laboratory based morphological studies will be               
              used to reconstruct the relationships among Otocinclus species.                
              This project will then provide one additional component toward                 
              building a comprehensive dataset for testing competing                         
              biogeographic hypotheses in the Neotropical region.
