Title       : Collaborative Research: Structure and Resilience of Trout Stream Food Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9119668

Award Number: 9119668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Kohler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Microparasites have recently  caused the collapse of                      
              populations of a dominant insect competitor in coldwater streams               
                                                                                             
              in Michigan.  This has provided a unique natural experiment to                 
              examine the organization of entire stream communities.  The major              
                                                                                             
              objectives of this research are:1) to utilize this natural                     
              experiment as well as manipulative experiments, to assess                      
              mechanisms by which this dominant species affects the structure                
              of trout stream food webs, 2) to determine the extent to which                 
              communities dominated by this species represent stable community               
                                                                                             
              configurations; and 3) to study the important processes                        
              regulating the abundances of this dominant consumer.  The PIs                  
              will monitor responses (composition and abundances, biomass, and               
                                                                                             
              growth rates) of all trophic levels to the treatments created by               
                                                                                             
              the natural experiment.  A powerful feature of the natural                     
              experiment is that essentially identical food web perturbations                
              have been experienced at a series of diverse sites, with a                     
              variety of environmental characteristics (e.g., stream size,                   
              trophic structure, physical/chemical attributes).  Thus, the                   
              results should have considerable general applicability.                        
              Manipulative experiments will be performed to:1) determine the                 
              pathways and strengths by which interactions stemming from the                 
              dominant consumer affect the remainder of the community; and 2)                
              identify the processes regulating the abundances of the dominant               
                                                                                             
              consumer.  By utilizing this combination of approaches, this                   
              project will provide a comprehensive understanding of the                      
              mechanisms structuring coldwater stream communities and the                    
              stability of stream communities.  This study will be one of the                
              first to document the role of parasites in the population                      
              dynamics of lotic invertebrates.
