Title       : RUI: Maintenance of Knowledge During the Human Life Span
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9119800

Award Number: 9119800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $619988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry P. Bahrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate the effect of various types of                  
              interventions on the longevity of knowledge.  One investigation                
              will determine the individual and joint effects of the number of               
              training sessions and of the interval between training sessions                
              on retention of foreign language vocabulary over a period of                   
              several years.  Other investigations will focus on the                         
              maintenance of access to marginal semantic memory content.  Such               
              information is reliably identified on tests of recognition, but                
              it is recalled only some of the time; success or failure of an                 
              attempt to recall this sort of information depends upon momentary              
              context conditions.  The goals of this research are to establish               
              the effects of interventions that either decrease the probability              
              of losing access to marginal memory targets that are momentarily               
              not accessible (preventive maintenance) or re-establish access to              
              targets that are momentarily not accessible (corrective                        
              maintenance).  These investigations will establish the half-life               
              of several types of preventive and corrective interventions for                
              several types of memory content for young and old adults.                      
              Another investigation will explore the possibility of extending                
              the life-span of knowledge acquired in a statistics course by                  
              increased spacing of training sessions and by computer-aided                   
              instruction.  This research can provide the basis for effective                
              schedules and types of interventions designed to assure                        
              continuing access to knowledge acquired in schools.  The research              
              is also relevant to the formulation of guidelines for the                      
              maintenance of professional expertise in various domains of                    
              public interest.
