Title       : Neolithic Economy and Social Relations in the Eastern Sahara
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1993   
File        : a9119487

Award Number: 9119487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Wendorf fwendorf@sun.cis.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela E. Close  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Fred Wendorf and                 
              his international team of collaborators will conduct                           
              archaeological research in the Gebel Nabta region of the Eastern               
              Sahara Desert in Egypt.  They will return to sites located in                  
              past work and employ a series of strategies which include survey,              
              surface collection of exposed materials and careful excavation.                
              This site dates from the Neolithic period, ca. 9,000 to 6,0000                 
              years before the present.  A series of houses are particularly                 
              important because they contain large numbers of small                          
              depressions, probably the remains of cooking fires.  Each holds                
              abundant and well preserved floral remains which possibly are the              
              by products of individual cooking events.  With such data it is                
              possible to gain unprecedented insight into subsistence practices              
              since it is extremely rare for plant materials to be so well                   
              preserved.  A broad scale site survey should provide information               
              on settlement pattern and subsistence strategies.                              
                                                                                             
              The Neolithic period marked the appearance of many of the                      
              hallmarks which characterize our society today.  The first long                
              term settlements were established, pottery first appears in the                
              archaeological record, and plants and animals were domesticated.               
              Because this change was so important, archaeologists refer to it               
              as "The Neolithic Revolution."  However, it is not well                        
              understood what caused groups in many parts of the world to                    
              change from a hunting and gathering way of life to a more                      
              sedentary existence.  Dr. Wendorf's work focusses directly on                  
              this issue and the Egyptian desert provides an excellent region                
              for this study because sites are often visible from surface                    
              remains and the dry climate favors floral preservation.                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists.  It will                 
              explore indirectly the issue of black Africa and its contribution              
              to the development of civilization.  It will also shed light on                
              the processes which led to the emergence of complex societies.
