Title       : Collaborative Research: The REVELATION Project Query Processing In Behavioral
               Object-Oriented Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1995   
File        : a9119446

Award Number: 9119446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard D. Shapiro len@cs.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Goetz Graefe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many new data management systems are being developed to support                
              applications with advanced data management requirements, such as               
              extended relational models, persistent programming languages and               
              object-oriented databases. Such systems enhance semantic                       
              expressiveness, but they must offer good performance to be viable              
              commercial technologies. An area particularly needful of improved              
              performance is query processing, where new modeling features such              
              as encapsulation, type hierarchies, complex values and object                  
              identity make conventional set-processing methods difficult or                 
              ineffective to apply. The overall goal of the Revelation project               
              is to expand query processing to address and exploit these new                 
              modeling extensions at all levels of query processing, from                    
              schema management, through optimization and physical planning, to              
              runtime support. For encapsulation, a Revealer is incorporated, a              
              trusted system component that can access type implementations.                 
              Heterogeneity in collections arising from subtyping and                        
              polymorphism is handled by an Annotater that reasons across                    
              schema definitions. Complex values and identity are addressed                  
              both at the logical algebra level, with new operations to deal                 
              with ordered structures such as sequences and arrays, and at the               
              physical level with new operators such as one to assemble complex              
              objects. This project will construct a prototype query processor,              
              exploiting existing software technology such as the Volcano                    
              optimizer generator and the Volcano query evaluation system.
