Title       : RUI: A CCD Camera and Image Processing System for Astronomical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9119750

Award Number: 9119750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Caton catondb@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A modern, research quality, Charge Coupled Device (CCD) camera will            
              be acquired for implementation at Appalachian State University's               
              Dark Sky Observatory (DSO).  It will be used to capture images that            
              will yield fundamental data in stellar and extragalatic astronomy.             
              A high-speed computer workstation will also be implementted, using             
              the IRAF image processing system already developed by the national             
              observatories.  The complete system will allow observational work              
              of the highest quality, as well as extend the limits set by                    
              existing equipment.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The CCD camera will be used for a number of existing and planned               
              projects.  The current program of eclipsing binary photometry will             
              benefit from the CCD's high efficiency and CCD photometry's                    
              relative insensitivity to less than ideal observing conditions.                
              The CCD will be used as the detector in a spectrograph being built             
              for use at DSO.  The spectrograph will be used for work in stellar             
              classification and studies of chemical abundances in stars.  The               
              CCD camera will also be used for studies of optical outbursts in               
              quasi-stellar objects.  We would also expect that new projects will            
              be conceived based upon the capabilities of the system.                        
                                                                                             
              Additionally, the new system will expand the opportunities for                 
              astronomy students in the regions, and will help attrack students              
              into the sciences.
