Title       : Use of the Homeobox System to Elucidate Metazoan Sister-Group Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9119437

Award Number: 9119437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo W. Buss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank H. Ruddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Buss and Ruddle propose to initiate a research program                    
              directed at the resolution of the metazoan phyla. The current                  
              state of metazoan phylogeny is one of considerable uncertainty,                
              with morphological and molecular data sets supporting conflicting              
              hypotheses. They suggest that examination of Antp-class homeobox               
              genes will prove capable of resolving the principle                            
              uncertainties. The extreme conservation of sequence of homeoboxes              
              and their distinctive pattern of genomic organization provide an               
              abundance of characters ideal for higher level phylogenetic                    
              analysis. In this proposal, they will re-examine the relationship              
              between annelids and arthropods by characterization of the                     
              genomic diversity, organization, and sequences of homeoboxes from              
              crustaceans, chelicerates, arachnids, molluscs, onychophorans,                 
              and annelids. Combined with the growing existing database on                   
              homeoboxes in cnidarians, nematodes, uniramians, echinoderms and               
              chordates, this work holds the realistic promise of resolving not              
              only the annelid-arthropod relationship, but also of shedding                  
              light on the relationships within and between the most speciose                
              protostome and deuterostome phyla. The use of the homeobox system              
              for phylogenetic analysis is particularly compelling because                   
              these genes have proved to be central components of the                        
              regulatory networks involved in early embryonic pattern formation              
              and specification of cell fate. Thus, as our understanding of the              
              molecular genetics of development grows, it is likely that the                 
              information generated in the progress of this research will                    
              permit study of the origin of the developmental novelty. To                    
              accomplish these goals it will require the collaboration of                    
              developmental geneticists and evolutionary biologists.
