Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Finite Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1992   
File        : a9119864

Award Number: 9119864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Assmus efa0@Lehigh,bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In the beginning, the discipline of finite geometry was                   
              motivated by questions in geometry and recreational mathematics.               
              From the earliest questions that were asked, it was clear that                 
              the natural setting for the emerging discipline was group theory.              
              The discipline was enriched and invigorated by the needs of                    
              statisticians in the design of experiments, but the foundational               
              questions and the relationship with group theory continued to                  
              dominate the subject throughout the first half of the twentieth                
              century.  The most recent enrichment of the discipline has come                
              from the applied problems which gave rise to algebraic coding                  
              theory.  The achievement most visible to those outside the field               
              was the computer proof of the non-existence of a projective plane              
              of order ten, a result that rested heavily on the contributions                
              of algebraic coding theory.  This result has spurred the interest              
              in the interaction of algebraic coding theory and finite geometry              
              and there is currently a renewed interest in nets and the                      
              classification problems involving finite projective planes.  On                
              the other hand, the classification of finite simple groups has                 
              given rise to a renewed interest by group theorists in finite                  
              geometry and the language of diagrams has provided a framework                 
              for the discussion of the relationship of groups to geometry.                  
              Finally, traditional classification problems (e.g., difference                 
              sets, generalized quadrangles and translation planes) continue to              
              be of interest.                                                                
                   This project will support the Conference on Finite Geometry               
              to be held April 11-14, 1992 at Lehigh University.  This meeting               
              will overlap the Eastern Regional Meeting of the American                      
              Mathematical Society at which there will be a Special Session on               
              finite geometry.  The format of this conference is expected to be              
              similar to the Oberwolfach model.
