Title       : Phylogenetics of Aphids and Their Intracellular Associates and Implications for
               the Evolutionary History of the Endosymbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1992  
File        : a9119280

Award Number: 9119280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Moran nmoran@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   Many animal and plant species contain bacteria, called                    
              endosymbionts, that inhabit specialized cells of their hosts.                  
              These associations are widespread in insects that feed on plant                
              sap, including aphids and their evolutionary relatives.  The                   
              insects cannot grow or reproduce without their endosymbionts, and              
              specialized mechanisms ensure that offspring are infected at                   
              birth.                                                                         
                   Dr. Nancy Moran of the University of Arizona, collaborating               
              with Dr. Paul Baumann at the University of California-Davis, is                
              working to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the                         
              endosymbioses of aphids and related insects, in order to                       
              determine how the bacteria and insects have diversified in                     
              association with one another.  They are analyzing nucleotide                   
              sequence data from ribosomal DNA from both bacteria and their                  
              hosts in order to infer phylogenetic trees of the species, by                  
              measuring mutational differences among the taxa.  Analysis of the              
              correspondence, or lack thereof, of these phylogenetic trees will              
              permit a determination of whether the bacteria have diversified                
              in parallel with hosts or whether unrelated groups of bacteria                 
              have frequently invaded new insect hosts through time.  The data               
              will also allow an estimate of the ages of the associations and                
              of rates of molecular change.  The findings should illuminate the              
              nature of endosymbiotic associations in general and will aid in                
              understanding the evolution of this important group of insects.
