Title       : Collaborative Research: Trophic Structure and the Stoichiometry of Nitrogen and
               Phosphorus in the Pelagic Food Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9119269

Award Number: 9119269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford N. Dahm                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269897             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Elser j.elser@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Ecologists are increasingly realizing that patterns of                    
              storage and processing of energy and chemical elements in                      
              ecosystems are strongly influenced by the composition of the                   
              ecological communities present in the ecosystem.  In lakes, the                
              abundance of "top predators" (i.e. fish-eating fish species like               
              bass) can have strong effects on all levels of the system,                     
              including the abundance and productivity of plant producers and                
              the cycling of chemical elements.  This occurs because predatory               
              fish consume plankton-feeding fish, like minnows, which in turn                
              influence herbivorous consumers (zooplankton).  Finally,                       
              zooplankton both regulate the abundance of plant producers                     
              (phytoplankton) and decomposers (bacteria) and recycle nutrients.              
              This project focusses on the effects of food web structure on the              
              relative availability of nutrient elements critical for microbial              
              growth (nitrogen and phosphorus).  It tests the predictions of a               
              recently-developed, physiologically-based theory designed to                   
              understand how different zooplankton species regenerate nitrogen               
              and phosphorus present in their food.  By altering the dynamics                
              of these herbivorous zooplankton, fish predation can therefore                 
              influence the cycling of nitrogen and phosphorus.  Based at the                
              Experimental Lakes Area in Canada, the main research approaches                
              will in involve experimental manipulations of nutrients and                    
              zooplankton in large enclosures in lakes as well as whole-lake                 
              manipulations of food-web structure (via introduction of pike to               
              two lakes which lack such a fish-eating species).  THese studies               
              have direct application to understanding the processes                         
              controlling elemental cycling in ecosystems; such processes play               
              a critical role in various areas of direct societal, including                 
              global climate change, the dynamics of contaminants in the                     
              environment, and degradation of water supplies.
