Title       : The Role of Mago Nashi in Drosophila Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9119535

Award Number: 9119535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Boswell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In many organisms early determinative events are established by                
              the differential distribution of informational                                 
              molecules(cytoplasmic determinants).  In Drosophila,the                        
              distribution of these determinants is established by genes that                
              make a strictly maternal contribution to the developing embryo.                
              Drosophila serves as a model system for studying genes that                    
              produce these determinants and/or are involved in properly                     
              distributing these determinants within the embryo.  The PI is                  
              studying Mango Nashi a maternal effect gene required both for the              
              determination of the primordial germ cells and establishment of                
              the anteroposterior axis of the embryo.  The mago locus is novel               
              in that mutations of the locus disrupt germ cell formation and                 
              are also capable of causing a replacement of anterior embryonic                
              structures by posterior tail and abdominal structures.  Double                 
              mutants between mago and alleles of loci crucial for delineation               
              of the anteroposterior axis of the embryo will be used to better               
              define the role of mago in specifying the anteroposterior axis of              
              the embryo.  Genetic isolation of new mago alleles and                         
              developmental analysis of thes alleles will provide information                
              necessary for refining models dipicting the role of mago+ in                   
              early embryonic development.  A molecular characterization of the              
              mago locus will include: (a) identification of mago mRNA(s), and               
              isolation and sequencing of cDNA clones representative of mago                 
              mRNA; and (b) determination of the distribution of the mago                    
              transcript(s) and protein(s) in oocytes and embryos.  This                     
              combined analysis should significantly improve our understanding               
              of mago+ function in early Drosophila development.  Thus, these                
              studies should provide insights into the mechanisms underlying                 
              germ cell formation and the establishment of positional                        
              information in the early embryo.
