Title       : Molecular Systematics and Tests of Monophyly Within the Small-bodied,
               Small-scaled Radiation of Sceloporus (Phrynosomatidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9119091

Award Number: 9119091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Sites Jack_Sites@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marek J. Kaliszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1127,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project includes an intensive field collecting phase                 
              and a follow-up laboratory analysis phase, in that order.  The                 
              field research centers on making research collections almost                   
              entirely in Mexico, under the direction of a Mexican scientist                 
              and his students, of the conspicuous and extremely diverse lizard              
              genus Sceloporus.  Of the specimens collected, at least 60% will               
              be deposited as standard museum vouchers in a research collection              
              at Mexico's National University, and the remaining specimens (the              
              final proportions will be determined by permit requirements) will              
              likewise be catalogued in U.S. collections.  Simultaneously,                   
              large collection of frozen tissue samples will be made from these              
              animals upon their capture, and all frozen tissues will be                     
              returned and catalogued into U.S. tissue collections.                          
                   Species and distinct populations will be collected                        
              nonrandomly so as to maximize the utility of the samples for                   
              addressing a variety of basic questions in ecology and historical              
              biogeography.  For example, selected species are to be collected               
              from the Baja Peninsula, some islands in the Sea of Cortez, and                
              the western mainland of Mexico for the purpose of testing                      
              alternative ideas concerning the derivation of island populations              
              relative to those of Baja and the mainland.  These data will have              
              important implications for understanding the origins of entire                 
              island biotas, since all species present on these islands were                 
              subjected to the same geological events which formed the Baja                  
              Peninsula and the Sea of Cortez, and for emphasizing the value of              
              these still largely intact systems for conservation.  A second                 
              group of lizards will be collected from the transverse volcanic                
              range of central Mexico because these populations display                      
              different stages of the transition from egg-laying to live-                    
              bearing reproductive modes associated with adaptions to high                   
              elevations.  In both cases, laboratory work will utilize two                   
              independent classes of molecular markers, including proteins and               
              DNA molecules, to reconstruct the genealogies of the populations               
              sampled.  The lab work will support extensive training                         
              opportunities and collaboration for both Mexican and U.S.                      
              graduate students and research associates.
