Title       : Mechanism of Action of Lipoxygenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1992     
File        : a9119203

Award Number: 9119203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Axelrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Lipoxygenases are non-heme, non-sulfur iron dioxygenases which                 
              catalzye the hydroperoxidation of unsaturated fatty acids                      
              containing cis, cis-1, 4-pentadiene systems.  The object of these              
              studies is an understanding of the structure-function relationship             
              of lipoxygenase.  Sequences of 14 different plant and animal                   
              lipoxygenases share a common motif of histidine residues which are             
              candidates for a putative iron coordination site.  The iron binding            
              ability of the mutant constructions of the well-characterized                  
              isozyme (soybean L-1) in which the histidines are replaced with                
              glutamine will be tested.  These mutants have been previously                  
              constructed and have been shown to have zero or diminished                     
              activities.  Three soybean seed lipoxygenases, L-1, L-2 and L-3,               
              despite their great homology, differ markedly in their enzymic                 
              characteristics e.g. substrate specificity, region-specificity, pH             
              optimum and secondary reactions.  Chimeric constructs of these                 
              enzymes will be examined to identify the basis for their                       
              differences.  The information sought should contribute to an                   
              understanding of the nature of the active site and the diversity of            
              kinetic characteristics of the primary and secondary reactions of              
              the isozymes and will ultimately facilitate interpretation of the              
              X-ray structure of lipoxygenase which is likely to become available            
              in the future.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              The results will not only contribute to a basic understanding of               
              the mechanism of lipoxygenase but they will also be significant for            
              human health since lipoxygenases generate precursors of                        
              leukotrienes and other important physiological efforts in human                
              tissue.  It is likely that much of what is learn from these studies            
              on the readily available soybean enzyme will be useful in the                  
              understanding of the animal enzymes.
