Title       : Colony Structure and Queen-Worker Conflict in Social Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1993  
File        : a9119624

Award Number: 9119624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Herbers  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie S. Banschbach vbanschb@moose.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   For some insect societies a colony can comprise several                   
              discrete nesting units.  This phenomenon of colony fractionation,              
              or polydomy, produces nest subunits that can differ primarily in               
              whether or not they contain a queen.  Since workers and their                  
              mother queen are in conflict over how reproductive energy should               
              be allocated polydomous colonies represent natural systems for                 
              studying conflict and cooperation within the squabbling family.                
              Furthermore, polydomous colonies represent a tractable ecological              
              system for studying levels of selection.  Colonies of the ant                  
              species Myrmica punctiventris are seasonally polydomous:  in                   
              spring a colony emerges aboveground as a unit, but then                        
              fractionates.  Nest subunits are functionally autonomous during                
              the summer months, but re-coalesce in fall for overwintering.                  
              Previous work has shown that workers can exploit this system to                
              bias reproductive broods towards their own interests and away                  
              from the interests of their mother queen.  The proposed research               
              will characterize colony structure and reproductive allocation                 
              for three populations of this species; contextual analysis will                
              allow us to distinguish selection on the local nesting unit                    
              versus on the entire colony.  A field experiment will be carried               
              out to assess the impact of ecological parameters for seasonal                 
              polydomy, reproductive allocation, and levels of selection in                  
              this species.  The research will provide considerable insight to               
              the evolutionary mechanics of social behavior.  Furthermore this               
              project, while primarily basic research, may have implications                 
              for control of pest ant species, which are notoriously                         
              polydomous.
