Title       : Radiocarbon Dating of Collagen-degraded Bone: The Use of Ostecalcin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1991   
File        : a9119958

Award Number: 9119958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19950              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. E. Taylor RETAYLOR@citrus.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Taylor and his colleagues will conduct exploratory research                
              to determine the feasibility of using osteocalcin to radiocarbon               
              date bone. The project consists of three parts. First osteocalcin              
              will be extracted from sample bone and its purity determined                   
              through analysis of amounts of Gla and Hyp present. Secondly                   
              osteocalcin will be extracted from bone with known age of greater              
              than 100,000 years and then radiocarbon dated. One would expect                
              that radioactive activity would not exceed background levels.                  
              Finally osteocalcin will be extracted from degraded bone which                 
              derives from Clovis age sites (ca. 10,000 years old). This also                
              will be radiocarbon dated and the accuracy of the results                      
              determined.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Most of the organic fraction of bone consists of collagen and                  
              many experiments have shown that if this collagen is not                       
              seriously degraded by post depositional processes it can yield                 
              accurate radiocarbon ages. However it is also clear that degraded              
              collagen often given anomalous results. Osteocalcin is a non-                  
              collagen organic material which is also present in bone and                    
              preliminary results lead Taylor and his colleagues to believe                  
              that it may provide accurate dates for degraded bone. This                     
              preliminary exploratory project will serve to evaluate this                    
              approach and hopefully provide the basis for more large scale                  
              work.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important not only for archaeologists but other               
              scientists who wish to date the past. Bone is often the only                   
              organic material preserved in archaeological sites and other                   
              prehistoric contexts. While it is sometimes datable, often it is               
              too chemically altered to give good results. The technique                     
              developed here may remedy this problem.
