Title       : Molecular Phylogenetic Studies of Anaerobic Microbial Community Population
               Structure and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9119879

Award Number: 9119879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William S. Armbruster                   
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Stahl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
                   The governing position of microorganisms in biogeochemical                
              cycles has long been appreciated, yet the ecology of the                       
              contributing natural microbial populations remains poorly                      
              resolved.                                                                      
              This is principally a consequence of the technical and historical              
                                                                                             
              limitations of pure culture isolation and phenotypic                           
              classification.  However, the advent of molecular systematics and              
                                                                                             
              newer techniques of molecular biology and recombinant DNA have                 
              markedly changed the repertoire of tools available to the                      
              microbial                                                                      
              ecologist.  It is now feasible to define microbial communities at              
                                                                                             
              the level of populations and even single cells.  The proposed                  
              research will use and, to a more limited extent, develop                       
              phylogenetically-based molecular techniques to study the                       
              population                                                                     
              structure of complex anaerobic communities.  These studies will                
              emphasize the characterization of methanogenic and sulfate-                    
              reducing bacterial populations.                                                
                   Sulfate-reducing and mentanogenic bacteria comprise                       
              anaerobic                                                                      
              populations which perform the terminal mineralization of organic               
                                                                                             
              matter within the microbial communities of aquatic sediments and               
                                                                                             
              other anaerobic settings.  They are generally considered to be in              
                                                                                             
              competition for substrates, the outcome of which is dependent                  
              upon                                                                           
              the availability of sulfate as the electron acceptor.                          
              Comparative                                                                    
              16s rRNA sequencing will provide the framework for developing and              
                                                                                             
              applying analytical molecular techniques to determine the                      
              population structure of each functional group in different                     
              communities.  The molecular techniques will include:  1)                       
              Selective                                                                      
              PCR amplification, cloning and sequencing of 16s rRNA genes, and               
                                                                                             
              2) Phylongentically-based hybridization probes.  Differences (and              
                                                                                             
              similarities) in population structure within these communities                 
              will                                                                           
              be evaluated in relationship to community activity  (i.e. sulfate              
                                                                                             
              reduction, methanogenesis or acetate catabolism).
