Title       : Metabolic Organization in Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1994      
File        : a9119151

Award Number: 9119151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to characterize the structure,            
              assembly and inter-relationships of the feedback sensitive enzymes             
              of arginine biosynthesis in Neurospora crassa.  The first seven                
              biosynthetic enzymes, including the feedback-sensitive enzymes,                
              acetylglutamate synthase and acetylglutamate kinase, are localized             
              in the mitochondria.  The structural and functional relationships              
              between acetylglutamate synthase, acetylglutamate kinase and                   
              acetylglutamyl-phosphate reductase will be investigated to evaluate            
              various models for coordination of feedback inhibition, enzyme                 
              synthesis and assembly.  The leader sequences and sequences                    
              involved in processing the polyprotein precursor of acetylglutamate            
              kinase and acetylglutamyl-phosphate reductase will be identified.              
              A molecular analysis will be performed to investigate the                      
              biological role and evolutionary origin of this complex gene                   
              organization.  The arg-14 gene will be cloned and sequenced to                 
              confirm (or confound) its identiy as a structural gene.  Genetic               
              and biochemical analyses will be performed to ascertain the role(s)            
              of acetylglutamate kinase in synthesis, processing, assembly and               
              functioning of acetylglutamate synthase.  The specificity,                     
              kinetics, energetics, and regulation of metabolite trafficking and             
              the possible relationships between mitochondrial, plasma and                   
              vacuolar membrane transport systems will be investigated.  The                 
              components of the transport systems will be identified by                      
              conventional biochemical methods or by labelling with photolabile              
              amino acid derivatives.  Attempts will be made to isolate and                  
              characterize mutations affecting their function.  The results will             
              be of signifcance in understanding metabolic regulation and the                
              assembly of mitochondria (and other organelles) in eukaryotic                  
              cells.
