Title       : The Mechanism of Milk-Fat Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9119264

Award Number: 9119264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian H. Mather   (Principal Investigator current)
              John O. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Wall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lucinda J. Jack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony V. Capuco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal addresses the mechanism, at the molecular level,              
              underlying the secretion of milk-fat droplets from mammary                     
              epithelial cells during lactation.  Fat droplets assembled in the              
              cytoplasm are released from the surface of secretory cells coated              
              with an outer layer of membrane.  This layer gives rise to the fat-            
              globule membrane (FGM) on the surface of fat droplets in milk.  The            
              proposed experiments will test the hypothesis that butyrophilin,               
              the major protein of FGM, functions as a specific receptor for                 
              cytoplasmic fat droplets, and that the budding of fat droplets from            
              the apical surface occurs through the progressive cross-linking of             
              butyrophilin molecules to each other and to other FGM proteins via             
              disulfide bonds.  It will be determined if butyrophilin is enriched            
              in the FGM relative to the apical plasma membrane and becomes                  
              cross-linked by disulfide bonds in the cytoplasmic domain during               
              formation of FGM.  The butyrophilin gene will be inserted into                 
              cells in culture, and into mice, to see whether butyrophilin                   
              associates with fat droplets in cells other than mammary secretory             
              cells.  Butyrophilin gene expression will be eliminated in                     
              transgenic mice to test whether milk-fat secretion is inhibited in             
              lactating animals.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Exocrine secretion (cellular secretion which proceeds via                      
              exocytosis of secretory content) has become an extremely well                  
              studied aspect of cell biology, and tremendous breakthroughs in our            
              understanding of exocytotic secretion have been and continue to                
              take place.  In contrast, apocrine secretion (secretion which                  
              proceeds by the "budding off" of apical cytoplasmic content), as               
              typified by milk fat globule secretion, has received relatively                
              little attention in recent years.  This proposal promises to                   
              increase our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in             
              milk fat secretion.  In addition to contributing to fundamental                
              knowledge of cellular processes, a better understanding of milk fat            
              secretion will have great significance for potential                           
              biotechnological applications, such as the use of transgenic bovine            
              milk as a source of commercially useful membrane proteins.
