Title       : RUI: Morphology and Evolution of the Pectoral Complex in Catfishes (Teleostei:
               Siluriformes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9119705

Award Number: 9119705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Bornbusch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   This study proposes an evolutionary analysis of the morphology            
              of the pectoral fin and related skeletal and muscular elements                 
              (henceforth referred to as the pectoral complex) in catfishes.  The            
              pectoral complex exhibits remarkable diversity in catfishes, with              
              regard to both structure and function.,  However, there is lacking             
              a comprehensive survey of this character-rich complex in the group.            
              This scarcity of information is particularly acute for the                     
              musculature of the pectoral complex.  The goals of this study are:             
              (1) to survey the pectoral complex in catfishes to define the                  
              extent of its structural diversity; (2) to determine the extent to             
              which evolutionary modifications of elements within the complex are            
              correlated to each other and to modifications in pectoral fin                  
              function; (3) to determine the significance of pectoral complex                
              characters for inferring evolutionary relationships of the 35                  
              extant and fossil catfish families.                                            
                                                                                             
                   The results of this study will be used to develop hypotheses              
              of the structural evolution of the catfish pectoral complex that               
              can guide quantitative/experimental investigations.  This study                
              will generate hypotheses of catfish relationships that can be                  
              combined with or tested by information from other                              
              anatomical/functional complexes.  This study will also contribute              
              to a better understanding of how the diversification of catfishes              
              has been related to earth history.  Inasmuch as catfishes                      
              constitute approximately 30% of all primary freshwater fishes, this            
              work will assist in unravelling the complex evolutionary history               
              of the world's freshwater fish faunas - a significant component of             
              aquatic biological diversity.
