Title       : Molecular Cloning of Phycobilisome Polypeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9119062

Award Number: 9119062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Troxler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gwynneth D. Offner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A major question in plant biology concerns the role of light in                
              regulation of chloroplast gene expression and the mechanisms for               
              positive and negative control of chloroplast genes are incompletely            
              understood.  The unicellular rhodophyte, Cyanidium caldarium, has              
              a number of properties which make it a good system for                         
              investigating photoregulated chloroplast genes.  The light                     
              harvesting antenna in this organism is comprised of phycobilisomes,            
              which are macromolecular assemblies containing allophycocyanin,                
              phycocyanin and several linker polypeptides.  Cells grown in the               
              dark contain a small etioplast which develops into a large                     
              chloroplast in the light.  This is accompanied by 50 fold increases            
              in the levels of mRNAs for apc, cpc, and other chloroplast genes,              
              such as psaA, psbA and rbcL.  Turnover rates of chloroplast                    
              photogenes will be determined in dark and light to determine                   
              whether accumulation of transcripts in light results from increased            
              transcription activity, changes in mRNA stability, or both.  In                
              addition, heme promotes accumulation of transcripts for certain                
              chloroplast photogenes in the dark and mechanisms underlying this              
              process will be investigated (Aim 1).  Experiments will be                     
              performed to determine whether genes for linker polypeptides are               
              photoregulated and whether levels of transcripts of these genes are            
              modulated by heme (Aim 2).  Genes for allophycocyanin and                      
              phycocyanin will be cloned and sequenced in order to identify                  
              possible light- and heme-responsive regulatory elements (Aim 3).               
              A homologous in vitro transcription system will be developed to                
              investigate factors involved in regulation of chloroplast                      
              photogenes.
