Title       : Collaborative Research: Trophic Structure and the Stoichiometry of Nitrogen and
               Phosphorus in the Pelagic Food Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9119781

Award Number: 9119781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Sterner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Chrzanowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Ecologists are increasingly realizing that patterns of                    
              storage and processing of energy and chemical elements in                      
              ecosystems are strongly influenced by the composition of the                   
              ecological communities present in the ecosystem.  In lakes, the                
              abundance of "top predators" (i.e. fish-eating fish species like               
              bass) can have strong effects on all levels of the system,                     
              including the abundance and productivity of plant producers and                
              the cycling of chemical elements.  This occurs because predatory               
              fish consume plankton-feeding fish, like minnows, which in turn                
              influence herbivorous consumers (zooplankton).  Finally,                       
              zooplankton both regulate the abundance of plant producers                     
              (phytoplankton) and decomposers (bacteria) and recycle                         
              nutrients.  This project focusses on the effects of food web                   
              structure on the relative availability of nutrient elements                    
              critical for microbial growth (nitrogen and phosphorus).  It                   
              tests the predictions of a recently-developed,                                 
              physiologically-based theory designed to understand how different              
              zooplankton species regenerate nitrogen and phosphorus present in              
              their food.  By altering the dynamics of these herbivorous                     
              zooplankton, fish predation can therefore influence the cycling                
              of nitrogen and phosphorus.  Based at the Experimental Lakes Area              
              in Canada, the main research approaches will in involve                        
              experimental manipulations of nutrients and zooplankton in large               
              enclosures in lakes as well as whole-lake manipulations of                     
              food-web structure (via introduction of pike to two lakes which                
              lack such a fish-eating species).  THese studies have direct                   
              application to understanding the processes controlling elemental               
              cycling in ecosystems; such processes play a critical role in                  
              various areas of direct societal, including global climate                     
              change, the dynamics of contaminants in the environment, and                   
              degradation of water supplies.
