Title       : The Biomechanics of Bat Flight: Skeletal Architecture and Functional Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9119413

Award Number: 9119413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Fray                               
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190447             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon M. Swartz sharon_swartz@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Flight is a truly distinctive locomotor mode:  it makes extreme                
              demands on an organism's morphology and physiology, and produces               
              profound ecological and behavioral consequences.  In the hundreds              
              of millions of years that vertebrates have inhabited the earth,                
              only three lineages have evolved the capability of sustained                   
              flight:  the extinct pterosaurs among reptiles; the birds; and                 
              within mammals, the (Order Chiroptera).  Perhaps because of the                
              ecological opportunities available to nocturnal flying animals, the            
              success of bats has been extraordinary by any measure.  Today, bats            
              are more abundant than any other mammalian order in number of                  
              individuals and are second only to the rodents in number of                    
              species, with over 900 species of living bats described.                       
              Furthermore, bats are more widely distributed than any other                   
              mammals except humans and cetaceans (whales and porpoises).  Most              
              authors have attributed the tremendous evolutionary radiation of               
              bats to the key adaptive innovation of powered flight, even while              
              our understanding of this evolutionary transformation has remained             
              rudimentary.  Bats fly using wings that are clearly derived from               
              successive modifications of the primitive mammalian limb design,               
              retaining the basic topological interrelationship of forelimb                  
              skeletal elements even while certain aspects of the morphology of              
              the bony elements and the surrounding soft tissues have been                   
              greatly altered.  In particular, changes have occurred in the                  
              proportions and shape of the limb skeleton; the geometry and                   
              mobility of the forelimb joints; the attachment points, internal               
              architecture, and physiological capabilities of muscle tissue; and             
              the distribution of mass within the body.  We have yet to explore              
              how the wing skeleton functions during flight or the nature of the             
              bony material in wings.  This project will test the hypothesis that            
              skeletal composition and limb bone architecture in bats relate                 
              directly to the strenuous mechanical demands placed on the wing                
              skeleton during flight.  We will explore the possibility that the              
              mineral content and basic properties of bat wing bones differ                  
              significantly from other mammals, and determine the stress flight              
              places on wing bones during flight.  This case study will be an                
              important test of the general hypothesis that the structural design            
              of limbs in vertebrates is determined by the functional                        
              requirements of locomotion.
