Title       : XVII International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS)
               Congress, Washington, D.C., August 1992.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1993 
File        : a9119009

Award Number: 9119009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38440              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. French   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Society for Photo
	      5410 Grosvenor Lane
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Photogrammetry, remote sensing, and geographical information              
              systems have become increasingly important in the conduct of                   
              research in recent decades.  The quadrennial congresses of the                 
              International Society for Photogrammetry and remote Sensing have               
              traditionally served as venues for the presentation of the latest              
              research on and with these methodologies.  This international                  
              gathering of scholars permits scientists and practitioners the                 
              opportunity to see, hear, and discuss the most recent                          
              advancements in research employing photogrammertric techniques,                
              data from remote sensing satellites, and geographical information              
              systems.  The 17th Congress of the ISPRS will be held in                       
              Washington, D.C. in August of 1992, and it will provide American               
              scientists with the opportunity to meet and converse with other                
              scientists from throughout the world on matters of mutual                      
              scientific interest.  This award provides support for the                      
              congress by assisting in the distribution and publication of                   
              proceedings which will be distributed widely, and by providing a               
              vehicle for other federal agencies to support the congress                     
              through interagency funds transfers as supplements to the award.               
                   By providing a partial subsidy for the congress, the costs                
              of disseminating the congress's proceedings will be reduced.                   
              This will make the proceedings more widely available.                          
              Additionally, NSF will be in a position to further assist the                  
              congress through its ability to supplement the award with funds                
              provided by other federal agencies.
