Title       : Nanocrystalline Materials Prepared by Spark Erosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9119005

Award Number: 9119005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ami E. Berkowitz aberk@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Brian Maple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Andre Meyers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1492      EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project on nanocrystalline materials has three                            
              primary objectives.  First, the spark erosion                                  
              technique for producing nanoparticles of a very                                
              wide range of materials will be investigated and                               
              optimized for maximum yield of the desired particle                            
              sizes and compositions.  Second, a variety of                                  
              nanoparticle systems representing superconducting,                             
              magnetic and structural properties will be                                     
              extensively characterized.  Third, the consolidation                           
              of the nanoparticles into macroscopic samples                                  
              retaining the unusual properties of the precursors,                            
              utilizing dynamic extrusion and shock consolidation                            
              as well as conventional processing methods, will be                            
              implemented.  Using liquid dielectics, the spark                               
              erosion technique has been shown to yield high                                 
              purity particles of metals, alloys, oxides, carbides,                          
              and semiconductors in sizes from nanometers to                                 
              micrometers at significant production rates.  Sparks                           
              erosion may be carried out also in ultrapure gases.                            
              This approach increases the performance of this                                
              method in the synthesis, treatment and subsequent                              
              handling of nanoparticles.  The characterization of                            
              various types of nanoparticles produced will involve                           
              diffraction (x-ray, electron, neutron), high resolution                        
              TEM, surface analysis, as well as methods                                      
              particularly suited to specific systems such as                                
              optical and Mossbauer spectroscopy, transport                                  
              measurements and magnetic properties.                                          
                                                                                             
              Research is planned to demonstrate and extend the                              
              capabilities of the spark erosion method to produce                            
              economically significant quantities of various types                           
              of nanoparticles, as well as to investigate some of                            
              the unique properties of these systems in                                      
              particulate and consolidated form.
