Title       : Mechanism of Paternal X Chromosome Inactivation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9204466

Award Number: 9204466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith S. Sam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The long term objective is to understand the molecular mechanism of            
              imprinting, the marking of chromosomes as being of maternal or                 
              paternal origin.  The study of imprinting should help answer basic             
              questions about inheritance and gene regulation during development.            
              I propose to examine the feasibility of using embryonic stem (ES)              
              cells undergoing X chromosome inactivation as a model system for               
              imprinting.  ES cells, derived from mouse embryos, can grow in                 
              tissue culture, and by simple changes in growth conditions, the                
              cells can also be induced to undergo differentiation in vitro.  ES             
              cells are known to form two layers as they differentiate into                  
              embryoid bodies, an endoderm-like outer layer, and an ectoderm-like            
              inner layer.  I propose to use ES lines which are heterozygous for             
              a number of X-linked genes, and an allele-specific assay for                   
              specific RNAs to characterize X-inactivation in these cells.  I                
              propose  1) to characterize X-inactivation in the inner ectoderm               
              layer and the endoderm layer, 2) to investigate large scale methods            
              of separating the two layers for biochemical analysis, and 3) to               
              analyze whether DNA methylation patterns found in mouse embryos are            
              preserved in ES cells.  In addition, I propose to study the                    
              distribution of a transcript, termed Xist, recently discovered to              
              be synthesized only from the inactive X chromosome.  I propose to              
              use in situ hybridization and PCR-based assays to learn more about             
              the role of Xist in cases where the paternal X chromosome is                   
              preferentially inactivated.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The mystery of how a chromosome is marked as being either from the             
              mother or the father should begin to be solved by the development              
              of this system and the results of these experiments.
