Title       : Computer-Support for Collaborative Writing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9204861

Award Number: 9204861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1009661            (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Morris james.morris@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Kaufer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravinder Chandok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Neuwirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to continue development of a "work in              
              preparation" (PREP) editor to study collaborative writing                      
              relationships.  The proposed work builds on previous work that                 
              resulted in design of a prototype editor that supports some                    
              important cognitive needs of social Interaction such as (1) the                
              recognition of individual contributions to a collaboration and (2)             
              the detection of change from one version to another.  While the                
              project continues to address further issues in supporting the                  
              cognitive needs of writers working together, the project also                  
              begins to work on supporting the social needs of writing                       
              groups,needs such as flexible sharing of partial products and                  
              managing parts of the writing task.  For example, to support                   
              flexible sharing of partial products, the project defines a set of             
              parameters that will allow users to control what they exchange                 
              (character, paragraph, column, document), when they exchange it                
              (automatically, upon request) and the speed of exchange.  The work             
              on this front makes a theoretical and practical contribution to                
              computer science.  The work on supporting the cognitive needs of               
              collaborative writers leads to embedding in text and graphic                   
              editors more general, coherent an consistent models for                        
              annotations.  The work on supporting the social needs of                       
              collaborative writings groups leads to the development of new                  
              protocols for collaborative documents, modeled as distributed,                 
              disconnectable databases.
