Title       : Developing Adsorptive Protein Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9204436

Award Number: 9204436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ed N. Lightfoot lightfoot@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thatcher W. Root  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9181,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is an experimental study of adsorption and                       
              diffusion of proteins within the interstitial spaces of a                      
              chromatographic resin.  The primary focus of this study is the                 
              measurement of the diffusion coefficients and adsorption rate                  
              constants in resins by an NMR technique.  This technique was                   
              first pioneered by the PIs using the protein hen egg white                     
              lysozyme.  This enzyme was labelled with a fluorine spin                       
              label, dissolved in a medium without adsorbing boundaries, and                 
              subject to an rf pulse.  Equations are written for the                         
              evolution of the transverse and longitudinal magnetization                     
              imparted by the pulse.  From these equations, the magnitudes                   
              of the refocussable magnetization can be obtained as a                         
              function of the tracer diffusion coefficient; comparisons with                 
              the measured values of the magnetization allows for the                        
              computation of the diffusion coefficient.  The proposal                        
              presents a novel idea for the measurement of adsorption.  The                  
              PIs argue that when the decay rate of the transverse                           
              magnetization of the protein in the fluid is much smaller than                 
              that for the protein on the surface, and the characteristic                    
              time for adsorption is much longer than the time for                           
              relaxation of the transverse magnetization of adsorbed                         
              species, the equation which governs the refocussable                           
              magnetization is identical to that for relaxation in a                         
              nonadsorbing medium, with adsorption renormalizing a                           
              coefficient.  They suggest first using this technique to                       
              obtain the diffusion coefficient, and then using a simulated                   
              echo, in which longitudinal relaxation governs much of the                     
              response, to measure the adsorption coefficient.  Adsorption                   
              is not lumped in the dynamic equations for the longitudinal                    
              decay because the scale for longitudinal relaxation decay on                   
              the surface is of the order of that in the bulk.  The proposed                 
              research will examine experimentally adsorption and diffusion                  
              in new adsorbent materials, particularly size excluded resins                  
              with small pores in order to determine the effects of hindered                 
              diffusion, and then in ion exchange, hydrophobic interaction                   
              and reversed phase systems.  These materials will be studied                   
              with a view towards end-use applications in perfusion                          
              chromatography.                                                                
                                                                                             
              In a second part of the study, protein molecules will be                       
              tagged with paramagnetic ions by means of chelators in order                   
              to render the aqueous protons dependent on the local protein                   
              concentration.  The PIs intend to calibrate this effect, and                   
              use it to measure concentration profiles in the interstitial                   
              space.  In a third and final part of the study, modeling                       
              efforts will be directed at prediction of diffusion and                        
              adsorption including the effects of pore size distribution,                    
              adsorption kinetics, and high loading.  Separate theoretical                   
              efforts will focus on instabilities at miscible displacement                   
              fronts.
