Title       : Dissertation Research: Pregnancy Wastage and Ovarian Function in a Settled
               Turkana Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9204617

Award Number: 9204617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. DeLuca  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a proposal to study pregnancy loss or miscarriages in a                
              population of previously nomadic, but now settled, Turkana women               
              from the semi-arid savanna of northwest Kenya.  Studies of                     
              Turkana nomadic herders and their settled counterparts in this                 
              region have been conducted by a team of biological and social                  
              anthropologists and ecologists for more than a decade.                         
              Considerable time-depth information has been accumulated on the                
              relations of these people, their health, their social behavior,                
              and their environment.  The current research, dealing with                     
              mothers' health and reproduction, has suggested that settled                   
              Turkana women have a higher pregnancy rate yet fewer live births               
              than nomadic women.  As a result, the settled women are thought                
              to have an unusually high rate of miscarriages.  The work to be                
              done in this current study will sample 180 settled Turkana women               
              who will be followed throughout their pregnancies to detect early              
              and later miscarriages.  Pregnancies and miscarriages will be                  
              determined by hormone analysis of urine samples (pregnancy kits).              
              The results of the research will:  (1) contribute to our general               
              knowledge of reproduction, as well as to knowledge of those                    
              factors that influence human fertility in a harsh environment                  
              with limited resources, and (2) provide information on the                     
              effects of settlement of nomads on their fertility.
