Title       : Nucleolin Function in Amphibian Oocyte Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9204796

Award Number: 9204796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301255             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. DiMario pdimari@unixl.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 The objective of this project is to characterize the functions              
              of nucleolin, a nucleolar specific protein.  Although nucleolin is             
              thought to bind pre-ribosomal RNA, its actual function in                      
              processing nascent ribosomal RNA into 18S, 5.8S, and 28S ribosomal             
              RNA remains unknown.  Xenopus nucleolin consists of unique modules             
              with distinct functional characteristics; the amino terminal third             
              contains several alternating acidic and basic domains, while the               
              carboxyl terminal two-thirds contains four RNA-binding domains.                
              Xenopus oocytes will be injected with in vitro synthesized                     
              transcripts that encode either epitope-tagged full length Xenopus              
              nucleolin or epitope-tagged nucleolin truncation peptides;                     
              subsequent immunolocalization of epitope-tagged nucleolin                      
              truncations to either the ribonucleoprotein matrices of lampbrush              
              chromosome loops or subregions of multiple nucleoli will strongly              
              indicate functional associations.  Nucleolin's macromolecular                  
              associations within an established Xenopus pre-rRNA processing                 
              extract will be determined by immunoprecipitating nucleolin-                   
              containing ribonucleoprotein complexes from the extract.                       
              Associations with other nucleolar proteins or with nucleolar-                  
              specific small nuclear RNAs will expand our understanding of                   
              nucleolin function.  Immunodepletion of nucleolin from the                     
              processing extract will also test the functional significance of               
              nucleolin in the initial pre-RRNA processing reaction.  These                  
              studies, which are at the interface of cellular and molecular                  
              biochemistry, will advance our fundamental knowledge of the                    
              function of the nucleus of the eukaryotic cell.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              In eukaryotic cells, most of the genetic material is sequestered in            
              the nucleus of the cell, and it is in the nucleus that the DNA is              
              both replicated and transcribed into RNA, which in turn is                     
              transported out of the nucleus to function in the biosynthesis of              
              proteins.  Three different kinds of RNA function directly in                   
              protein biosynthesis in the cytoplasm:  messenger RNAs, which                  
              contain the "codes" for the specific amino acid sequences of the               
              nascent proteins; transfer RNAs, which are the "decoders" that                 
              supply the correct amino acids in the correct sequence; and                    
              ribosomal RNAs, which are structural components of the ribosomes,              
              the machines which "sew" the amino acids together.  While messenger            
              RNA sequences are scattered throughout the DNA of the nucleus, the             
              genes coding for ribosomal RNAs are grouped together in a                      
              microscopically-definable structural region of the nucleus called              
              the nucleolus.  The nucleolus contains, in addition to the                     
              ribosomal genes, a number of nucleolar-specific proteins which are             
              presumed to be involved in either transcription or assembly of                 
              ribosomal RNAs, but for which specific functions have not yet been             
              determined.  In this project, the goal is to determine the function            
              of one specific nucleolar protein, called nucleolin.  This work                
              will advance the understanding of a fundamental process of                     
              eukaryotic cells.
