Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Multi-Dimensional Dilation Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9204514

Award Number: 9204514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   Scaling equations form a class of functional equations                    
              arising in a wide variety of applications including wavelets,                  
              sub-division schemes for computer generation of curves and                     
              surfaces and iterated function systems, the fundamental tools of               
              fractal geometry.  This project continues mathematical research                
              on the representation of solutions to scaling equations (scaling               
              functions) in terms of infinite matrix product expansions.  At                 
              the present time, the convergence of the product is dependent on               
              a contractivity assumption.  The terms of the infinite product                 
              are chosen from a finite set of matrices and combined in a                     
              certain deterministic manner.  That all possible finite products               
              appear lead to investigations into bounded semi-groups of                      
              matrices.  Work will be done investigating weaker assumptions                  
              involving bounded semi-groups and establishing weaker                          
              contractivity conditions on the corresponding products in terms                
              of the Lyapunov exponent.  A second goal of this project is that               
              of using infinite matrix product expansions to establish iterated              
              function system algorithms for the construction of scaling                     
              functions and to analyze their regularity and dimensionality.                  
              The work will concentrate primarily in the multi-dimensional                   
              setting where the most important applications lie.                             
                   At the heart of wavelet theory is the simultaneous local                  
              decomposition of functions in space and frequency.  Applications               
              of this goal abound in mathematical analysis, signal processing,               
              statistics and data compression.  In combining the underlying                  
              principles with that of iterated function systems, this work                   
              leads naturally to important techniques for compression and                    
              reconstruction of television and other communication signals.
