Title       : Exploratory Investigations into the Origins and Evolution of Food Production in
               Southwestern Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1992  
File        : a9204890

Award Number: 9204890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Steven Brandt will conduct archaeological survey and                       
              excavation in the Gamu-Gofa Highlands region of Southwestern                   
              Ethiopia.  His goal is to understand how ensete (Ensete                        
              ventricosum) or "false banana" was domesticated and incorporated               
              into Ethiopian subsistence practices.  He will conduct two months              
              of fieldwork in this area which is both archaeologically unknown               
              and in the heart of the present region of ensete use.  He will                 
              locate promising areas on the basis of both local interview and                
              analysis of areal photographs and satellite imagery.  In                       
              particular, he will focus on caves and rock shelters because the               
              potential for locating stratified deposits is greatest there.                  
              Limited test excavations will be conducted and a basic cultural                
              sequence established.  With this data it will then be possible to              
              plan longer term field research.                                               
                                                                                             
              While the archaeology of the Ethiopian highlands is poorly known,              
              modern botanic data suggest that this region served as point of                
              origin for many widely used African domesticates.  Ensete is a                 
              large, fibrous, tree-like monocot which closely resembles a                    
              banana.  Unlike the banana, however, the fruits are inedible and               
              the main sources of food are the roots, pseudo-stems and left-                 
              stems.  Although wild species of ensete are distributed                        
              throughout much of central, eastern and southern Africa,                       
              evidently it is only in Ethiopia that domesticated varieties are               
              cultivated. Ensete is either baked or made into porridge and is                
              eaten by about one fifth of Ethiopia's estimated 10,000,000                    
              people. Various parts of the plant are also used for fodder, fuel              
              and packing material.  Almost nothing is known about the                       
              development of ensente use and Dr. Brandt's research should                    
              provide needed basic data.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  It will provide                
              insight into the processes which led to the original                           
              domestication of plants and animals.  Ethiopia is prone to                     
              drought and human starvation and hopefully greater understanding               
              of indigenous farming techniques which have stood the test of                  
              time) may provide new ways to attack this problem.  This short-                
              term exploratory project should lay the groundwork to later more               
              intensive research.
