Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI Uniqueness of Multiple Trigonometric Series and
               Symmetric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9204325

Award Number: 9204325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny C. Rinne drinne@mail.csusb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher F. Freiling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues collaborative research on                          
              mathematical questions concerning multiple trigonometric series.               
              The starting point of the work rests with the 1870 result of G.                
              Cantor who showed that at most one trigonometric series can                    
              converge to a given function.  This is a different question from               
              that of determining whether a given series converges.  It falls                
              into the category of what is known as a uniqueness question.  A                
              longstanding problem has been the uniqueness question for                      
              multiple trigonometric series.  There are many more obstacles to               
              this question arising from the multiple methods of summation                   
              available, which do not show up in the one variable case.  The                 
              investigators have determined that the uniqueness is valid in the              
              case of rectangular summation.  Work will now be done in carrying              
              over newly developed techniques to investigate other summation                 
              methods such as iterated or spherical convergence.  In addition,               
              further studies will be carried out on questions of multiple                   
              uniqueness and the problem of determining when a trigonometric                 
              series (in several variables) is a Fourier series.                             
                   Trigonometric series form the backbone of the modern theory               
              of harmonic analysis.  They play a ubiquitous role in the study                
              of analytic problems ranging from pure number theory to the                    
              solution of partial differential equations of physics.  Recent                 
              results on the uniqueness question has opened up a new avenue of               
              research possibilities which have essentially been dormant for                 
              decades.
