Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Low-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9204331

Award Number: 9204331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Mosher mosher@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Oertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The study of 3-manifolds is often enriched by imposing extra              
              structure on the manifold:  geometric structure such as a                      
              Riemannian metric of negative curvature, or topological-dynamical              
              structure such as a flow or lamination.  The two investigators                 
              will continue research into 3-manifold supporting laminations and              
              pseudo-Anosov flows.  They will also undertake new research into               
              the structure of 3-manifolds and more general spaces which are                 
              not negatively curved.  In a joint project, Mosher and Oertel                  
              will explore a new technique for analyzing such spaces.  Any such              
              space can be made to support a certain kind of 2-dimensional                   
              measured lamination.  The properties of this lamination will be                
              studied and used in an attempt to shed light on the general                    
              structure of these spaces.  In a separate project, Mosher will                 
              continue a study of Thurston's homology norm for a 3-manifold,                 
              and techniques for computing this norm using pseudo-Anosov flows.              
              He will also pursue a computer study of ends of hyperbolic 3-                  
              manifolds.  In still another separate project, Oertel will                     
              continue research into a class of 3-manifolds called laminated                 
              manifolds.  The first goal is to extend methods and theorems from              
              the well-known class of Haken manifolds to the larger class of                 
              laminated manifolds.  The second goal is to show that, in some                 
              sense, "most" 3-manifolds are laminated.                                       
                   It is a surprising fact that, although we live in a three                 
              dimensional space, a so-called 3-manifold, and so are blessed                  
              with a natural intuition about such geometric objects, in the end              
              this does not carry us as far as we might have expected, for                   
              questions which have been settled by algebraic calculations for                
              higher dimensional manifolds still remain baffling in the 3-                   
              dimensional case.  The most famous of these is the celebrated                  
              conjecture of Poincare from around the turn of the century                     
              concerning 3-dimensional spheres, where precisely the original 3-              
              dimensional case is the only one still open.  The investigators                
              are pursuing a variety of questions about 3-dimensional                        
              manifolds, some with slightly strange notions of distance on                   
              them, so-called hyperbolic metrics, but time and time again these              
              questions have been shown to have clear relevance to the case of               
              manifolds with a more familiar notion of distance.
