Title       : Disorder, Chaos and Correlations in Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1994  
File        : a9204480

Award Number: 9204480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick A. Lee palee@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Altshuler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The field of mesoscopic physics has had significant progress during            
              the past few years.  The theoretical progress has been driven by               
              the statistical approach to sample fluctuations in the ensemble of             
              small disordered systems.  As the sizes of the systems are made                
              smaller and smaller, eventually they approach the electron mean                
              free path.  Then the motion of an electron becomes ballistic.  On              
              the other hand, due to the complex geometry, this motion can still             
              be chaotic.  Such a system is similar in many respects to other                
              systems (atomic or nuclear) which display quantum chaos.  For                  
              analytical calculations disordered systems turn out to be simpler              
              than chaotic ballistic ones because of the additional ensemble                 
              averaging.  The idea of this research is to use disordered systems             
              as a laboratory for the investigation of quantum chaos.  In a                  
              diffusive regime we plan to derive relations and develop analytical            
              methods which can be extended to general cases.  Theoretical                   
              studies will also be carried out on problems of persistent currents            
              in isolated rings and the magnetic susceptibility of isolated                  
              metallic grains - problems closely connected to quantum chaos.  We             
              will take into account interactions between electrons since                    
              existing one-electron theories are in substantial disagreement with            
              experiment.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The field of mesoscopic physics is a very current one which deals              
              with basic problems in fundamental physics and yet has important               
              ramifications for microelectronics.  The present research will                 
              theoretically deal with a number of problems in mesoscopic physics.            
              In particular, the research will study the onset of quantum chaos              
              in these systems.  Clearly, besides its fundamental importance, the            
              conditions under which a microelectronic system becomes chaotic, or            
              unstable, is of interest to the computer and communications                    
              industry.
