Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topology of Three-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9204489

Award Number: 9204489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Frohman frohman@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Frohman intends to pursue the study of three-dimensional                  
              manifolds, especially topics associated with Heegaard splittings               
              and minimal surfaces and the representation theory of knot groups              
              and three-manifold groups.  For instance, he is planning to study              
              the finiteness of Heegaard splittings of bounded genus of three-               
              manifolds up to homeomorphism.  Another problem he is pursuing is              
              the construction of functors that are similar to coupled                       
              topological quantum field theories using the intersection                      
              homology of moduli spaces of semistable holomorphic bundles with               
              parabolic structure over a nonsingular algebraic curve.                        
                   Three-dimensional manifolds are very natural objects for                  
              topologists to study, since (ignoring time) we live in a physical              
              world of three dimensions.  Also dimension three is the first                  
              dimension where many types of rich complexity arise.  In fact, it              
              is a notorious and paradoxical fact that some of the difficulties              
              presented by three-dimensional topology disappear again in higher              
              dimensions.  For example, the celebrated Poincare conjecture                   
              about the characterization of the three-dimensional sphere                     
              remains as challenging as when it was first posed about the turn               
              of the century, while the analogous propositions in higher                     
              dimensions have all now been settled.  Frohman is exploring some               
              of these mysteries and sharpening the available tools of the                   
              trade.
