Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1992     
File        : a9204804

Award Number: 9204804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Zhou zhou@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The mathematical research supported by this award continues               
              work on the development of a nonlinear harmonic analysis on                    
              integrable equations in connection with inverse scattering                     
              theory. Central to the project is a steepest decent method for                 
              analyzing the asymptotics of oscillatory Riemann-Hilbert problems              
              of the kind that arise in the theory of integrable nonlinear                   
              equations.  To date the method has been applied to the modified                
              Korteweg-deVries equation and the defocusing nonlinear                         
              Schrodinger equation.                                                          
                   The steepest descent method mentioned above gives long time               
              asymptotics of solutions to Cauchy problems integrable by the                  
              inverse scattering method.  A great deal of work has been done                 
              along the same lines, but much is formal and very little is                    
              rigorous.  This project will first seek to analyze the zero                    
              dispersion limit problems for Korteweg-deVries equations, that                 
              is, to study directly the corresponding oscillatory Riemann-                   
              Hilbert problem.  It is expected that the new method will not                  
              require any spectral assumptions, and that, once worked out, will              
              apply to a broad class of problems.                                            
                   A second line of research will consider Hamiltonians arising              
              as transverse Ising models at the critical transverse magnetic                 
              field.  The corresponding autocorrelation function can be                      
              computed from the solution of the associated Riemann-Hilbert                   
              problem.  Preliminary calculations give results different from                 
              previous formal results of others.  Work will be done to justify               
              these discoveries and to continue work on a class of related                   
              integrable statistical models to compute the large time behavior               
              of the autocorrelation function.
