Title       : The Origin of Badwater in the Edwards Aquifer, Texas: An Integrated Approach to
               Regional Flow Systems in a Carbonate Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9204980

Award Number: 9204980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay L. Banner banner@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research seeks to evaluate the processes responsible for             
              natural saline groundwaters in a regional carbonate aquifer--the               
              Edwards aquifer of Texas.  These waters are present in what is                 
              locally referred to as the badwater zone (salinities of greater                
              than 1000 mg/1).  Despite the environmental importance of this                 
              aquifer and many previous studies here, hypotheses for the origin              
              and evolution of the badwater zone hydrochemical facies remain                 
              numerous and speculative.  This research will integrate a range of             
              conventional and newly developed analytical techniques in a                    
              hydrological and geochemical study of the Edwards aquifer both                 
              along and normal to the boundary between the badwater and                      
              freshwater zones.  The data base will include potentiometric and               
              major-element (rare-earth elements), and stable (H, O, B, S) and               
              radiogenic (Sr, Nd, U and Ra) isotope data that will be acquired               
              on new samples.  This study will also include petrologic and                   
              geochemical analyses of lower Cretaceous carbonate rocks that                  
              constitute the aquifer.  These data will be used in quantitative               
              models that simulate fluid flow, fluid-rock interaction, and fluid             
              mixing within aquifers.  The elemental and isotopic parameters to              
              be studied have a wide range of geochemical behavior, which will               
              be critical for the application of theoretical models to                       
              constraining the processes involved in the origin of each of five              
              distinct hydrochemical facies.  This study will bear on our                    
              understanding of regional flow systems in the Gulf of Mexico                   
              sedimentary basin, and will have broader implications for the                  
              chemical and structural controls on the development of regional                
              carbonate aquifers and the evolution of saline groundwaters.
