Title       : Continuing Operation of a Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) to
               Investigate Propogating Ionospheric Current Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9204520

Award Number: 9204520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370859             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robert Clauer rclauer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eigil Friis-Christensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,5750,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is directed toward the operation of an array of             
              unattended, automatic magnetic data collection platforms on the                
              Greenland ice cap and the reduction, distribution and analysis of              
              these data.  We propose to make the data from the MAGIC array,                 
              after reduction and verification, fully available to those who                 
              request it ?MAGIC = Magnetometer Arrary on the Greenland Ice Cap!.             
              The MAGIC array compliments the magnetic stations on the coast of              
              Greenland for the investigation of small-scale, ionospheric current            
              systems.  Operation of this array in the interior of Greenland                 
              takes advantage of the established logistical support for the                  
              Greenland Ice Sheet Program II (GISP II) at the Greenland summit.              
              Thus, it is possible to establish and maintain these stations for              
              a small cost.  These magnetic stations form a two-dimensional array            
              with station separation of about 150km.  The scientific objective              
              of these magnetic measurements is to investigate small-scale                   
              propagating magnetic disturbances which appear to result from                  
              moving filamentary field-aligned currents interacting with the                 
              ionosphere.  Different classes of these systems have now been                  
              identified and the origin of the field-aligned currents appears to             
              be the magnetospheric boundary layer and magnetopause region.  It              
              is particularly important to have a dense two-dimensional array in             
              order to resolve the motion and structural evolution of these                  
              current systems.  The MAGIC stations in combination with the                   
              existing west coast and east coast Greenland magnetometers and with            
              stations to be deployed in Canada, permit us to observe these                  
              phenomena over a sufficient region as to identify their generation             
              location and resolve their motion and spatial evolution as they                
              propagate tailward.  Further the comparatively high time resolution            
              (15-s data) of the MAGIC and coastal stations will permit                      
              investigations which were limited by the one minute data previously            
              available.  This data and the proposed research is important to                
              understanding the physics of the processes that couple energy and              
              momentum from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere.              
              The proposed research is a collaborative effort between the                    
              University of Michigan, SRI International, and the Danish                      
              Meteorological Institute.
