Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistifcal Theory and Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9204864

Award Number: 9204864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley Efron brad@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The general goal of this project is the development of                    
              statistical theory that is likely to be of direct use to                       
              statistical practitioners.  Specific projects are developed                    
              around the theme of computer-intensive statistical inference.                  
              Special topics include bootstrap, jackknife and related                        
              resampling methods, permutation tests and group theoretic testing              
              procedures, Gibbs sampling and Markov chains.  All these topics                
              concern data mappings of special interest to statisticians.                    
              Historically, permutations were the first such mappings studied.               
              Methods like the bootstrap generalize permutations to wider                    
              classes of statistical problems, at the expense of less                        
              mathematical neatness and greater computational expense.  This                 
              project addresses ways to overcome these obstacles.                            
                   Statistical inference is the science of generalization from               
              observed data, often just a small amount, to the larger                        
              population from which the data were drawn.  The basic principles               
              of statistical inference were laid down before World War II.  The              
              basic theory was built around classical mathematics and the bell-              
              shaped curve.  Computer-intensive methods, developed in the last               
              15 years, aim to extend the range, ease, and plausibility of                   
              statistical arguments.  They substitute specially-developed                    
              computer algorithms of classical mathematical approximations                   
              relating to the bell-shaped curve.  Our research aims to justify               
              these algorithms.  Mathematical and computational arguments are                
              used to show that the algorithms automatically produce the                     
              classical answers when such answers exist, and still give good                 
              answers in the much more common circumstance of problems having                
              no classical solution.
