Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorial Topology and Surface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9204292

Award Number: 9204292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Handel handel@comet.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will work on three projects.  The first is a             
              continuation of work with Mladen Bestvina (U.C.L.A.) on                        
              automorphisms of the free group.  They hope to prove a                         
              classification theorem for subgroups of polynomial growth                      
              automorphisms and thereby complete the proof of the Tits                       
              Alternative for Out(Fn).  Secondly, the investigator hopes to prove            
              that there are no minimal homeomorphisms of the once punctured                 
              plane, which would answer a question of Besicovitch and of Herman.             
              Finally, the investigator, in collaboration with Bruce Kitchens                
              (I.B.M.), will explore the relationship between two natural                    
              definitions of topological entropy for homeomorphisms of non-                  
              compact spaces.                                                                
                   The topology of surfaces is a highly developed subject,                   
              addressing properties which remain invariant when a surface is                 
              stretched or twisted without tearing it, so-called rubber sheet                
              geometry.  The theory of dynamical systems is another highly                   
              developed subject, addressing questions about transformations of a             
              space into itself, such simple things as rotations of spheres, but             
              also far more complicated transformations.  For transformations of             
              surfaces, the topology is intimately involved and says a great deal            
              about what kinds of transformations are possible.  Extracting this             
              information by combining the topology of surfaces with the theory              
              of dynamical systems is a sophisticated endeavor which forms a                 
              large part of this project.
