Title       : A Program of Analysis of the Multiexperiment Data from the Cusp Observatory at
               Svalbard, Norway: A GEM Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9204116

Award Number: 9204116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34451              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              John V. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans C. Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Deehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the continued collection and                
              analysis of multi-instrument data at the Longyearbyen, Svalbard                
              Observatory.  Instrumented with an all-sky camera, a meridian                  
              scanning photometer, riometer, induction and fluxgate                          
              magnetometers, this site is well suited for studies of the cusp                
              and delineation of high latitude magnetospheric boundaries.  The               
              Longyearbyen observatory is unique in the northern hemisphere in               
              lying on the dark side of the terminator at noon during northern               
              winter.  The sky is dark enough to allow optical observation from              
              late October to early February.  The site has been operated                    
              successfully for more than a decade.  Studies of the multi                     
              instrument data helps provide a context for interpretation                     
              unavailable for single instrument measurements.  While the                     
              magnetometers can be used to identify the station location with                
              regard to the major high-latitude current systems, the optical                 
              instruments identify emissions associated with the various                     
              regions near the cusp. As yet, it is not clear what processes the              
              emissions and associated geomagnetic pulsations represent; they                
              may map boundaries or show the processes confined by                           
              magnetospheric boundaries.  The larger question is the goal of                 
              this proposal.  During this winter season, this campaign will                  
              allow us to study large scale features of the cusp region and                  
              their development in time.  Associated with impulsive events at                
              the magnetopause, arcs and waves are detected which require study              
              before a positive identification can be made.  When combined with              
              satellite data, the data suite is sufficient to begin the process              
              of identifying ionospheric signatures of auroral forms associated              
              the the cusp.
