Title       : Diamond Coatings on Cutting Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9204345

Award Number: 9204345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Komanduri ranga@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   For machining many difficult-to-machine materials, such as                
              high silicon aluminum-silicon alloys and composites,                           
              polycrystalline diamond tools made by the high pressure (50 kbars)             
              -- high temperature (1500 C) (HP-HT) process are used.  These tools            
              are expensive because of the high cost of processing and finishing             
              and need exists for an alternate tool material.  The low pressure              
              chemical vapor desposition (CVD) diamond synthesis, in contrast,               
              is relatively simple and inexpensive, thus offering a potential for            
              producing diamond coated cutting tools.                                        
                   The primary goal of this project is to develop the science                
              base for strongly adherent diamond coatings on various cutting tool            
              materials, including, cemented carbide (coated and uncoated) and               
              ceramics (silicon nitride and SiAION) by the four activated CVD                
              diamond synthesis techniques, namely, combustion synthesis,                    
              microwave CVD, hot filament CVD, and laser assisted CVD with                   
              emphasis on the first two.  The conditions for each of the                     
              activated CVD diamond coating processes will be optimized for a                
              given tool material based on good metallurgical coating, its                   
              thickness and morphology.  These tools will be characterized by                
              optical and scanning electron microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy.              
              They will be evaluated in machining different work materials with              
              the cutting speed and length of cut as variables.  Various surface             
              treatments including etching of the surface, different surface                 
              finishing conditions, surface interlayer coatings for the substrate            
              will be considered.  Tool wear mechanisms, tool life, and finish               
              of the work material with diamond coated tools will be compared                
              with that of the uncoated tools and/or polycrystalline diamond                 
              tools.
