Title       : Heme Biosynthesis in the Bradyrhizobium japonicum/Soybean Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9204778

Award Number: 9204778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. O'Brian mrobrian@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Bradyrhizobium japonicum is the bacterial endosymbiont of soybean              
              (Glycine max) that functions as a nitrogen-fixing organelle within             
              cells of a specialized plant organ called a root nodule.  Many                 
              interactions occur between the two symbionts for the initiation,               
              development and maintenance of nodules.  The broad objective of the            
              proposed work is to understand how leguminous plants communicate               
              with their bacterial partners to regulate metabolic processes                  
              essential for symbiosis.  In particular, we are elucidating the                
              interactive events between B. japonicum and soybean that control               
              heme synthesis in root nodules.  Some data support the hypothesis              
              that the heme prosthetic group of the plant nodule protein                     
              leghemoglobin is bacterial in origin, and work from my laboratory              
              indicates that formation of the bacterial heme moeity itself                   
              requires the coordinated effort of both symbionts.  Three                      
              objectives are proposed which address the two aforesaid hypotheses.            
              i) Determine whether the B. japonicum heme synthesis enzyme                    
              ferrochelatase is essential for soybean hemoglobin heme formation              
              using a temperature-sensitive mutant.  ii) Characterize the B.                 
              japonicum uptake mechanism of the heme precursor delta-                        
              aminolevulinic acid (ALA), and ascertain its role in nodule heme               
              synthesis.  Data indicate that bacterial uptake of plant-derived               
              ALA is a key feature of an inter-organismic heme pathway in                    
              nodules.  iii) Construct and characterize a B. japonicum mutant in             
              ALA dehydratase, the second step of the heme synthetic pathway, and            
              study the regulation of the ALA dehydratase gene.  The mutant will             
              allow us to determine exactly which heme synthesis steps in the                
              inter-organismic pathway must be bacterial.
