Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conformal Geometry and Geometric Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9204378

Award Number: 9204378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. David Minda minda@ucbeh.san.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research into problems                
              of complex function theory, concentrating on geometric ideas                   
              which use differential geometric tools.  The common feature in                 
              the investigation of all these problems is the use of conformal                
              metrics, especially the hyperbolic, euclidean and spherical                    
              metrics.  One is interested in obtaining information about one                 
              conformal geometry, say hyperbolic, in terms of another conformal              
              (usually euclidean) geometry or in studying analytic functions                 
              viewed as mappings from one geometry to another.  For instance,                
              from this perspective, Bloch functions are precisely those                     
              analytic functions from hyperbolic to euclidean geometry with                  
              bounded distortion.  Problems of interest include two-point                    
              comparison theorems for euclidean and hyperbolic geometry,                     
              generalized convexity-concavity properties of the hyperbolic                   
              metric, Bloch and linearly invariant functions, quasi-invariant                
              domain constants, and a study of various conformal metrics and                 
              distance functions defined by families of holomorphic or harmonic              
              functions.                                                                     
                   Complex function theory encompasses the study of                          
              differentiable functions of a complex variable and related                     
              classes of functions such as harmonic functions and                            
              quasiconformal mappings.  The subject is highly geometric; many                
              of the problems concern the properties of various sets under                   
              transform by functions from one of the above classes.                          
              Applications of the theory to potential theory and fluid dynamics              
              are standard in engineering circles.
