Title       : A Frequency Domain Fluorescence Lifetime Instrument for the Aladdin Synchrotron
               Light Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1995   
File        : a9204515

Award Number: 9204515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397400             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Mantulin lfd@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Jameson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregorio Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Royer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes the construction of a research  resource at the Aladdin
              Synchrotron, University of Wisconsin-  Madison, dedicated to time-resolved
              fluorescence  spectroscopy of biological systems.  The specific aims are  to
              (1) build a frequency domain fluorometer that exploits  the time structure of
              the Aladdin Synchrotron light source  especially its picosecond resolution and
              broad excitation  wavelength capabilities; (2) establish a preparative 
              biological sample laboratory in conjunction with the  fluorescence facility;
              (3) train students in the principles  of frequency domain methods using
              synchrotron radiation, and  to operate the facility; and (4) conduct core
              research on  the dynamics of biological systems.  To accomplish these  goals,
              we will draw upon our prior experiences (1)  establishment of a synchrotron
              radiation facility at  Frascati (Italy), (2) development of frequency domain 
              fluorescence instrumentation exploiting the harmonic content  of pulsed
              sources, (3) design and construction of a  microwave superheterodyning
              fluorometer and (4)  establishment and operation of an international
              luminescence  center (Laboratory for Fluorescence Dynamics), which  provides
              biological scientists with a state-of-the-art  fluorescence laboratory coupled
              with a functional  biochemistry laboratory.  Fluorescence time-resolved 
              experiments are invaluable in exploring the dynamics of  biological systems
              such as protein and nucleic acid  biopolymers, or cellular organelles.. The
              uniqueness of the  Aladdin Synchrotron source in terms of time resolution, 
              brightness, continuous excitation wavelengths (ultraviolet  and visible), phase
              stability, and pulse-to-pulse amplitude  stability, makes it the best choice in
              the United State for  a synchrotron radiation laboratory.  After the initial 
              construction period, the Fluorescence Synchrotron Radiation  Laboratory will
              become a research resource for the life  sciences community.  Preliminary
              experiments at Aladdin have  fully demonstrated the feas ibility of frequency
              domain  measurements in the multibunch mode and have confirmed our  predictions
              in terms of signal stability and signal  intensity which are crucial
              characteristics for the study of  complex biological systems.
