Title       : Herder-Forager Interactions in an Unstable Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9204577

Award Number: 9204577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40052              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Garth Sampson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Garth Sampson and                 
              his colleagues will conduct archaeological and paleoenvironmental              
              research in the Zeekoe valley region in South Africa. The goal of              
              the work is to examine the relationship between environmental                  
              change and the response of humans who live at a simple                         
              technological level. Potsherds collected in the course of prior                
              archaeological research in the region will be dated by both                    
              thermolumenescence and radiocarbon dating of adhering organic                  
              materials. Changing paleoenvironment will be reconstructed                     
              through the analysis of hyrax dung middens. This latter is a                   
              technique pioneered by Dr. Sampson. Hyrax are small territorial                
              animals who return over generations to favored habitation sites.               
              Resultant dung middens can span centuries and can be dated by                  
              radiocarbon. Because the contained material includes pollen                    
              grains, these latter can be analyzed to provide insight into                   
              changing climatic conditions. With these data Dr. Sampson will be              
              able to correlate environmental cause and human response.                      
                                                                                             
              For many years Dr. Sampson and his collaborators have worked in                
              the Zeekoe valley region. Thousands of sites have been located                 
              and studied and the general chronology and sequence of events                  
              have been established. Over the period from about 600 - 1800 AD                
              this region was most likely inhabited by two groups, one which                 
              subsisted by hunting and gathering and the other by herding sheep              
              and goats. The interactions between the two appear to be complex               
              and changing over time. When European settlers entered the region              
              in the 1800s they encountered only hunters and gatherers there.                
              While the pattern has been established, its cause is unknown and               
              this is the focus of Dr. Sampsons' present work. The Zeekoe is a               
              semiarid region which has undergone significant climatic                       
              fluxuation in historic times and likely in prehistory as well.                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how humans adapt to changing climate and how              
              groups at a simple level of technological development relate to                
              each other in a varying environmental context.
