Title       : Investigation of Evolutionary Processes in Planktonic Foraminifera Using Stable
               Isotopic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9204857

Award Number: 9204857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Kennett kennett@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This study is an investigation of processes of evolution in               
              planktonic foraminifera using stable isotopic analysis.  In the                
              absence of obvious barriers to gene flow such as land masses (e.g.             
              Isthmus of Panama) or major oceanographic boundaries (e.g. Polar               
              Front and Tasman Front), how does evolution proceed in large                   
              pandemic populations in which gene flow is readily maintained over             
              great distances?  How do chronospecies gradually evolve within one             
              biographic province?  Most models predict that evolutionary change             
              in the deep-dwelling planktonic foraminifera occurs through                    
              segregation within the water column during times of well developed             
              depth stratification.  In broader terms, the globorotalid                      
              morphology is believed to have evolved iteratively in association              
              with adaptation to increasing water depths.  However, almost no                
              data have been have been generated to test such hypotheses.                    
                   We will isotopically analyze morphometrically-defined Late                
              Miocene to Recent species of the Globoratalia (Globoconella) clade             
              in sedimentary sequences that form a meridional transect in the                
              southwest Pacific.  A time-series strategy will be employed                    
              focusing upon those stratigraphic intervals in which there is                  
              overlap in the ranges of ancestor and descendant species.  Some of             
              the questions we will address include:  Do ancestor and descendant             
              species exhibit consistent differences in isotopic values,                     
              suggesting vertical or seasonal segregation in the water column?               
               Are there isotopic trends within                                              
              this clade, suggesting progressive habitation of cooler or warmer              
              waters, either vertically or seasonally?  Are the isotopic trends              
              associated with paleoceanographic changes?  Are the isotopic trends            
              associated with specific morphological characters?  Do ancestor and            
              descendant species living in different water masses, some within               
              and some peripheral to the main biogeographic range of the clade,              
              exhibit similar differences in isotopic values and similar                     
              paleoceanographic and morphological associations?  How do the                  
              stable isotopic results from the Globorotalia (Globoconella) clade             
              compare with those from another deep-dwelling planktonic                       
              foraminiferal clade that, in part, exhibits similar morphologic                
              characteristics: - the Globorotalia (Truncorotalia) clade?
