Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Mathematical Models in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9204490

Award Number: 9204490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Waltman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator continues research on applications                       
              of dynamical systems ideas to problems in ecology and                          
              population biology, focussing on the notion of persistence and                 
              models of the chemostat.  The persistence theorem is studied in                
              the context of reaction-diffusion equations and functional                     
              differential equations.                                                        
                   The chemostat is a laboratory apparatus that is used                      
              in ecology to study exploitative competition.  (It is a model of               
              a simple lake.)  It is one place where both the mathematics and                
              the biological experiments are tractable; all the parameters                   
              needed for the equations of the mathematical model are measurable              
              in the laboratory.  The basic model does not allow for the delat               
              between nutrient uptake by the organisms in the chemostat                      
              and reproduction (cell division).  A standard assumption in the                
              model is that the tank is well stirred; hence there are                        
              differences in the amounts of nutrient present in different parts              
              of the tank. To study the effect of a nutrient gradient, another               
              device called the gradostat has been proposed by biologists.  The              
              mathematics of that device is now fairly well understood.                      
              Another way to induce a gradient is to allow the nutrient to                   
              enter the tank at one point and to diffuse along with the                      
              organisms.  The notion of persistence tries to capture the                     
              ecological idea that all components of a model ecosystem survive.              
              Such theorems have proved useful in the context of ordinary                    
              differential equation models; e.g., in the analysis of the                     
              gradostat and of a chemostat with an inhibitor.  The concept has               
              now found its way into the mathematical literature in a general                
              form, in particular for an asymptotically smooth semi-dynamical                
              system.  The aim of this project is to use the full potential of               
              the persistence theorem by applying it in an infinite dimensional              
              context, to reaction-diffusion equations and differential                      
              equations with delays.  If the assumptions about the chemostat                 
              are changed to remove the well-stirred hypothesis and to let the               
              nutrient and the cells move by diffusion or convection, then a                 
              reaction-diffusion equation or a gradostat results.  Delayed                   
              chemostat models have been studied, but no physiological                       
              mechanism has been introduced to account for the delay.  The                   
              obvious mechanism is the cell cycle, the time between nutrient                 
              uptake and cell division.
