Title       : Advancing Power System Identification Methods and Robust Control Strategies for
               Power System Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9204582

Award Number: 9204582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijay Vittal                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Pierre don p@ee.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Hashem Nehrir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In order to fully utilize the transmission capacity of                         
              transmission lines, significant advances need to be                            
              achieved in power system control as applied to the                             
              damping of low-frequency electro-mechanical                                    
              oscillations.  Power system stability characteristics                          
              generally restrict the maximum allowable power                                 
              transfers at thermal limits of the lines.  The stability                       
              characteristics of power systems depend on                                     
              damping devices and damping control strategies                                 
              employed.  While there are many devices that can                               
              be used in power systems to achieve damping, the                               
              strategies that are currently used to control these                            
              devices generally do not provide enough stability                              
              enhancement to enable operation near thermal                                   
              limits.  The development of better damping control                             
              strategies for large power systems is the focus of                             
              this research.  This research concerns two related                             
              areas: 1) improved methods for power system                                    
              identification to aid uncertainty model description;                           
              and 2) robust control methods that include these                               
              uncertainty models to dampen electro-mechanical                                
              power system oscillations.  To improve power                                   
              system damping over a set of operating points,                                 
              methods of system transfer-function identification                             
              are needed which can account for non-zero initial                              
              conditions and noise.  Transfer-function uncertainty                           
              models also need to be generated and included                                  
              appropriately in robust controller design method.                              
              Two main goals of this research  are: 1) to develop                            
              improved methods of identifying system transfer                                
              functions and uncertainty models under conditions                              
              where power system faults result in significant                                
              system changes and where post-fault system                                     
              transfer-function identification must be                                       
              accomplished in the presence of both power system                              
              noise and initial conditions on lightly damped                                 
              modes of oscillation; and 2) to investigate and                                
              extend recent advances in robust multivariable                                 
              control theory to obtain improved power system                                 
              damping controller design method, methods that                                 
              accommodate the transfer functions and uncertainty                             
              models obtained under 1 above.
