Title       : Workshop on USA/German Collaboration in Research & Education: Chemical
               Engineering to be held on April 3, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1992  
File        : a9204150

Award Number: 9204150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph H. Kummler rkummler@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A one day workshop on USA/German Collaboration in Research and                 
              Education:  Chemical Engineering, is proposed to be held in                    
              conjunction with the 1992 Spring meeting of the American                       
              Institute of Chemical Engineers in New Orleans.  The workshop                  
              is in conjunction with a similar workshop proposed by                          
              Professor Fletcher of Texas A&M mechanical engineering.  The                   
              goals of the workshop are to survey existing academic chemical                 
              engineering programs and to catalyze a dialog among members of                 
              the US chemical engineering academic community directed toward                 
              documenting existing mechanisms for US/German student                          
              exchanges in cooperative education and research, while                         
              obtaining input from the involved community regarding                          
              impediments to collaborative German/US exchanges.  The                         
              workshop will initiate an exploration of new methods for                       
              enhancing collaborative projects.  The products to this                        
              workshop and accompanying final report will include:  A                        
              catalog of current US/German interactions; a tabulation of                     
              current successful and ideal models for US/German academic                     
              cooperation; identification of structural impediments and                      
              possible solutions to cooperation; plans for encouragement and                 
              implementation of US/German cooperation.  The report of this                   
              workshop will be widely distributed.                                           
                                                                                             
              It is the intent of the workshop to sensitize participants and                 
              readers of the final report to the international nature of                     
              chemical engineering so that of chemical engineering programs                  
              throughout the United States will be encouraged to participate                 
              in exchange programs to develop the cultural skills necessary                  
              to interact well with German trained engineers throughout the                  
              world.  The German University education and research system                    
              emphasizes close collaboration with industry.  US students and                 
              faculty will gain insight into the German view of engineering                  
              and may be better able to help their US companies to be                        
              competitive in foreign markets.  These students should be able                 
              to work more effectively for US companies overseas, or (in the                 
              US) for German companies with subsidiaries in the US, and feel                 
              equally comfortable in these different environments.
