Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Formal Tolerance and Set-Based Methods in Engineering
               Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9258401

Award Number: 9258401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin L. Wood wood@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9227,9297,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This project focuses on a balance between an academic research            
              program, engineering education, and industrial applications.  In               
              this program, the general problems of engineering design and design            
              for manufacturing will be addressed.  In particular, one part of               
              the research program considers the development of analytical and               
              experimental models for determining the physical surface-structures            
              produced from both material removal processes and solid-freeform               
              fabrication.  The basis for these models is fractal-based                      
              representations, or more generally the Karhunen-Loeve method, which            
              will provide indices for linking manufacturing process variables               
              to design parameters.  While a fractal-based approach is known to              
              be applicable at surface finish scales, surface structures that                
              will be identified in this research are at tolerance scales (e.g.,             
              40-300 microns for journal bearings).  Tolerances usually carry the            
              function of the device.  For example, in a rotating mechanism, the             
              tolerances associated between a shaft and a bearing assembly may               
              be critical, i.e., if the shaft-bearing assembly is misaligned or              
              out-of-tolerance, catastrophic failure of the system will result               
              due to excessive wear and possible seizure.                                    
                   Providing design methods and measures that link manufacturing             
              process variables to the design parameters, performance parameters,            
              and functional requirements of a design is crucial, especially if              
              manufacturing information is to be combined with functional                    
              considerations in the early stages of design.  This research will              
              seek to verify the fractal-based models with experimentation,                  
              represent the results within a formal set-based theory for design,             
              and apply the method to rotating machinery, structures, and                    
              microautomation.  Beyond the fundamental theories of fractal                   
              tolerances and set-based design representations, computational                 
              methods will be developed for linking global geometric information             
              to the design for manufacturing techniques.  The general scope for             
              these computational methods will be a feature-based design system,             
              including the formal representation of spatial relationships.
