Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9258149

Award Number: 9258149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. T. McKinnon jmckinno@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There will be two major thrusts to this program.  First, the                   
              chemical mechanisms of fullerene formation in a sooting flame                  
              will be investigated, with an end-goal of developing an                        
              optimized inexpensive path to fullerene production.  As part                   
              of this activity, a thorough parameter-space search of the                     
              variables important to fullerene formation will be carried                     
              out, with guidance being provided by previous thermodynamic                    
              studies.  Inasmuch as these studies have indicated that                        
              temperatures in excess of  available adiabatic flame                           
              temperatures may be advantageous to fullerene production,                      
              experiments in which additional energy is coupled into the                     
              flames in the form of microwave or radio-frequency radiation                   
              will be carried out.  As part of this study, various possible                  
              mechanisms for fullerene production will be modelled and                       
              tested against data obtained in the experimental part of the                   
              study.  Secondly, the use of an infrared laser system to                       
              continuously monitor efficiency of hazardous waste                             
              incinerators will be studied.  Chemical kinetic modeling                       
              studies of incineration of chlorinated hydrocarbons have                       
              identified intermediates of combustion on whose infrared                       
              transmissions the lasers should be tuned; experiments to                       
              verify this approach to development of an effective continuous                 
              monitoring system will be carried out.                                         
                                                                                             
              Both research projects have important potential applications.                  
              In the first case, development of means for relatively                         
              inexpensive production of fullerenes is important to further                   
              development of potential uses for these materials.  In the                     
              second case, a current deficiency in incineration technology                   
              tending to block use of such methods is lack of an on-line                     
              real-time process monitor which can be incorporated in a                       
              controller scheme to minimize or eliminate escape of toxic                     
              materials during incinerator operation transients resulting                    
              from various causes.
