Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9258580

Award Number: 9258580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Beckman beckman@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9163,9197,9297,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an NSF Young Investigator Award to Eric Beckman to                     
              enable him to explore modifications of polymer processes                       
              and/or products to reduce their adverse effects on the                         
              environment.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              For example, he will look at the production of bisphenol A                     
              polycarbonate.  Presently phosgene and bisphenol A disodium                    
              salt are reacted in an interfacial process, followed by a high                 
              temperature process that yields sodium chloride as a                           
              byproduct.  Large quantities of residual solvent must be                       
              eliminated from the product prior to further processing and                    
              the salt produced has to be landfilled as a hazardous waste.                   
              Dr. Beckman plans to explore a route to polycarbonate                          
              production which allows a milder environmental impact using                    
              supercritical carbon dioxide as both monomer and process                       
              solvent.  Carbon dioxide, nitrophenol, and a nitrophenoxy tin                  
              catalyst will be combined to produce nitrophenyl carbonate,                    
              which is then transreacted at mild temperatures to generate                    
              high molecular weight polycarbonate.  The nitrophenol produced                 
              during polymerization is then stripped from the polymer melt                   
              with carbon dioxide and recycled to the monomer production                     
              process.  This route would lessen the environmental impact of                  
              the polycarbonate synthesis by (1) eliminating the salt                        
              byproduct and chlorinated solvents, (2) reducing the energy                    
              requirement for polycarbonate production and (3) eliminating                   
              phosgene from the polymerization sequence.                                     
                                                                                             
              Another process that will be studied will involve the                          
              synthesis of polymers where improved recyclability is                          
              incorporated into the material at the molecular level.  The                    
              environmental impact of many short life-time packaging                         
              materials derives from their impact on the overall solid waste                 
              problem.  Current recycling technology permits a small                         
              fraction of the overall plastic waste stream to be recovered                   
              and re-processed.  Any thermoplastic material, if retained in                  
              a relatively pure form following use, can be reprocessed and                   
              thus recycled, therefore the recycling problem is in fact a                    
              separations problem.  The PI plans to generate polymers                        
              containing functional groups, which although hydrophobic, are                  
              readily reversibly transformed to hydrophilic groups in one                    
              synthetic step.  These materials could consequently be                         
              dissolved in water following chemical treatment, allowing both                 
              their extraction from bilayer or composite products, and                       
              subsequent recovery following reversal of the                                  
              functionalization reaction.
