Title       : Core Approach to Computer Science for the General Student
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9150719

Award Number: 9150719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Arnow arnow@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project adds a laboratory component to a successful pilot                 
              program in mathematical and computer literacy, expands this                    
              program to large scale use, and evaluates this program.  The                   
              pilot program is an effort to find an appropriate place for                    
              mathematics and computer science within a core curriculum, a                   
              set of general education courses required of all students.  One                
              goal of the program is to attract undecided students,                          
              particularly woman and minorities, to the fields of mathematics                
              and computer science.  Another goal is to guarantee that those                 
              students who do not pursue a scientific career will be                         
              sufficiently sophisticated to make intelligent judgements about                
              computer-related issues.  The approach used in the program is                  
              a principles-based one, but avoids attempting a broad survey of                
              the field.  Instead, it uses a hands-on approach to focus on                   
              sentential logic, its relation to everyday reasoning and                       
              language, and its application to the design of digital                         
              circuits.  It also focuses on an extremely small subset of                     
              Pascal, chosen to teach the significance of iteration and the                  
              software engineering principle of solving complicated problems                 
              by combining solutions to simpler ones.The project involves the                
              design, development, piloting and evaluation of a digital logic                
              lab component to be added to the current course.  The project                  
              also supports five faculty development seminars for instructors                
              both inside and outside of CUNY to disseminate the experience                  
              of the pilot program in order to encourage large scale use.  In                
              addition, the project involves a broad assessment of the impact                
              of the pilot program on students performance in more advanced                  
              classes.
