Title       : Laboratory for Modern Optics Using the Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9150287

Award Number: 9150287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Fork   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Haus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Persans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              This project utilizes recent progress in educational techniques                
              and computers to provide undergraduates with interactive access                
              to a full range of laboratory optical technology, from the                     
              simplest to the latest high technology optics, while reducing                  
              cost and unifying the learning experience in physics and                       
              engineering.  The need for national preeminence in the area of                 
              rapid and precise handling of optical information requires                     
              students who are well and consistently trained across the                      
              spectrum of optics in physics and engineering.  The project is                 
              based in CUPLE (Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning                         
              Environment) program, which provides a base of computational                   
              and video techniques.  It provides access to a broad range of                  
              optics technology in a consistent manner that enables the                      
              student to move in an interactive manner from familiar to less                 
              familiar material.  This program is comprehensive, because it                  
              draws on innovative developments in classroom, laboratory,                     
              lecture demonstration, and computer based materials developed                  
              by a consortium of excellent educators and unified in that it                  
              presents a consistent user interface to students, lecturers,                   
              and experimentailsts across different applications and                         
              different media, such as laboratory instruments, data arrays,                  
              graphical displays, and video recordings.  This approach can                   
              bring a larger number of undergraduate students into closer and                
              more timely contact with laboratory experience in a flexible                   
              manner at significantly reduced cost as compared to                            
              conventional methods.  The present project is developing a set                 
              of trial modules on modern optics combining instruction                        
              simulation, and experiments within the CUPLE environment.
