Title       : A Model Program for the Preparation of Mathematics and Science Teachers at the
               Secondary Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9150028

Award Number: 9150028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1736762            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence F. Lowery   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Schoenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,7348,9177,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of California, Berkeley, seeks funding for a                    
              five-year program:  A Model Program for the Preparation of                     
              Mathematics and Science Teachers at the Secondary Level.  The                  
              project will serve a model Credential-Plus-Master Degree                       
              program for preservice teachers in mathematics and science                     
              with research and program development components.                              
                                                                                             
              The program for teachers is based on the following premises:                   
              a solid preparation in mathematics and/or science; knowledge                   
              of and participation in state-of-the-art research on teaching                  
              and learning; and extensive experience in the use of                           
              instructional technology.  The certificate program normally                    
              takes a year to complete at UC-Berkeley; however, this program                 
              will include the master level work and a total design change                   
              from traditional teacher preparation programs.  For example,                   
              instead of a one-semester student teaching experience, the                     
              students will work in schools throughout the project.  Senior                  
              faculty members will be involved in teaching the courses and                   
              the unifying seminar.  Faculty, graduate students, and                         
              inservice mentor teachers will work with all aspects of the                    
              school-based experiences and seminars.  There is an important                  
              component of professional development and preparation for                      
              graduate students to become future leaders in mathematics and                  
              science education.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The research component is intended to help mathematics and                     
              science educators learn more about the preparation of teachers                 
              in the disciplines and how such a program might be implemented                 
              elsewhere.  In particular, the research will focus on:  the                    
              role of videoportfolios in teacher development; how teacher                    
              beliefs affect their classroom practices, and how those                        
              beliefs evolve; the effects of the teacher preparation on the                  
              research and teaching of the graduate faculty; and how the                     
              "school cultures" in the schools where students are placed                     
              interact with what they study in the program.                                  
                                                                                             
              The amount of non-NSF cost-sharing by the University of                        
              California at Berkeley is 45% of the total budget requested                    
              from NSF.
