Title       : Global Warming Exhibition and Interpretive Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1991    
File        : a9150138

Award Number: 9150138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1001278            (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Pfirman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The American Museum of Natural History and the                            
              Environmental Defense Fund will produce a major exhibition                     
              on global warming.  The prospect of global warming is viewed                   
              by many with increasing attention and concern, but                             
              conflicting reports have resulted in public confusion about                    
              predictions of climate change.  Thus, a need exists for                        
              education on this timely subject, particularly in the direct                   
              and vivid way that only an exhibition provides.  Wide-spread                   
              awareness of the significance of potential climate change                      
              will lead to making informed decisions and taking necessary                    
              actions regarding this complex and serious problem.                            
                                                                                             
                   Visitors will learn about the forces that drive climate                   
              change, the sources and properties of greenhouse gases, how                    
              scientists study climate, and debates on the accuracy of                       
              global warming predictions.  The exhibition will also focus                    
              on potential environmental, social, and economic                               
              consequences of global warming and what choices individuals                    
              and nations can make to reduce emissions of greenhouse                         
              gases.  Visitors will be able to explore these topics in                       
              depth and integrate the information with personal                              
              experience.  The exhibition will present scientific data                       
              objectively, clearly distinguishing between what is known                      
              and what is predicted.                                                         
                                                                                             
                   The American Museum and EDF will produce scientific                       
              symposia, educational programs, and publications for greater                   
              outreach to general visitors, schools and the media.                           
              Consultants will monitor and evaluate the content and                          
              design, from planning through fabrication and display, to                      
              ensure the educational effectiveness of the exhibition.
