Title       : Visual and Interactive Modes for Integrated Learning of Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9150079

Award Number: 9150079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $754477             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. E. Stanley hes@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              81        Anthropology                            
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is investigating the cognitive and motivational                   
              development of diverse groups of high school students as they                  
              work with highly visual, dynamic simulations of the laws of                    
              random phenomena as exhibited in a wide variety of physical,                   
              biological and chemical systems.  Students manipulate models of                
              physical reality in a fashion similar to the modelling methods                 
              used by the research scientists who are conducting this project.               
              The investigators hypothesize that students underrepresented in                
              mathematics and science, including women and minorities, will                  
              particularly benefit from these visualization tools and from                   
              their participation in current scientific research.  Research                  
              questions include the following:  What is the cognitive                        
              significance of pairing hands-on experiments with compute models               
              in learning activity?  What are the cognitive consequences for                 
              students of working with dynamic, time-dependent representations               
              of systems and phenomena that are impossible to represent                      
              directly in prose or still photographs?  What are the                          
              consequences of multiple representations, such as liquid water                 
              viewed at a microscopic and macroscopic levels?  What are the                  
              central anchoring concepts students need in order to use dynamic               
              visual models to explore and understand both the scientific                    
              processes of modeling and the concepts of randomness and order in              
              nature?  What are the consequences for high school students and                
              teachers of cognitive apprenticeships with graduate students who               
              are carrying out the research modeled in the teaching materials?//
