Title       : Structural, Organizational, and Narrative Coherence: Designing the Introductory
               Physics Laboratory to Increase Retention of Prospective Science and Engineering
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1991       
File        : a9150311

Award Number: 9150311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick F. Kenealy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alok Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Nationally less than 50% of the students who originally choose                 
              a science or engineering major complete a degree in that major.                
              It is clear that the problems of retaining interested students                 
              are severe enough that the traditional college physics                         
              laboratory approach must be questioned in a scientific way,                    
              using existing scientific knowledge on how people respond to                   
              teaching, how people learn new concepts, and how they                          
              incorporate new information.  In order to increase retention,                  
              this project is  restructuring social and intellectual                         
              interactions in the introductory physics laboratory in such a                  
              way that its operation is more in line with both the way modern                
              students learn, and the way the scientific community deals with                
              experimental information and evaluation of data.  "Conferences"                
              and "Public Reports" are  being made a formal part of the                      
              laboratory.  The project actively and systematically considers                 
              special populations of students:  women, minorities, and future                
              teachers.  Problems that research has identified as crucial are                
              capsulized in the following:  1) a demand for narrative                        
              coherence; 2) a student-to-student approach to teaching                        
              problem-solving; 3) instructional strategies designed to                       
              produce a sense of community; and 4) establishment of a culture                
              of competence and cooperation in the laboratory and classroom.                 
              The project postulates that these strategies will serve well                   
              all students.  The laboratory in introductory physics is the                   
              project's main focus.  The content of these introductory                       
              laboratories is staying close to observations connected to                     
              direct sensory and perceptual experiences.  The emphasis in                    
              this development is not on the design of "new" experiments, but                
              1) on the interaction of the students, and 2) on the context                   
              and coherence of their total laboratory experience.  A strong                  
              evaluation plan is an integral part of the project.
