Title       : New Approach to Undergraduate Instruction in Structural Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1991      
File        : a9150316

Award Number: 9150316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Pollard dpollard@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop new instructional                  
              materials that change, fundamentally, how structural geology is                
              taught to undergraduate students in the earth sciences.                        
              Current textbooks and laboratory manuals present excellent                     
              treatments of the geometric description and classification of                  
              rock structures, but do not effectively integrate this material                
              with the principles and quantitative methods of structural                     
              analysis based on continuum mechanics. A new textbook,                         
              specifically designed to accomplish this integration, can be                   
              used to disseminate the project results to other educators and                 
              students. Packaged with the textbook, and representing a fresh                 
              approach to instructional materials in structural geology, is                  
              a floppy disk of computer exercises keyed to chapters in the                   
              textbook. The exercises are set up as templates using Microsoft                
              Excel for computation and graphics, and are compatible with                    
              both the Macintosh and IBM PC. The computer exercises combine                  
              the map data and descriptive observations of classical                         
              structural geology with the relevant mathematical methods and                  
              principles of engineering mechanics. By making concepts                        
              understandable and analysis methods available that heretofore                  
              have been restricted to graduate courses or practicing                         
              professionals, this project prepares undergraduates better for                 
              advanced degrees and professional careers. The language and                    
              methods learned in this course prepare geologists to                           
              communicate effectively with engineers and other scientists, a                 
              key requirement for the multidisciplinary problem solving                      
              methods that will typify industrial practices in the next                      
              century. This project aims to provide a prototype for                          
              instructional materials that can be emulated across the                        
              spectrum of earth science education.
