Title       : The Digital Video-Interactiee Learning Environment: A Case Study in Physics
               Teaching...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9150222

Award Number: 9150222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Zollman dzollman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the 1980s the analog videodisc provided a means for                         
              interactivity in multimedia instruction.  However, the video                   
              images remained in an analog form so that their use was limited                
              to images or part of images as they were recorded and simple                   
              graphics placed on the video.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The development of digital video stored on a compact disk has                  
              changed that situation.  One can now obtain video images which                 
              are stored in digital form, played in real time, and manipulated               
              by a computer as computer graphics are.  The digital video format              
              provides a full range of possibilities, including the combination              
              of different scenes and the changing of parts of a scene, to                   
              create images which realistically appear and which respond to                  
              student needs.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The proposed project will combine digital video with up-to-date                
              software techniques, research on student learning of physics, and              
              information about reaching diverse audiences.  Instructional                   
              models, paradigms, and materials will be developed for the                     
              teaching of modern physics.  These materials will address issues               
              of teaching difficult and abstract concepts by enabling students               
              to make connections between their "real" (Macroscopic) world and               
              the world of the very small or very high speeds.  By using                     
              software and the manipulation of digital video images the system               
              will be able to make gradual changes from the students' everyday               
              experiences to the physicists' models.  Because the students will              
              have control of the changes and the rate at which they are made,               
              they will also control their own learning.  In this way the                    
              digital video learning platform will demonstrate how this                      
              technology can open new possibilities for the teaching of                      
              science.
