Title       : Project A-STEP: Reformulating Teacher Preparation in Mathematics & Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1994     
File        : a9150037

Award Number: 9150037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568056             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Skuldt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard F. McDermot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Allegheny College seeks funding for a three-year                          
              program:  Project A-Step:  Reformulating Teacher                               
              Preparation in Mathematics and Science.  The project,                          
              developed with a planning grant from NSF and the Exxon                         
              Foundation, will redesign the teacher preparation programs                     
              in mathematics and science at Allegheny and will make                          
              discipline-specific preservice education a central focus of                    
              the entire college.  The department of education has                           
              already been restructured,  and all positions are or will                      
              be filled by faculty with dual appointments in mathematics                     
              or science departments.  There is a structure in place, The                    
              Schools Partnership, which ties the college to six school                      
              districts.  The Partnership will be involved in project                        
              activities with faculty and students through joint                             
              programs, institutes, workshops, student mentoring, student                    
              field-experiences, and program development in Project                          
              A-Step.  A component of the Partnership is an electronic                       
              computer network which will provide teachers, students,                        
              faculty members access to each other and to the college's                      
              computer as well as to the Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center.                    
              The Allegheny faculty has formed a Task Force on teaching                      
              to develop programs in mathematics and science education                       
              for preservice teachers which have as the basic premise a                      
              strong command of the discipline, knowledge of the                             
              connections to related disciplines, and discipline specific                    
              pedagogy.  The faculty and top administration are committed                    
              to make Allegheny a model for small liberal colleges that                      
              prepare teachers in mathematics and science.                                   
                                                                                             
                   Allegheny has received funding for related components                     
              of the project from the Amoco Foundation, the Vira Heinz                       
              Endowment, the Pew Charitable Trusts; and the Knight                           
              Foundation.  In addition, Allegheny's cost share will be                       
              62% of the NSF total costs.
