Title       : Development and Evaluation of Design-Oriented Electrical Engineering Lower
               Division Laboratory Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1991    
File        : a9150470

Award Number: 9150470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Chesley as Backup AA            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wils L. Cooley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel T. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. McConnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Engineering Lower Division Laboratory MaterialsFaculty at West                 
              Virginia University, University of Wisconsin - Platteville, and                
              Colorado School of Mines are addressing the criticism of                       
              engineering education that it is weak in design, and while                     
              producing engineers who excel at analysis, lack skills in                      
              design, synthesis and evaluation.  Many educators propose                      
              changes in curricula and instructional methods aimed to                        
              integrate these skills back into the learning experience.                      
              While many innovations have merit and work well for their                      
              developers, educators elsewhere often experience difficulty                    
              incorporating them into their particular environment. The                      
              faculty are developing lower-division electrical engineering                   
              design oriented laboratory materials and plan to evaluate their                
              effectiveness in three very different curricular environments.                 
              A student booklet of laboratory design exercises and an                        
              accompanying instructor's manual describing in detail how to                   
              conduct a design-oriented laboratory is being developed from                   
              the most broadly successful draft materials.  The materials                    
              transform the laboratory from the relatively passive                           
              intellectual experience of verifying well established theories                 
              to an active intellectual experience creating functional                       
              devices, circuits, and systems.  The student materials are                     
              heavily supported by extensive aids for the instructor, and all                
              materials are designed for and evaluated within disparate                      
              curricular structures to make them broadly useful.
