Title       : US/USSR Curriculum Materials Development Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9150115

Award Number: 9150115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Gersmehl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Leading geographers from the Association of American                           
              Geographers together with secondary school teachers will                       
              produce a curriculum materials package for use in existing                     
              and emerging social science classes in the secondary                           
              schools.  The materials will focus on population, patterns,                    
              economic regionalization and political geography as factors                    
              that shape the pattern of human-environment interaction                        
              throughout the nation.  The aim is a broad contextual                          
              understanding of environmental issues with particular                          
              emphasis on the kinds of global problems that require                          
              coordinated action at the global, regional and local levels.                   
              The materials will consist of a concise geography text, a                      
              set of classroom and individual student activities, related                    
              readings, and a detailed teachers' manual.  Student                            
              assessment instruments will also be developed.  The                            
              materials will incorporate features that reflect trends in                     
              several aspects of the secondary curriculum as recommended                     
              by "Guidelines for Geographic Education," the NCTM                             
              Standards, the report, "Charting a Course:  Social Studies                     
              Curriculum for the 21st Century" published by the National                     
              Commission on Social Studies in Schools.  Formative                            
              evaluation will be conducted by an outside expert and the                      
              network of Geographic Alliances will play a central role in                    
              materials dissemination and teacher enhancement.
