Title       : GLOBE-NET: Changes in the Global Environment: A Curriculum Development Project
               Grades 4-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9150001

Award Number: 9150001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M.Patricia Morse                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1393738            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriett S. Stubbs H_Stubbs@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Businger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              New instructional materials that incorporate scientific                        
              research on global environment changes will be developed for                   
              grades 4-12 to be infused into ongoing curricula.                              
              Capitalizing on ten years experience in the development,                       
              publication and dissemination of materials on air quality                      
              issues, and the network already established between                            
              scientists, educators, teachers and students, GLOBE-NET will                   
              create, evaluate, and prepare materials for publication                        
              which are bias-free and scientifically and educationally                       
              sound, taking into account findings of research scientists                     
              in subject areas and current research on how students learn                    
              science.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              These materials will be designed to be infused into existing                   
              and established courses and study in life, earth, physical,                    
              environment sciences, biology, chemistry, physics and other                    
              science curricula.  Dealing with global environmental                          
              changes these materials will provide hands-on experiences,                     
              cooperative and inquiry learning and other research-based                      
              strategies.  The materials will meet the standards of the                      
              National Diffusion Network and will be published Carolina                      
              Academic Press and disseminated by Carolina Biological                         
              Supply Company and others.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project will translate and transfer the most current                      
              information on this vital topic - to teachers to students                      
              and ultimately to the general public.  GLOBE-NET will help                     
              teachers, students and parents learn more about science and                    
              will lead toward an informed citizenry that is cognizant of                    
              scientific issues of major international concern.                              
                                                                                             
              Cooperators from the SCI-LINK Project, supported by the                        
              National Science Foundation, include personnel from local,                     
              state and federal government agencies, universities and                        
              corporations, many students and teachers from different                        
              schools.  GLOBE-NET is a joint project of the Colleges of                      
              Agriculture and Life Sciences, Physical and Mathematics                        
              Sciences, Forest Resources, Education and Ecology, and                         
              Behavioral Biology, University of Minnesota.
