Title       : Idaho Teachers Excited About Cruising the Heavens (I TEACH)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9150249

Award Number: 9150249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Stewart                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorette M. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert C. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine E. Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Discovery Center of Idaho
	      PO Box 192
	      Boise, ID  837010192    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Idaho Teachers Excited About Cruisin' The Heavens (I TEACH)                    
              is a three year project which will prepare educators to                        
              develop and present an exciting hands-on astronomy unit.                       
              Six educators teams - consisting of three teachers and one                     
              administrator - will be selected from six regions throughout                   
              Idaho.  These teams will gather for a two-week summer                          
              institute in Boise at The Discovery Center of Idaho (DCI).                     
              The center's goal is to enrich and supplement formal                           
              education through an interactive approach to learning basic                    
              and applied science.  While at DCI, participants will learn                    
              to teach basic astronomy using hands-on activities, a                          
              portable planetarium and Native American, Greek, Roman, and                    
              Old European sky myths.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The teams will return to their home district with one-                         
              month's use of a portable planetarium and the requirement                      
              that they use it in their classrooms and give presentations                    
              for fellow teachers and community members.  During years one                   
              and two of the project, team members working with 7th - 9th                    
              graders will be targeted for selection.  I TEACH will be                       
              opened to participants working with 4th - 6th graders in                       
              year three.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Beginning in year two, six regional facilitators will be                       
              selected from the previous year's I TEACH participants to                      
              assist teams with unit development during the two-week                         
              summer institute.  Regional facilitators will also provide                     
              technical support for I TEACH graduates as they team-teach a                   
              hands-on astronomy continuing education workshop in their                      
              home region.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The Principal Investigator is Dr. Gilford.  Ms. Lorette                        
              Williams Executive Director of DCI is Co-PI serving as                         
              liaison with other institutions in Idaho.                                      
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 18% of the NSF award.
