Title       : Quantitative Sciences Curriculum for Life Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9150354

Award Number: 9150354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis J. Gross gross@tiem.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to develop, evaluate, and                    
              publicize a curriculum in quantitative studies for                             
              undergraduates in the life sciences. This curriculum will                      
              emphasize the great utility of quantitative approaches in                      
              analyzing biological problems, will utilize many examples from                 
              recent biological research, and serve a dual role of both                      
              introducing new quantitative methods and reinforcing key                       
              concepts in modem biology. A variety of software will be                       
              evaluated and utilized in the curriculum to enhance the                        
              problem-solving aspects of the courses. This will enable                       
              students to experiment with alternative key biological                         
              assumptions in mathematical models and analyze the resultant                   
              quantitative and qualitative behavior of these assumptions. The                
              curriculum to be developed will include an entry-level sequence                
              as well as a second-year set of courses. A workshop of                         
              researchers and educators in quantitative biology will be held                 
              as part of the initial stages of the development in order to                   
              develop a set of basic quantitative and biological concepts                    
              that should be included in the curriculum. A few of the                        
              attendees at this workshop will serve as an advisory board for                 
              the remainder of the projected proposal period. Over the three                 
              years of the proposal, the new curriculum will be developed,                   
              appropriate software evaluated, pilot studies run, and results                 
              of the project publicized. A monograph compiling detailed                      
              syllabi, lesson plans, and software evaluations will be                        
              published and distributed to quantitative and life science                     
              departments throughout the U.S.
