Title       : New Approaches to Maass Wave Forms in Mathematics and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0105314

Award Number: 0105314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Lewis jlewis@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The discrete spectrum of the Laplacian on the 
modular surface and the
              associated eigenfunctions 
(called Maass wave forms) are an interesting and
              basic 
class of functions which nevertheless remain mysteriously 
elusive
              fifty years after their discovery. While numerical 
approximations exist,
              concrete analytic information is 
somewhat scarce; in particular, at present
              no explicit 
constructions exist for any of these eigenfunctions. These
              
mathematical objects are of interest in such seemingly 
diverse fields as
              number theory in mathematics and dynamical 
systems, statistical mechanics,
              and quantum chaos in 
theoretical physics. The starting point for this project
              is
a new class of functions equivalent to the Maass forms, called 
period
              functions in analogy with the period polynomials 
associated to the classical
              modular forms of integral weight. 
These functions, discovered by the
              investigator and developed 
individually and more recently in collaboration
              with D. Zagier, 
are holomorphic and satisfy a simple functional equation, and
              
so appear to be simpler class of mathematical objects than the 
Maass forms
              themselves. For this reason, and because the 
development of their algebraic
              structure leads in a number of 
different interrelated and intriguing
              directions, they show 
promise to continue to shed new light on this basic
              problem. 
Their further development and the extension of these results 
to
              general subgroups, using representation theory and cohomology 
of groups, are
              the main goals of this project. In addition, 
connections between period
              functions and certain equations which 
arise both in the study of transfer
              operators for dynamical 
systems and in the study of spin-chain partition
              functions in 
statistical mechanics are already under study by several
              
researchers, including one working group in Germany which 
is specifically
              investigating these questions. The applications 
of Maass period functions to
              these related areas of theoretical 
physics is thus also a focus of this work,
              to be pursued including 
discussions with researchers working on these
              problems. 


  Research in mathematics and related theoretical physics will
              
use methods developed by the investigator and his colleagues to 
gain more
              concrete and explicit information about Maass wave forms. 
These functions are
              one type in a class called "modular forms" 
which has many applications in
              such diverse fields as number theory, 
physics, and cryptography (or code
              making and breaking). Maass wave 
forms in particular are the non-Euclidean
              version of the sine waves 
(or pure tones - the wave form produced by striking
              a tuning fork) 
in ordinary space, which are the basic components out of which
              all 
shapes are built. The study of geometry and physics in this
              non-
Euclidean "parallel universe" has provided science with a rich source
              
of new ideas, as well as a contrasting proving ground on which to 
sharpen
              ideas in the geometry and physics of the space we live in. 
For example, the
              study of the behavior of Maass forms provides very 
useful insights in the
              quest to gain a deeper understanding of the 
conditions under which a physical
              system will exhibit regular or 
chaotic behavior, an important and pervasive
              question in physics. 
Maass forms have proven mysteriously hard to construct
              explicitly, 
and continue to be under active investigation fifty years after
              
their discovery.  
    

  

