Title       : Improving Symbolic Analysis of Restructuring Compilers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0105422

Award Number: 0105422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. van Engelen engelen@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyle A. Gallivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research investigates new methods for symbolic analysis to
improve
              various restructuring compiler optimizations.  A new algebra on
functions is
              investigated to manipulate, simplify, and derive normal forms of
scalar
              functions and (generalized) induction variables in multi-dimensional
loops. 
              The derivation of normal forms for intermediate program constructs
enables
              reasoning about the semantics of a program under analysis.  This is
extremely
              useful to improve various compiler optimizations to effectively deal
with
              symbolic expressions in real-world applications.  More specifically,
              the
proposed research aims to improve symbolic analysis methods such
              as
generalized induction variable recognition, linear and non-linear
              data
dependence analysis, value range analysis, global value propagation,
              and
counting the number of solutions to systems of constraints.  The
              effectiveness
of parallelizing compilers depends heavily on the accuracy of
              these methods.
The research will result in the ability of compilers to more
              effectively
handle symbolic expressions and constraints.  Current methods are
              not always
effective, resulting in considerable performance losses caused by
              worst-case
assumptions or when program analysis has to be performed at
              execution time.

