Title       : SGER: Developing the Cr Isotope Method for Investigating Impact Cratering Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0105894

Award Number: 0105894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paterno R. Castillo pcastillo@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

This is a proposal for small grants for exploratory research (SGER)
              to apply a new expertise and approach to "established" research in early impact
              cratering events.
Specifically, the PI and his collaborator, Dr. Gunter
              Lugmair, plan to develop a routine field and laboratory procedure for using the
              Cr isotope method in investigating early impact cratering. The Cr isotope
              systematics of impact ejecta has been shown to be one of the most effective
              tools not only for verifying the occurrence of impact events but also for
              identifying the class of meteorites that impacted during these events. All
              samples studied for Cr isotope systematics so far, however, were carefully
              selected, containing a significant proportion of an extraterrestrial component
              (ETC) in the impact ejecta. In contrast, most of the suspected impact sites on
              Earth are characterized by a low ETC content. This is reflected particularly by
              low Ir and Cr concentrations. When Cr concentration is low, the isotopic
              composition of the terrestrial background Cr masks that of the cosmic Cr. This
              severely hampers the use of the Cr isotope method. To avoid these difficulties
              much effort is needed to develop physico-chemical procedures for concentrating
              meteoritic Cr in the samples and to continue improving the mass-spectrometric
              technique for the Cr isotope analysis. In addition, a thorough selection of the
              samples based on their geological settings and measurements of concentrations
              of other siderophile elements is crucial. For this study, Cr isotope
              systematics of the ejecta materials from two suspect impact sites in South
              Africa and Western Australia will be analyzed. Samples from these sites have
              variable ETC concentrations; these have never been analyzed for Cr isotope
              systematics before. A successful completion of the proposed investigation will
              be a great leap forward in our ability to unequivocally identify impact sites,
              constrain the nature of the extraterrestrial impactor in each site, and better
              understand the geological and environmental consequences of cratering on the
              Earth's surface. 

