Title       : Minimization of actuator hysteresis under varying load and temperature
               conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0105190

Award Number: 0105190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Galinaitis sgalin@ferrum.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ferrum College
	      
	      Ferrum, VA  24088    540/365-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The accuracy of positioning systems that use piezoelectric actuators is limited
              by a hysteresis relationship between the input to the actuator and the
              resulting displacement.  The positioning accuracy of the system can be improved
              by minimizing the effect of the hysteresis.  To reach this goal it is necessary
              to have an accurate representation of the hysteresis, and a control strategy
              that provides compensation for the hysteresis.  Recent work has demonstrated
              the feasibility of using the KP operator to model hysteresis.  This work also
              demonstrated the use of the inverse KP operator to create an open loop control
              that minimized the positioning error caused by the hysteresis.  The results of
              that work are restricted to an actuator working under a fixed set of operating
              conditions.  As these conditions change the performance of the model and the
              control degrade.  To remedy this situation the proposed three year research
              program will focus on the modification of the KP operator so that it is capable
              of modeling hysteresis over a wide range of operating conditions (temperature
              and load).  As before, the inverse operator will be used as part of a
              controller designed to minimize positioning error over a range of operating
              conditions.  The major program tasks are: 1) The determination of the
              conditions necessary for data that is used to identify the nonnegative measure
              of the KP operator; 2) The modification of the KP operator to explicitly
              include variables associated with the temperature of the actuator and the load
              acting on the actuator; 3) The inversion of the modified KP operator and the
              development of a control based on this inverse.  Computer simulations and
              experimental data will be used to evaluate the relative performance of the KP
              and modified KP operators.  Similarly, the performance of controllers based on
              the inverses of both operators will be compared to determine if the positioning
              accuracy of the actuator can be improved by incorporating load and temperature
              variables into the KP operator.  

A key component of many mechanical systems
              is the positioning subsystem.  This subsystem typically consists of a
              controller that uses sensor information to drive an actuator such that a
              desired position is attained by a system component.  For a satellite-tracking
              antenna, it may be the system that aims the parabolic antenna dish at the
              desired point in the sky, or it is the system that is used to position a
              specimen under the probe tip in a scanning probe microscope (SPM).  Whether it
              is a system for pointing an antenna or imaging microscopic structure, the
              accuracy of the positioning directly impacts the overall effectiveness of the
              system.  For an SPM a piezoceramic type actuator is used for positioning.  A
              relationship between the actuator input and the resulting position, called
              hysteresis, limits the accuracy of this type of actuator.  The hysteresis
              introduces a positioning error that cannot be effectively minimized with
              conventional control strategies.  However, over the past decade several methods
              have been developed that are capable of minimizing this error for fixed
              operating conditions.  The proposed program is directed at extending a method
              based on the KP operator so that it can be used to reduce the hysteresis error
              over a range of actuator operating conditions.  The two major benefits of the
              program are: 1) The results can be used to improve the accuracy of currently
              installed positioning systems such as those used for microscopic imaging and
              integrated circuit production and 2) The program will actively engage a diverse
              undergraduate student population to state of the art research.  The second of
              these benefits is as significant as the first, for this effort will include the
              development of an experimental test facility at Ferrum College for both
              computer simulation work and experimental testing.  Students at the college
              will be active participants in the design, implementation and execution of
              experiments directed at the development and evaluation of the hysteresis models
              and the actuator controllers.  Additionally, they will apply material learned
              in their undergraduate courses to analyze experimental data and system
              performance.  The program will provide a rare opportunity for undergraduate
              students in this region to experience advanced research typically only found at
              a major research university or industrial research center.  This program will
              also be an introduction for this region of the state to advanced technology.
