Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Relationships, Biogeography, and
               Phylogeography of Plethodontid Salamanders of the Genera Pseudotriton,
               Gyrinophilus, and Stereochilus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0105115

Award Number: 0105115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9965               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul T. Chippindale paulc@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this research are to investigate relationships of red, mud,
              spring, and many-lined salamanders (Pseudotriton, Gyrinophilus, and
              Stereochilus), evaluate the factors that have determined their geographic
              distributions, and assess species boundaries in the group.  Specimens from
              throughout the ranges of these species will be examined using both molecular
              and morphological data.  DNA markers will also be developed that will allow
              reliable identification of larvae of the red and mud salamanders
              (Pseudotriton); these are important components of many aquatic systems but are
              extremely difficult to distinguish based on morphology.

Plethodontid
              salamanders are model organisms for a wide variety of ecological and behavioral
              studies, but very little is known about phylogenetic relationships and species
              boundaries within and among the genera Pseudotriton, Gyrinophilus and
              Stereochilus.  Preliminary mitochondrial DNA sequence data suggest greater
              species diversity than previously thought.  Nuclear sequences will also be
              examined to test phylogenetic hypotheses based on the mitochondrial data.
              Pseudotriton ruber exhibits genetic homogeneity throughout the Appalachians but
              considerable diversity in the lowlands, suggesting a higher degree of gene flow
              in highland populations of this species than that observed for any other
              plethodontids. This study will allow tests of hypotheses regarding high- versus
              low-elevation centers of diversification in plethodontids, and has broader
              implications for understanding of historical biogeography, patterns of
              biodiversity, and conservation in eastern North America. This work will also
              result in a major taxonomic revision of the Pseudotriton/ Gyrinophilus/ 

