Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary History of Reproductive Systems in Closely
               Related Taxa of the Lichen-forming Genus Porpidia (Ascomycota)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0105024

Award Number: 0105024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0105024
Mueller

The overall objectives of this research project are to
              clarify relationships within the genus Porpidia (lichen-forming Ascomycota),
              and to analyze the distribution and interdependence of transitions between
              reproductive modes within and among its species. The genus was chosen, due to
              its accumulation of closely related taxa that show contrasting reproductive
              modes. The P. flavocoerulescens (sexual)/P. melinodes (asexual) "species pair"
              was selected for detailed population-level analyses. Hypothetical patterns of
              changes between the two modes of reproduction will be tested using a
              phylogenetic approach. The underlying population structure and history within
              the "species pair" will be studied using an integrated phylogeographic and
              genealogical analysis.

Today the significance of sexual and asexual
              reproductive modes and their continued coexistence are still unsolved, despite
              the in-depth theoretical attention the issue has received. This situation is in
              part due to the scarcity and disparate nature of available empirical data,
              which do not allow stringent tests of proposed hypotheses. Model systems such
              as Porpidia that include closely related species with different modes of
              reproduction ranging from sexual to asexual provide important means to gain
              insight into the history and consequences of different levels of recombination.
              So far, investigations have concentrated almost exclusively on either the
              phylogenetic or population-genetic aspects of the problem. The present study
              will be the first in lichenized ascomycetes to integrate both phylogenetic and
              population-genetic approaches. It will not only infer patterns of evolutionary
              history, but also provide insight into the underlying population processes and
              historical events shaping these patterns.

