Title       : A Framework for Utilization-Based Absolute Delay Guarantees Using Adaptive
               Prefetching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0105873

Award Number: 0105873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarek F. Abdelzaher zaher@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   We propose to develop an architecture and theoretical underpinnings for
              providing absolute delay
guarantees for HTTP traffic. HTTP traffic constitutes
              an overwhelming majority of all Internet
traffic today. Both network load and
              user-perceived end-to-end response time of web requests
depend not only on
              network conditions but also on the performance of web proxy caches
              around
major network backbones. For example, in an HTTP-dominated network,
              increasing the total
amount of cached data may increase hit ratio and
              subsequently decrease both network load and
network delay. Hence, an
              architecture for end-to-end web traffic delay guarantees should
              explicitly
consider the effect of caching. It is the joint consideration of
              caching and network performance that
separates our work from prior efforts on
              delay guarantees. Essentially, the joint problem considers
data placement
              (replication) as a dimension to manipulate for affecting traffic delays. The
              approach
is cost-effective since data storage is cheaper than network
              bandwidth.
     The first contribution of this project is to develop a scheme
              for network load control that relies
on adaptive data prefetching. The
              architecture can be thought of as replacing admission control
at the network
              boundary. In an HTTP context, while admission control would prevent a
              client's
request from entering the network, data prefetching would bring the
              information to the client's
side before it is requested, hence de ecting the
              request away from the backbone. While prefetching
itself introduces traffic,
              the performance gain comes from the fact that, unlike serving live
              requests,
prefetching can occur at a lower priority in the background without
              jeopardizing user-perceived
network performance. Hence, prefetching removes
              time constraints from a big chunk of HTTP
traffic which can now be served at a
              lower priority. Consequently, the remaining (live) HTTP
traffic will receive
              better service from the network.
    The second main contribution of the
              project is a theoretical derivation of the relationship
between network
              resource utilization and the satisfaction of end-to-end deadlines.
              Specifically, we
prove that keeping network resource utilization due to live
              web traffic below a given threshold
ensures that all ow deadlines are met. We
              call this threshold, the overcommitment threshold .
This result allows us to
              associate deadlines with live web traffic and ensure their satisfaction
              simply
by performing utilization control. The result obviates maintaining per-
              ow state in the network for
the purposes of satisfying absolute delay
              guarantees.
     Merging the aforementioned contributions together, we propose
              to use our adaptive prefetching
scheme to keep the amount of live web traffic
              below the overcommitment threshold. Hence, we
ensure the satisfaction of
              absolute delay guarantees while requiring neither admission control on
              the
network boundary nor per- ow state in routers. The architecture calls only
              for service differentiation
in the network to separate live real-time web
              traffic from background prefetching traffic which may
receive lower priority.
              The project will use the PI's existing evaluation testbed for implementing
and
              evaluating architectural prototypes.
