Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Growth Form and Phytochemical Consequences
               in Adenia (Passifloraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0105127

Award Number: 0105127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9971               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucinda A. McDade   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Is it possible that a plant's growth form predicts plant chemistry?  We
              investigate the association between evolutionary changes in growth form and
              shifts in plant chemistry with this research.  The genus Adenia
              (Passifloraceae) provides an ideal group to research this and related
              questions.  With ca. 90 species, species in this group have diversified into
              trees, succulent shrubs, tuberous herbs, tuberous vines, caudiciforms, fibrous
              rooted vines, and lianas, as well as variants on these basic forms.  In
              addition to this remarkable growth form radiation, the chemistry is varied and
              appears to play an important role in the plants' interactions with Acraea
              caterpillars and various Chyrsomelidae which use Adenia as a host.  
By
              constructing a molecular phylogenetic hypothesis of the relationships of
              species in Adenia, we hope to test the monophyly of the group and determine
              where Adenia fits within the Passifloraceae family.  During the second phase of
              the research, we investigate the development and evolution of stem anatomy as
              it relates to growth form.  We test the hypotheses that the ancestral growth
              form is a vine (implying that the trees, shrubs, and herbs are derived from
              vines) and that the succulence observed in the trees and shrubs is a result of
              paedomorphic processes.  Ultimately, we map leaf cyanogenesis and leaf tannin
              content on the phylogeny to test hypotheses developed from allocation theory
              and apparency theory. We believe that cyanogenesis will be highest in vines
              whereas tannins will be most concentrated in other more "apparent" growth
              forms. Furthermore, we predict that changes in stem anatomy will correlate with
              changes in chemistry.  Species of Adenia are distributed throughout the
              Old-World tropics.  Hearn has traveled to South and Eastern Africa to make
              field collections and observations of the Adenia there.  This fall and winter,
              2001, he will travel to Madagascar to research the 20 Adenia endemics found
              there.  This DDIG support provides the funding to carry out both the Malagasy
              research, the anatomy research, and parts of the molecular and chemistry
              research.

