Title       : Image Coding for Constrained Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0105734

Award Number: 0105734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Zeger zeger@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Cosman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              TITLE: Image Coding with Constraints

ABSTRACT

This project studies image
              and video coding schemes for emerging and future
networks. The study
              concentrates on certain specific types of image coding
including facsimile,
              still imagery, and video.  Networks of the future will
consist of hybrid
              combinations of wired and wireless components. Commercial
products such as
              digital cameras, cell phones, and PDAs will send and/or
receive images of
              various types over a wide range of network channel
conditions.  The networks
              impose constraints such as: low data rate and
high/unpredictable packet
              losses.  The devices impose constraints including
small batteries, small
              displays, low delay, limited memory, and limited
processing power. Together,
              these constraints make the design of inexpensive
and efficient image
              transmission devices of the future a very challenging task.
In addition to
              designing such systems, a solid theoretical understanding of the
achievable
              qualities and limitations is important to know.

The main objectives of this
              research are to achieve deep theoretical
understanding of source and channel
              coding for images transmitted on lossy
networks and to develop practical
              algorithms that can be effectively used in
real applications. The work
              exploits the diverse backgrounds of the PIs in
image and video coding and
              combined source/channel coding.  The investigation
involves code design,
              theoretical analysis, and computer simulation.
The main topics investigated
              for constrained image coding include:

(1) Robust facsimile
              transmission,
(2) Robust low rate video source coding,
(3) Error correction,
              resilience, and concealment.
