Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeography of Salamanders of the Plethodon Jordani
               Complex in the Southern Appalachian Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0105066

Award Number: 0105066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Larson larson@wustlb.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Project Description

The Plethodon jordani complex is an assemblage of seven
              high-elevation mountain species that show little morphological differentiation,
              but contain high levels of genetic differentiation according to surveys of
              protein variation.  Cycles of temperature change during the most recent ice
              ages are predicted to have caused repeated episodes of population isolation and
              contact as salamanders tracked their favorable environments.  These contrasting
              episodes may have caused genetic  ivergence when isolated and genetic mixing
              while in contact.  In many cases it is unclear how the interplay of these
              forces has affected species formation in this species complex.  Objectives of
              this research are to utilize mitochondrial DNA sequences in tandem with the
              existing protein variation data to test hypotheses of genetic differentiation
              and hybrid formation among fragmented populations in the P. jordani complex
              through phylogenetic analyses.

Project Significance

	Few phylogeographic
              studies have sufficient sampling to detect on a fine geographic scale the
              patterns of genetic fragmentation and secondary contact among natural
              populations.  This study seeks to provide a detailed and fine-scale
              phylogeographic test of species hypotheses that were generated from protein
              variation.  The relatively limited distribution of the Plethodon jordani
              complex allows extensive sampling across its distribution and, therefore, near
              complete characterization of genetic diversity for a mitochondrial gene.  The
              large sample sizes and mitochondrial DNA sequences allow us to distinguish
              ongoing dynamic gene exchange among populations versus historically
              discontinuous patterns of gene exchange.  Furthermore, the existence of
              extensive surveys of protein variation provides an ideal situation for
              examining combined data sources for quantifying evolutionary divergence among
              populations and species formation.




