Title       : Dissertation Research: Pathway Analysis of Ethanol and Acetic Acid
               Detoxification in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0105085

Award Number: 0105085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9995               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0105085
Clark

Ethanol and acetic acid tolerance are highly positively
              correlated across populations of D. melanogaster and species of Drosophila. 
              The non-independence of traits associated with different steps in the ethanol
              and acetic acid detoxification pathway underscores the need for a pathway
              analysis of ethanol and acetic acid tolerance.  Analysis of this complete
              pathway was hindered by the fact that only ADH and aldehyde oxidase (ALDOX)
              could be studied at the biochemical and molecular levels, leaving the third
              step in the ethanol detoxification pathway, catalyzed by acetyl Co-A synthetase
              (AcCoAS), uncharacterized.  Identification of AcCoAS from the complete genome
              sequence of D. melanogaster and recently developed molecular probes for the
              AcCoAS reaction now allow for a complete pathway analysis of ethanol and acetic
              acid tolerance.  We hypothesize that selection for both tolerances operates on
              the entire detoxification pathway and will shape the patterns of variation and
              covariation between the three key enzymes in the pathway.  A combination of
              techniques will be employed to quantify variation in and covariation between
              nucleotide sequence data, mRNA expression levels, enzyme activities and
              tolerance to both ethanol and acetic acid.

The research funded by this
              Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant takes an evolutionary quantitative
              genetic approach to characterize the relationship between genetic variation and
              enzyme activity variation at all three steps in the pathway and the
              consequences of this variation on ethanol and acetic acid tolerance.  The
              findings will be analyzed in the context of metabolic control theory and will
              allow us to make predictions about the genetic and biochemical responses to
              selection on organismal performance

