Title       : Dissertation Research: Are Relatively Small Populations more Vulnerable to
               increased Inbreeding Depression and Decreased Heritability for Traits with a
               Quantitative Genetic Basis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0105148

Award Number: 0105148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brook G. Milligan brook@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0105148
Milligan

The performance of individuals within populations and the
              ability of
populations to respond to selection, e.g., due to
              environmental
changes, have received special attention by conservation
              biologists.
In particular, small relative to large populations are
              generally
regarded as either containing individuals expressing
              deleterious
genes or lacking sufficient genetic variation to respond to
              selection.  The
quantitative genetics measures of inbreeding depression
              and
heritability quantify these effects, and ideally such measures would
be
              available for both small and large populations of the same
species.  This
              study is using innovative molecular genetic methods to
measure these
              quantities in populations of Aquilegia (Ranunculaceae;
columbines) that vary
              dramatically in total population size.  DNA
genotypes will be used to
              determine how related inviduals are within
the populations; statistical models
              will then be used to estimate the
quantitative genetics parameters describing
              inbreeding depression and
heritability.  Because populations of different
              sizes will be studied,
a relationship between these measures and population
              size can be
detected if it exists.

Conservation biology has increasingly
              relied upon molecular genetic
variation.  However, to fully understand how
              that variation relates to
adaptive differentiation, evolutionary potential,
              and resistance to
the threat of extinction--all critical concerns of
              conservation
biology--a better understanding of the quantitative genetic basis
              of
adaptive traits is critical.  Furthermore, the assumptions mentioned
above
              about how population size affects that basis require empirical
testing in
              natural populations.  This novel study addresses and
empirically tests
              important phenomena in biological conservation using
measurements of
              quantitative genetics in field environments.

