Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reproductive Cooperation and Conflict in the
               White-Throated Magpie-Jay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0105139

Award Number: 0105139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Eadie jmeadie@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              eproductive cooperation and conflict in the white-throated magpie-jay

John
              McAllister Eadie, PI
Elena Catherine Berg, co-PI

This study will analyze
              the relationship between kinship, parentage, and behavioral variation within a
              Costa Rican population of white-throated magpie-jays (Calocitta formosa), a
              highly gregarious bird inhabiting the tropical dry forests of Central America.
              In this cooperative breeding bird, territorial groups typically consist of a
              breeding pair, their immature offspring, and one or more helpers (adult
              offspring that forego their own breeding attempts and assist the breeders with
              nest-building, defense against predators, and feeding of the incubating female
              and her nestlings). In most cooperative breeders, males act as helpers, but the
              magpie-jay is particularly interesting in that these sex roles are reversed:
              only females stay behind.  This provides a rare opportunity to study
              interactions between related females and assess the factors affecting female
              reproductive decisions. Specifically, we will test a recent model of
              reproductive behavior that predicts the precise conditions under which females
              should 1) lay eggs "parasitically" in the nests of other females, 2) breed
              alone, or 3) act as non-breeding helpers in their natal territory.  By testing
              the specific predictions of this model in a field setting, it will be possible
              to evaluate the factors affecting reproductive decisions among females,
              creating a springboard for future research on the relationship between
              cooperation and conflict in birds.  To test this model, behavioral and
              molecular data will be collected on multiple groups of magpie-jays during three
              breeding seasons.  Observational data will be collected on patterns of nesting
              and helping behavior, and molecular analyses of blood samples collected from
              adults and nestlings will be used to establish the reproductive output of
              individual females as well as patterns of kinship within and among groups. 
              This is an exciting new approach because it offers a fresh outlook on female
              alternative reproductive tactics, provides a theoretical framework for linking
              cooperating breeding and parasitism, and outlines specific predictions that can
              be tested in the field.

