Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics and Evolution in Mimulus and Tribe
               Mimuleae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0105048

Award Number: 0105048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Olmstead olmstead@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Systematists are charged with the difficult tasks of quantifying and
              characterizing diversity in large groups of organisms and of identifying
              discontinuities in morphological or genetic diversity that correspond with
              species delimitations. These tasks are especially critical for groups that
              have, 1) species that have become model systems for studying evolution and
              ecology, and 2) a large number of rare or threatened species. Species in the
              plant genus Mimulus have become model systems for the study of evolutionary
              processes in nature due to the diversity of interesting traits and adaptations
              in the genus. Species in this worldwide genus have different chromosome
              numbers, reproductive strategies, and pollinators, and interesting adaptations
              to extreme environments. Many species of Mimulus are also rare. Phylogenetic
              estimates of widely distributed, species-rich groups are important, because
              they give biologists the opportunity to study broad-scale diversification
              events, in which parallel radiations into spatially separated, similar
              environments may have occurred.  An estimate of the evolutionary relationships
              among the species is useful in documenting these radiations and enables
              comparative analyses. The role of systematists in delimiting species is equally
              vital. Conservation plans and studies of evolutionary processes require
              accurate circumscription of species. The purposes of this project are: 1) to
              determine the relationship of Mimulus to other genera, 2) to  determine whether
              Mimulus is a natural group, 3) to estimate species-level relationships and
              define taxonomic units within Mimulus and 4) to explore evolutionary patterns
              in the newly recognized radiation of Mimulus in Australia.

	The proposed
              research will accomplish two goals.   We will use DNA sequence information from
              two different genomes to further develop species-level phylogenetic hypotheses
              in the newly recognized Australian Mimulus clade. These analyses will provide
              an appropriate global perspective on diversification in the newly circumscribed
              family Phrymaceae. These will also provide an explicit phylogenetic framework
              for evaluating morphological changes in this group and will serve as a basis
              for future comparative studies.   We will use DNA  sequence and polymorphic DNA
              fragments to analyze patterns of genetic diversification in Mimulus sect.
              Eunanus. These patterns will be used to guide taxon delimitation and will serve
              as a model for defining taxa in groups with few morphological character
              differences. Because many of its species are rare, accurate species
              delimitation in Mimulus is critical to establishing appropriate management
              policies.


