Title       : Dissertation Research: Incorporating Ecological Stoichiometry into a
               Multi-trophic, Multi-resource Community Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0105014

Award Number: 0105014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9770               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathew A. Leibold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DIG DEB-0105014 - Leibold, M. and Hall, S.

Why do environmental changes
              affect composition of species among different localities?  What role do species
              play in the cycling of energy and nutrients in ecosystems?  These important yet
              difficult questions still challenge ecologists' mechanistic understanding of
              nature.  However, recent experimental and theoretical evidence suggests that a
              new approach to studying species interactions may help ecologists tackle and
              integrate these two questions.  This approach, called "ecological
              stoichiometry", incorporates constraints imposed by mass balance of key
              nutrients (such as phosphorus and nitrogen) into descriptions of
              plant-herbivore interactions.  Our research program focuses upon improving
              these descriptions and evaluating the importance of stoichiometry in complex
              natural and semi-natural, experimental conditions.  Currently, we are learning
              that, in ponds, species composition of zooplankton grazers is sensitive to
              changes in the relative proportion of phosphorus and carbon contained in their
              algal food.  Furthermore, the elemental quality of this food is driven, at
              least in part, by the relative and absolute supply of light and nutrients to
              pond ecosystems.  In our future work, we plan to more intensely quantify
              temporal dynamics of plant-grazer interactions in differing light:nutrient
              environmental regimes and with differing levels of predation pressure upon
              grazers.  This focus upon dynamics will enable us to more quantitatively
              evaluate the role that "ecological stoichiometry" may play in nature and to
              integrate it into extant mathematical theory.  Ultimately, our goal is to
              understand how supply of key resources to ecosystems influences composition of
              plant and herbivore species and flow of energy through food webs.  "Ecological
              stoichiometry" may provide a valuable framework to achieve this goal.

