Title       : Small Area and Longitudinal Estimation using Information from Multiple Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0105852

Award Number: 0105852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Lohr sharon.lohr@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              National surveys such as the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the National
              Crime Victimization Survey give accurate estimates of poverty or criminal
              victimization at the national level.  These surveys do not, however, contain
              sufficient sample sizes to give reliable estimates by themselves for "small
              areas" such as counties or minority groups, or to provide detailed information
              about events such as domestic violence that affect only a small part of the
              population.  Current methods for estimating poverty in small areas incorporate
              auxiliary information from administrative sources such as tax records through
              regression.  This approach assumes that the administrative data are without
              errors; it also does not incorporate information from other surveys or make use
              of longitudinal information.

This project focuses on combining information
              from multiple surveys, with possibly different sampling designs, to improve
              estimation in small areas.  Thus, for estimating poverty in small areas, the
              CPS can be used in conjunction with the American Community Survey and other
              sources.  Multivariate multi-level models that allow for missing data will be
              developed that make use of the correlations in the different surveys to
              increase the precision of the small area estimates, and theoretical properties
              of the estimates will be derived.  Modifications of the multivariate models
              will allow information from longitudinal surveys to be combined as well, and
              allow longitudinal analyses from a panel survey to be supplemented by
              information from related cross-sectional surveys.  The investigator will also
              develop methods for outlier detection and robust estimation using the multiple
              data sources.

Increasing amounts of information are available from surveys
              and other sources, and there is increasing demand from federal and local
              governments and from social scientists for estimates in small areas.  The
              models developed in this research will combine information from different
              surveys and use longitudinal and spatial aspects of the surveys to improve the
              accuracy of small area estimates, with no additional data collection cost.  The
              theoretical results derived in this research will also be useful for other
              areas of application such as genetics and quality improvement.  This research
              is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program and a
              consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey and
              Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.
