Title       : Experimental Analysis and Modeling of Digital Video Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0105404

Award Number: 0105404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjit K. Mitra mitra@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract 
Experimental Analysis and Modeling of Digital Video
              Quality

The cost of the production and transmission of digital video imagery
              is large and roughly proportional to the information in the images. 
              Consequently, information is routinely deleted from video imagery to reduce
              cost.  This deletion reduces the quality of the imagery as perceived by human
              viewers.  The ultimate objective of this project is to quantify and minimize
              this loss of quality.  As a step toward this goal, an understanding of how
              humans evaluate the quality of video images needs to be developed.  To gain
              this understanding a series of experiments are being performed in which human
              observers describe and evaluate defects that they detect in video images of the
              kind that are typical in digital video applications.  These images are
              processed so that they incorporate defects similar to those that occur in
              digital video.

The results of these experiments are then used to develop an
              understanding of how humans process and evaluate video imagery.  Image
              processing methods are being used to create sets of video defects that are
              quite similar to typical video defects, but are under much greater control. 
              These defects occur at random times and places within normal video clips.  They
              are treated as visual signals presented in a context of normal video imagery. 
              Established methods of visual pattern detection and visual pattern appearance
              analysis are applied to the study of these defects.  These include the
              following tasks: detecting the presence of a defect, rating the annoyance
              caused by a defect, and analyzing the perceived features of a defect.  The
              results of these experiments will be used to develop an increasingly detailed
              model of video quality evaluation by human observers.

