Title       : High-Performance Internet Router Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0105676

Award Number: 0105676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laxmi N. Bhuyan bhuyan@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With communication link speed exceeding terabit per second, packet processing at
              the routing processors is becoming the main bottleneck in network services. 
              The workload for these processors is very different compared to the
              general-purpose processors.

The two-year project develops necessary
              benchmark and simulation environment to analyze the impact of new architectural
              ideas, such as instruction-level parallelism, branch prediction, speculative
              execution, lock-up free caches and multiprocessing, on the performance of
              Internet router architectures.  First, it creates suitable workload by
              developing a set of communication benchmark programs that normally execute on
              high-performance routers.  These programs are executed on commercially
              available processors and their performance is compared with other standard
              benchmark applications.

The main contribution of the project lies in
              development of an execution-driven simulator for the router, where these
              communication programs are compiled and executed.  The simulator incorporates
              the network processor, line cards, and the backbone crossbar switch.  The input
              data to the simulator is obtained from real Internet traces, such as NLANR and
              UCB.  By incorporating new ideas in instruction-set design, memory subsystem,
              packet scheduling, and multiprocessing into the simulator, architectures for
              the next-generation Internet routers are developed and tested in this
              project.

