Title       : Diversity Dynamics of Middle Paleozoic Marine Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0105609

Award Number: 0105609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Foote mfoote@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Diversity Dynamics of Middle Paleozoic Marine Animals

Michael
              Foote
EAR-0105609

The subject of diversity dynamics explores how and why
              the number of species in the world changes over time.  This research will
              explore diversity dynamics with data on marine animals from the middle of the
              Paleozoic Era, about 440 to 350 million years ago.  The species composition of
              fossil communities will be inventoried, and the ancient geographic and
              environmental setting of these communities will be determined.  Using this new
              information as well as existing data from other sources, the times of
              origination and extinction of animal genera (the more inclusive taxonomic units
              that consist of one or more related species) will be estimated. This will allow
              the temporal patterns of diversity, origination, and extinction to be
              reconstructed, and these temporal patterns in turn will be used to assess the
              dynamics of diversity. When diversity increases over millions of years, does
              this tend to occur because the rate of production of new species has increased
              or because the rate of extinction of existing species has decreased? Likewise,
              does a decline in diversity tend to be marked by a decrease in origination or
              an increase in extinction?  In other words, is origination or extinction more
              important in regulating biological diversity?  Previous research shows that the
              style of diversity dynamics changes over the course of animal evolution, with
              extinction more important for about the first 300 million years of the history
              of animals (during the Paleozoic Era) and origination more important thereafter
              (during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Eras). There are reasons to think that
              diversity dynamics may vary geographically and environmentally. This research
              will be the first to test the predictions that, as far as diversity regulation
              is concerned, extinction is more important in the tropics than in the temperate
              zones and more important in shallow-water environments than in deeper waters. 
              In addition, it is known that shallow marine and tropical marine environments
              were more prevalent in the Paleozoic Era than later. The results of this
              research will therefore be significant in determining whether the observed,
              long-term temporal change in diversity dynamics may be underlain by a change in
              the prevalence of certain environmental and geographic settings in the marine
              realm.

