Title       : Collaborative research: Integrated Geophysical & Hydrogeologic Study of a Large
               Maine Peatland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0105322

Award Number: 0105322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Slater   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0105322
Slater

Solute transport controls vegetation and water chemistry
              gradients in peatlands.  Dispersive mixing and advective  transport in peat
              will be measured in laboratory column experiments and in a natural gradient
              tracer test in a peatland to determine the relative importance of these
              processes.  We will assess the retardation of solutes by matrix diffusion and
              the applicability of a dual-domain model.  Electrical geophysical methods,
              verified through direct measurements, will be used to track tracer
              migration.

An extensive geophysical and hydrogeologic characterization of
              the peatland will map variability in peat depth across the basin and identify
              stratigraphy.  Ground-penetrating radar and resistivity/induced polarization
              imaging will be employed.  Piezometer tests will provide a measure of the
              spatial variability in hydraulic conductivity within Caribou Bog, a large
              peatland in Central Maine.  Correlations between hydrogeologic and geophysical
              parameters will be assessed and used to provide constraints on parameters for
              ground-water flow and mass transport modeling.

Peat cores will be collected
              for laboratory tests to measure hydraulic conductivity, dispersion, effective
              porosity, specific surface and complex resistivity.  The variability of peat
              properties with depth will be determined through laboratory testing. 
              Relationships between peat electrical properties and hydrogeologic parameters
              will be evaluated.

An NaBr tracer will be injected into the peatland and
              monitored for 12 months.  The tracer will be tracked using surface and borehole
              electrical imaging.  The pixels on the geophysical images will be a substitute
              for extensive direct water sampling points, allowing rapid and nearly
              continuous tracking of solute distribution. 

Geophysical and ground-water
              chemistry data collected from the tracer test will be used to calculate the
              spatial moments of the solute plume through time.  Three-dimensional
              hydrogeologic and mass transport models will be calibrated to the geochemical
              and geophysical data to further evaluate mass transport parameters.  Matrix
              diffusion, the migration of solutes into hydraulically isolated pores, will be
              incorporated into the numerical models to evaluate this important
              process.

The project will evaluate:  (1) the nature of dispersive mixing,
              (2) the correlation of hydrogeologic and geophysical parameters, and (3) the
              role of mass transporft in peatlands. Peatlands are a large carbon reservoir
              and a significant source of methane gas.  Ground-water flow and mass transport
              are important in regulating geochemical  conditions favorable for methane
              production and peat accumulation.  The work will add to the understanding of
              processes that impact carbon and nutrient dynamics for peatlands.  Geophysical
              monitoring of a tracer will provide important information on the utility of
              this non-invasive method for tracking the movement of solute plumes.  This
              project will demonstrate the potential benefits of including electrical
              geophysics in hydrogeologic assessments and wetland characterization., 

