Title       : Conference: Horizons in Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a0105219

Award Number: 0105219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark N. Ellingham mne@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  An international research conference in the area of discrete mathematics and
              computer science will be held at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee
              from 21st to 24th May, 2001.  The conference is entitled `Horizons in
              Combinatorics,' and will be held in conjunction with the 16th Annual Shanks
              Lectures.  While all areas of graph theory, combinatorics and computing will be
              welcome at the conference, there will be an emphasis on the areas of ordered
              sets, colorings, and routing and flows in networks.  The conference includes
              the Shanks Lectures, to be given by W. T. (Tom) Trotter, Jr. (Arizona State
              University). These lectures have played a prominent role in Department of
              Mathematics at Vanderbilt University for the past sixteen years.  Many
              distinguished mathematicians in discrete mathematics (including Ron Graham and
              Laszlo Lovasz)  and other areas (including Israel Gelfand and Ingrid
              Daubechies) have been among the invited lecturers.  The other invited speakers
              for this year's conference are Jeff Kahn (Rutgers University), Eva Tardos
              (Cornell University), Robin Thomas (Georgia Institute of Technology), Bjarne
              Toft (University of Southern Denmark) and Peter Winkler (Lucent Technologies
              Bell Laboratories).  The organizers are Paul Edelman, Mark Ellingham, Jonathan
              Farley, Michael Plummer, and Jeremy Spinrad (all Vanderbilt University).  The
              proposed conference will last four days, providing ample time for an estimated
              70 to 100 contributed papers and for discussion among the attendees.

    The
              conference focuses on combinatorics, graph theory and computing. These areas
              form the essential theoretical background for much of our modern information
              infrastructure, and for many modern methods of optimizing activities such as
              transportation and scheduling.  Tools from these areas are used in areas as
              diverse as ecology, communication networks such as the Internet, economics and
              business, and military logistics.  The conference aims to promote interaction
              between researchers, to allow for the dissemination of the most recent research
              results, and to publicize the importance of these areas in modern society.

