Title       : Dissertation Research: Interspecific Interactions in Stage Structured Population
               Models: The Effects of Herbivores and Pollinators on Trillium grandiflorum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2001     
File        : a0105000

Award Number: 0105000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7111               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Kalisz kalisz@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal  0105000
DIG: Interspecific interactions in stage structured
              population models: The effects of herbivores and pollinators on Trillium
              grandiflorum

Susan Kalisz , Tiffany Knight


The growth rate of a plant
              population depends on the strength of its interactions with herbivores and
              pollinators, as well as the stage in the plant life-cycle in which these
              interactions take place.  Thus, variation in the magnitude of interactions with
              herbivores and pollinators among plant populations can cause variation in the
              rates of growth among natural plant populations.  If populations that have a
              high density of flowering plants are more attractive to both herbivores and
              pollinators, then the magnitude of their interactions with both herbivores and
              pollinators may be expected to change deterministically as plant populations
              grow or decline in time.  I have collected preliminary data on 12 populations
              of Trillium grandiflorum, a perennial forest herb.  The magnitude of its
              interactions with its mammalian herbivore, white tailed deer, and insect
              pollinator, bumblebees, vary highly among these populations, and these
              interactions primarily influence the reproductive stage in the plant
              life-cycle.  In a pilot experiment that manipulated plant density, significant
              changes in the magnitude of both plant-herbivore and plant-pollinator
              interactions were found. In this proposed work, I will quantify the amount
              variation among populations that is caused by variation in herbivore and
              pollinator interactions.  In addition, among several populations, I will
              experimentally manipulate the plant density to more fully quantify the
              density-dependent influences of herbivores and pollinators on Trillium
              survival, growth and fecundity.  I will use a modeling framework to synthesize
              all of this information and assess the effects of changes in interspecific
              interactions on the growth rate of plant populations.  



