Title       : Dissertation Research: Patterns of Reproductive Isolation in the Brachionus
               plicatilis Species Complex (Rotifera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0105040

Award Number: 0105040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean H. Rice sean.rice@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0105040
Rice

Speciation involves the splitting of a population, such that
              the members of either of the new populations are unable to mate and produce
              fertile offspring with the members of the other. In nearly all cases, little is
              known about exactly what biological changes are responsible for this
              reproductive isolation. The proposed research will address this question using
              the rotifer Brachionus plicatilis, populations of which inhabit salt lakes and
              coastal ponds worldwide and exhibit a range of abilities to interbreed. First,
              two genes from B. plicatilis will be sequenced to determine genetic divergences
              and the evolutionary relationships (i.e., a family tree) between different
              populations. Second, representatives of different populations will be crossed
              and the fate of the hybrids followed closely. The following specific questions
              will be addressed: What trait differences causing reproductive isolation arise
              first (i.e., what initiates speciation, and what finalizes it)? What
              evolutionary processes are responsible for their divergence?  How rapidly can
              and does a new species originate?

Understanding the biology underlying the
              evolution of reproductive isolation is critical to a general understanding of
              the processes responsible for producing biological diversity. Furthermore, many
              groups of organisms, including rotifers, have "hidden" species, populations
              that are fully reproductively isolated but do not look distinct and are thus
              not recognized as distinct species in most surveys. In addition to determining
              the true number of species currently lumped together as "Brachionus
              plicatilis", this study will provide insight into the mechanisms by which
              hidden species arise and how common they are, an understanding of which is
              essential to any accurate assessment of biodiversity.


