Title       : Strong Coupling Expansions for Models of Strongly Correlated Electrons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0105659

Award Number: 0105659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William O. Putikka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The properties of strongly correlated electrons in reduced dimensions remain
              some of the most fascinating problems in condensed matter physics.  The
              discovery of high temperature superconductivity focused attention on
              two-dimensional models, with the copper oxide plane found in high temperature
              superconductors well described by a square lattice.  The central theoretical
              hypothesis of research in high temperature superconductivity is that strong
              electronic correlations in reduced dimensions lead to enhanced superconducting
              correlations when the electrons are itinerant.  A corollary of this hypothesis
              is that the low energy excitations in high temperature superconductors are
              anomalous due to strong correlations.  Exactly how strong correlations produce
              these effects for two-dimensional systems, if at all, is currently not
              known.

This research will study the effects of strong correlations and
              reduced dimensionality on systems of itinerant electrons by calculating high
              temperature series for correlation functions of the 2D t-J model.  The 2D t-J
              model has been widely adopted as the fundamental model for high temperature
              superconductors.  Direct numerical results are needed to sort through
              approximate analytic treatments of 2D strongly correlated electrons.  High
              temperature series provide a means to obtain accurate, unbiased results in the
              thermodynamic limit for key properties of the 2D t-J model.

The specific
              quantities to be calculated are thermodynamic properties, equal time
              correlation functions and zero frequency susceptibilities.  The strength of
              superconducting correlations in the 2D t-J model are of key interest for
              applications to high temperature superconductivity.   Series will be calculated
              for all possible symmetries of spin singlet pairing correlations.  The full
              range of doping will be considered, from pseudogap behavior at small doping to
              the crossover to more conventional behavior at large doping.  The zero
              frequency, wave vector dependent charge susceptibility will be used to search
              for charge stripe formation, while the zero frequency, wave vector dependent
              spin susceptibility will aid interpretation of NMR experiments.  Equal time
              correlation functions and susceptibilities through their temperature
              derivatives can both be used to determine the momentum dependence of the low
              energy spin and charge excitations of the 2D t-J model.

 All quantities
              calculated for the full 2D square lattice will also be calculated for ladder
              lattices and other subsets of the square lattice with varying boundary
              conditions.  This will allow a detailed study of boundary effects for systems
              of strongly correlated electrons.  The series results will also be compared to
              density matrix renormalization group calculations on the same lattices and with
              the same boundary conditions.
%%%
Theoretical computational research will be
              conducted on a model for the behavior of electrons in the high temperature
              superconductors.  The results will aid in understanding these intriguing,
              fundamental and potentially useful materials.
***

