Title       : Chip-Interleaved Block-Spread Code Division Multiple Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0105612

Award Number: 0105612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgios B. Giannakis georgios@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Georgios Giannakis
Title: "Chip_interleaved Block-Spread Code Division Multiple
              Access"
CCR-0105612

With the demand for higher data rates  and wireless 
              services rising as fast as the Internet permeated our lives,  the need to cope
              with the idiosyncrasies of the shared wireless medium increases along with the
              challenges : multi-user interference (MUI), fading propagation effects,
              mobility-induced impairments, and high-performance telecommunication  systems 
              that are also bandwidth- and power-efficient. Today's Code-Division Multiple
              Access (CDMA) relies on long aperiodic pseudo-noise codes and strict power
              control to suppress MUI. On the other hand, CDMA proposals with symbol-periodic
              short spreading codes relax the need for power control at the expense of
              high-complexity  MUI cancellation which is less affordable at the mobile unit
              in the downlink. But also in the uplink, the frequency-selective fading that
              asynchronous high-rate transmissions experience as they propagate through 
              multipath-rich channels, degrades performance unless bandwidth is sacrificed.
              

The CDMA system of this grant relies on the novel idea of spreading a block
              of symbols with long, yet structured and deterministic, user codes. Our
              block-spread transmissions can be viewed as (and are implemented by)
              chip-interleaving of symbols spread by short codes. The attractive features of
              the resulting 
Chip-Interleaved Block-Spread (CIBS) CDMA system: i)flexibility
              to revert as block-spread TDMA, FDMA, Direct-Sequence-, or, Multicarrier-CDMA;
              ii)power- and bandwidth-efficiency; iii)MUI avoidance by-design;
              iv)full-multipath diversity and no loss of optimality with matched-filter
              reception; and v)low-complexity.  Basic research directions include:
              performance analysis and comparisons with competing alternatives in terms of
              capacity and bit error rates; mobility studies and development of
              timing-offset, 
carrier-frequency offset and channel estimation algorithms for
              acquisition and tracking; incorporation of multiple antennas to enhance
              diversity with space-time coding gains; investigation of optimal precoding,
              power-and-bit loading and adaptive modulation; and study of cellular
              system-level issues. 
