Title       : Expanding Capabilities for the University of Arizona Paleomagnetics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0105226

Award Number: 0105226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51771              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Butler butler@pmag.geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0105226
Butler

The Paleomagnetics Laboratory at the University of Arizona is
              an experimental facility utilized for a wide variety of geological projects. 
              The Paleomagnetics Laboratory Director and PI on this project, is currently
              collaborating with geologists on research projects in: (a) southeast Alaska;
              (b) the Bolivian Andes; (c) the Pyrenees of Spain; (d) Nepal; (e) Ethiopia; and
              (f) northern Tibet.  Funds from this grant will provide partial support for
              three equipment needs:

(1)	The primary instrument used to measure
              paleomagnetism is a superconducting rock magnetometer (SRM) that uses a
              refrigeration system to maintain low temperatures of the cryogenic components. 
              This refrigeration system requires periodic replacement which will be
              accomplished early in the grant period.
(2)	A common method of analyzing the
              magnetism of rock samples is thermal demagnetization in which samples are
              heated to progressively higher temperatures in a low magnetic field
              environment.  To increase capacity for processing samples in the laboratory, we
              will construct three additional thermal demagnetization furnaces. 
(3)	In
              paleomagnetic research, it is important to identify and characterize the
              iron-bearing minerals that carry magnetic signals.  We will purchase and
              install a Kappabridge susceptometer for measurements of magnetic susceptibility
              versus temperature and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility.  The resulting
              data will provide rapid and detailed information permitting identification and
              characterization of ferrimagnetic minerals.

Purchase and/or construction of
              these instrumentation items will permit The Paleomagnetics Laboratory at the
              University of Arizona to expand productivity and advance the experimental
              capabilities of this facility.  
***

