Title       : Testing For Regional Fluid Flow in Subducted Crust, Tinos Island, Cyclades
               (Greece)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0105927

Award Number: 0105927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay J. Ague jay.ague@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ague
EAR-0105927

Profound questions regarding the nature and extent of fluid
              migration in subducted crust have arisen in recent years. Strong evidence for
              regional fluid flow and large fluid fluxes can be found in some settings (e.g.,
              California), but is notably lacking in others (e.g., Alps, Cyclades). The
              latter case is particularly thought-provoking because clays, serpentine, and
              carbonate minerals in the precursor sediments and hydrothermally altered
              igneous rocks should have released abundant volatiles during prograde
              high-pressure/low-temperature (HP/LT) metamorphism. In an effort to resolve
              this apparent paradox, it is proposed to test for the presence of large-scale,
              regional fluid flow during both prograde subduction and retrograde exhumation
              and tectonic imbrication in the Cycladic Archipelago (Greece) by integrating
              high-accuracy digital field mapping, chemical analyses of rocks and minerals,
              and numerical models of coupled fluid flow and reaction. The specific focus is
              on the HP/LT rocks of Tinos island, which to date have yielded no clear
              evidence for regional flow despite prograde metamorphism during the Alpine
              orogeny to epidote-blueschist/eclogite facies. Futhermore, the potential for
              regional flow is not limited to the prograde stage, because many of the HP/LT
              rocks of the Cyclades underwent fluid infiltration and greenschist facies
              retrogression during exhumation. However, the processes and length scales of
              flow remain unclear.

The field and laboratory work will focus on the
              following straightforward criteria, applicable to both prograde and retrograde
              settings, to test for limited or no regional flow. (1) Local or limited
              devolatilization (prograde case) or volatile uptake (retrograde case); (2)
              derivation of vein mass from local surroundings as opposed to precipitation
              from through-going fluids; (3) limited mass transfer of non-volatile elements
              by flow processes; (4) small estimated fluid fluxes and; (5) absence of
              regional conduits for volatiles. Regional flow, on the other hand, requires
              that one or more of these criteria be violated. The numerical modeling will
              establish what type of flow regimes, whether local or regional in scope, are
              compatible with observed net transfer reactions, amounts and spatial
              distribution of reaction progress and element transport, volume changes of
              reaction, fluid compositions, and distribution of any flow conduits. 

The
              major goal will be direct determination of processes of volatile generation and
              pathways of volatile escape from downgoing slabs. The results will constrain
              models of the major and trace element composition of subduction zone fluids,
              critical for our understanding of mantle metasomatism and arc magma chemistry.
              Furthermore, the general directions of fluid motion, whether subvertical or
              slab-parallel will be estimated. Slab-parallel flow confined to regional
              tectonic units, in strong contrast to subvertical flow across layers, may
              deprive the mantle hanging wall of volatiles and transported non-volatile
              elements, therefore limiting mantle metasomatism and, ultimately, arc magma
              generation. Tectonic juxtaposition in active subduction zones allows downgoing
              rock units undergoing prograde metamorphism to release fluids that retrograde
              HP/LT terranes undergoing exhumation. What remains to be resolved is if the
              fluids can migrate regionally, or if the HP/LT packages absorb volatiles
              locally, preventing large-scale outwards fluid migration to the surface.

