Title       : Unwrapping Phase Images: Theory and Applications Using Probabilistic Inference
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0105719

Award Number: 0105719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Koetter koetter@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Koetter Abstract

Phase unwrapping in 2-dimensional topologies is a
              signal-processing problem that has been extensively studied over the past 20
              years and has important applications, such as medical imaging and synthetic
              aperture radar.  However, despite its importance in science and engineering, to
              date, phase unwrapping in 2-dimensional grids has remained an essentially
              unsolved problem.  This research takes a fresh approach to the problem using
              methods from probabilistic inference.  The work not only holds the promise of
              resulting in powerful phase unwrapping schemes based on the sum-product
              algorithm and structured variational methods, but also has the potential to
              provide deep theoretical insight into the ill-posed nature and solvability of
              the phase unwrapping problem.  Such an insight is extremely important for
              guiding the development of practical algorithms.

The main objective of this
              research is to develop and refine algorithms for phase unwrapping that are
              versatile, efficient and that significantly improve upon earlier approaches.
              One of the guiding ideas in this context is the use of probability inference as
              a nonlinear preprocessing step in a phase unwrapping scheme.  Initial
              experiments have confirmed that the performance of traditional techniques can
              indeed be significantly boosted with such an approach.  Success of this
              research can have a profound practical impact.  For example, in SAR
              interferometry, phase unwrapping is an essential step in generating terrain
              elevation maps, and this work can significantly enhance the accuracy of
              existing algorithms based on deterministic phase models.  Similarly, the
              proposed work will make routine phase imaging using Magnetic Resonance Imaging
              (MRI) signals feasible, which will significantly extend the clinical utility of
              MRI.  
