Title       : New directions in signal processing inspired by the auditory system
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0105499

Award Number: 0105499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramdas Kumaresan kumar@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0105499
U of Rhode Island
PI:  Kumaresan, Ramdas

Many natural and
              man-made sounds  have a  time-varying, broad-band spectrum. Although a number
              of computer processing methods have been developed  to analyze such signals,
              the auditory systems of humans and animals seem to  process such signals and
              make inferences on them much more successfully. What kind of signal analysis
              underlies  this phenomenon? In this research auditory scientists and signal
              processing engineers  collaborate to attempt to answer this question, and, in
              the process advance the state of the art in computer-based signal analysis. The
              potential applications of this research include improved feature extraction for
              sound/speech recognition/classification, separation of overlapping
              sounds/speech, sound source localization and better understanding of the
              auditory system. 

The auditory system, in addition to performing some form
              of spectral analysis, also extracts temporal modulation information from the
              acoustic signals. This information is encoded in the timing patterns of  the
              spike trains that originate in the inner ear. In this research, with the help
              of auditory scientists, the above  observations are translated into
              mathematically tractable signal processing problems. Specifically, the
              following basic question is explored: how can band-pass signals be represented
              by timing information only, as opposed to traditional Nyquist-rate amplitude
              sampling (as in Shannon's sampling theorem)?  Recent results by the
              investigators indicate that the information about the phase and envelope
              modulations of arbitrary band-pass signals can be represented by certain
              zero-crossings alone, if appropriate adaptive preprocessing(demodulation) is
              performed on the signal. Based on these ideas  an  analysis-synthesis
              procedures is being  developed in which time-varying signals such as speech can
              be effectively represented by a small number of modulated components using only
              timing information. The robustness of such procedures will be examined and the
              analysis-synthesis procedures will be applied to a number of applications
              mentioned in the above paragraph.


