Title       : GLOBEC 2000: GOA: Copepod and Euphausiid Growth and Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0105236

Award Number: 0105236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $980000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell R. Hopcroft hopcroft@ims.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rolf R. Gradinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental goal of the GLOBEC program is to understand the secondary
              production of the coastal Gulf of Alaska (GOA) and how the success of higher
              trophic levels, specifically salmon, are affected by the variability in the
              magnitude of secondary production seasonally, inter-annually, and at the
              decadal scale. Because of the highly advective nature of the GOA, it is
              necessary to establish the relative importance of local versus imported
              production. The PIs will determine the rates of development, growth and egg
              production for the dominant copepod and euphausiid species in the coastal GOA. 
              They will determine the in situ rates inshore and offshore by incubation
              techniques employing artificial cohorts (copepods) and individual females (both
              copepods and euphausiids). Incubation techniques are the only appropriate
              methods for this region due to its highly advective nature. The proposed
              research will put the in situ rates in perspective by determining their maximal
              rates under food- saturated conditions in the laboratory.  The investigators
              also will estimate the extent to which secondary production is food-limited in
              the field by determining the functional relationships of development, growth
              and egg production to body size, temperature and food regimes. Food regimes
              will be assessed in terms of chlorophyll and particulate organic carbon, plus
              the abundance and biomass of autotrophic and heterotrophic protists. In
              collaboration with other researchers in the GLOBEC program, the implications of
              physical versus biological processes on the success of salmon recruitment will
              be established and predicted.



