Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding Macroalgal
               Nitrate Metabolism and Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0105081

Award Number: 0105081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sherman tsherman@jaguar1.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding Nitrate
              Metabolism and Photosynthesis

Timothy Sherman and Julien Lartigue

All
              plants and especially aquatic plants are subject to temporal variation in the
              availability of nutrients and light.  As a consequence, many plants appear to
              have evolved a capacity to regulate their metabolism in response to these
              fluctuations.  How plants tune their photosynthetic and nutrient assimilation
              pathways to the ambient conditions and integrate these two fundamental
              processes is the focus of this research.  Three cosmopolitan genera of
              macroalgae - Enteromorpha (Chlorophyta), Gracilaria (Rhodophyta), and Gelidium
              (Rhodophyta) - will serve as the plant models for this work.  The goals of this
              research are 1) to understand how non-synchronous fluctuations in light and
              nitrate availability influence nitrate metabolism and 2) to develop a model for
              predicting rates of nitrate reduction in the field.  The fate of nitrate, from
              uptake to assimilation, will be tracked using the stable isotope, N15, while
              pulse amplitude modulated (PAM) fluorometry will allow for repeated,
              non-invasive sampling of photosynthetic pathways.  This integrative approach
              will lead to a linking of the physiology of nitrate metabolism and
              photosynthesis in the context of a plant's physical and chemical surroundings. 
              The result will be a more complete picture of macroalgal physiology at the
              level of the whole organism. This work also seeks to integrate research with
              undergraduate education by including aspects of this research in a marine
              botany course.

