Title       : New Prediction Paradigms for Parallel and Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0105628

Award Number: 0105628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory T. Byrd gbyrd@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Rotenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to expand and redefine the role of prediction-based
              techniques for parallel and distributed systems.  First, we reduce barrier
              synchronization overhead by predicting the final producer of a
value before
              the barrier.  This producer identification allows the consumer to speculatively
              proceed past the barrier, only waiting on the actual production as needed. 
              Second, we introduce the slipstream
paradigm to multiprocessor systems.  A
              redundant version of each parallel thread runs concurrently, its execution
              reduced by speculatively removing long-latency events, such as shared memory
              writes.  The reduced thread dynamically detects sharing patterns, which are
              used by the original thread to optimize its coherence and synchronization
              actions, improving overall performance.  Finally, we investigate the use of
              producer-validated message prediction to reduce traffic in a message-passing
              environment.  Both the producer and the consumer of a message predict its
              contents, using redundant prediction histories. Since the producer knows the
              results of the consumer's prediction, it need only send those data that were
              not correctly
predicted.  This traffic reduction is significant in
              environments in which communication is much more costly than computation, such
              as networked embedded systems.  These three avenues of research represent an
              excursion into new frontiers of prediction-based technology, resulting in
              parallel systems that scale to new levels of availability and performance.


