Title       : Small-Scale Dynamic Reconfigurability for Large-Scale Benefits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0105626

Award Number: 0105626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419784             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Lach jlach@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mircea R. Stan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Skadron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              General purpose processors (GPPs) are designed to implement on fixed
              configuration that is good on average but may not be well suited for individual
              applications.  In fact, applications can have drastically different execution
              characteristics (e.g. branch prediction technique preference, cache
              configuration and policy preference, low-power opportunities).  This suggests
              the use of device reconfigurability, but generic reconfigurable logic of any
              substantial scale (e.g. most field programmable gate array (FPGA) technology)
              is slow, lacks density, and is power-hungry.  Yet many processor structures are
              easily adaptable to a wide variety of configurations.  This research will
              develop dynamic, small-scale, partial reconfigurability for such structures. 
              This "Dynaptable" approach has the further benefit that it integrates work at
              the architectural, logic, and circuit levels.

The Dynaptable approach
              consists of three key elements:

   1.  Flexible structures:  designing key
              processor structures with judicious amounts of reconfigurable hardware to
              provide flexibility in a low-cost, non-invasive way.

   2.  Run-time
              monitoring:  determining the current configuration's performance or
              effectiveness compared to other possible competing configurations.

   3. 
              Dynamic reconfiguration:  using the results of run-time monitoring to adapt to
              a new configuration that improves the chosen figure of merit (e.g. performance,
              energy-delay product, fault tolerance).

The research will identify the most
              profitable places for adding small-scale reconfigurability, design the
              requisite reconfigurable elements, and develop the most effective and
              lowest-cost techniques for dynamic monitoring and adaptation.  This work will
              have an impact on the design of a variety of processor components (branch
              predictor, cache, datapath, etc.) for a range of processing environments
              (embedded systems, superscalar, SMT, etc.).  The final goal is to develop a
              consistent methodology for dynamically adapting GPP microarchitectures for
              improved performance, lower power, and increased fault tolerance.

