Title       : High-Pressure Behavior of Framework Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0105864

Award Number: 0105864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Ross nross@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross J. Angel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ross
EAR-0105864

Framework structures encompass a wide range of natural and
              synthetic compounds of importance in the Earth sciences, solid state chemistry,
              condensed matter physics, and materials sciences. Framework structures are
              materials whose atomic structure can be described in terms of the linking
              together of tightly-bonded groups of atoms such as SiO4 or PO4 that can be
              thought of forming relatively rigid polyhedra whose corners are formed by the
              anions such as oxygen. The frameworks are then formed by the condensation of
              these polyhedra, i.e. by sharing of the oxygen anions.  Examples of framework
              structures formed of tetrahedral groups such as SiO4 and AlO4 include major
              groups of minerals such as the feldspars (60% of the Earths crust), and
              zeolites that are the most important family of catalysts in the chemical
              industry. Other frameworks, including minerals stable in the deeper Earth such
              as garnets, incorporate network-forming tetrahedra and octahedra. Perovskites,
              which are probably the single most technologically-important group of compounds
              because of their electrical and elastic properties, are examples of frameworks
              composed entirely of corner-linked octahedra. 
Understanding the principles of
              behavior of these common structure types is important for a number of reasons.
              For example, in geochemistry we need to be able to predict the limit of solid
              solution of other components into end-member compounds. For geophysics one
              needs to predict the influence of these minor chemical components on the
              elasticity of minerals. The interaction of elastic and structural properties is
              also important for understanding the behavior of such perovskites such as
              ferro-relaxors and ferro-elastics that are used in many industrial devices.
              High-pressure studies can provide important insights into the general
              properties of frameworks for several reasons. First, pressure is energetically
              a far stronger driving force than temperature and thus one can explore a far
              greater range in structural behavior by compressing a structure rather than
              heating it. Second, pressure allows the repulsive regime of the inter-atomic
              potential to be explored directly. And, third, determination of the unit-cell
              constants of a material yield not only the volume as a function of pressure
              (for thermodynamic calculations and petrology) and the bulk modulus which is
              important for geophysical interpretations, but also certain combinations of
              individual elastic moduli. The philosophy of the research that we propose to
              undertake is to study the evolution of selected structure types under pressure
              by single-crystal X-ray diffraction up to pressures of 10 GPa. Current
              methodologies do not allow the sufficiently precise determination of the
              structural parameters of crystals under high pressures to identify all of the
              small changes that occur in framework structures as pressure is applied.
              Therefore a significant part of the work proposed in this grant is devoted to
              the improvement in the experimental techniques, which we expect will have wider
              applications than to high-pressure research alone. From the specific results we
              expect to be able to derive general principles concerning the behavior of
              framework structures under a range of conditions. 

