Title       : Collaborative Research: Software for Decomposing Solution Sets of Polynomial
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0105653

Award Number: 0105653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Sommese sommese@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is on the development of efficient numerical algorithms and high
              quality software to solve systems of polynomials.  A basic problem is to
              decompose the positive dimensional subsets of solutions into irreducible
              components.  The numerical approach of Sommese, Verschelde, and Wampler is
              based on generic slicing with linear spaces, generic projections into lower
              dimensional linear spaces, and use of classical interpolation techniques to
              numerically do what elimination theory does in symbolic programs.  Given a
              polynomial system with parameters, a goal of the project is to find equations
              on the parameters that need to be satisfied for the system to have a positive
              dimensional component of solutions.  Two applications targeted by this project
              are factoring multivariate polynomials and finding overconstrained
              mechanisms.

A major outcome of this work will be publicly available software
              to solve polynomial systems that arise in science and engineering.  This work
              is carried out in the research fields of numerical analysis and computer
              algebra whose mission is to provide the scientific community with software to
              solve mathematical problems.  Since polynomial systems are used as models in
              application areas as far apart as chemical reaction systems, the design of
              mechanisms, or economic equilibria to name but a few areas, the focus of the
              project on such basic models as polynomial systems is appropriate.  Besides the
              technology transfer of advanced mathematical tools into science and
              engineering, an important aspect of this project is to introduce students in
              the design and use of the developed software.

