Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics and the Evolution of a Novel Red
               Blood Cell Morphology in Plethodontid Salamanders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0105824

Award Number: 0105824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9996               (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Wake wakelab@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will focus on a multidimensional analysis of evolution at
              different hierarchical levels, from the molecular to the organismal and
              phylogenetic.  The study organisms, plethodontid salamanders of the genus
              Batrachoseps, are unique among vertebrates in displaying great variation in the
              proportion of red blood cells in the circulating blood - from nearly all
              nucleated to nearly all enucleated.  The variation appears to be correlated
              with degree of organismal specialization, in particular with elongation,
              attenuation, and miniaturization, in a group of organisms that is specialized
              for semifossorial existence in seasonally dry environments.  A complicating
              factor is the very high genome sizes in these organisms, which raises the
              possibility that enucleation is a phenomenon associated with a fundamental
              conflict between large cells, a necessary correlate of large genomes, and small
              blood vessels, a necessary correlate of miniaturization.  The study will
              investigate the possibility that enucleation is a mechanical outcome of
              miniaturization, by conducting ecological and morphological studies.  In order
              to proceed it will be necessary to develop a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for
              the genus, using molecular markers.  Mitochondrial genes have already been
              studied, and there is good resolution of many of the tips of the phylogenetic
              tree; new work will focus on more conservative nuclear genes and deeper
              branches in the tree.  A phylogenetic hypothesis  will permit a comparative
              biological analysis of this problem area and a determination of whether
              increases in body size within a miniaturized lineage are accompanied by
              increases in nucleation levels for red blood cells.

The significance of this
              research lies in the focused effort to study how different levels of
              organization -- molecular, cellular, organismal, ecological, and phylogenetic
              -- interact during development to give form and substance to lineages of
              organisms.  A simultaneous investigation of different levels provides a
              realistic assessment of how evolution proceeds in lineages through time, and
              permits an assessment of the nature of general adaptation processes and their
              implications.  The study also holds promise for opening new avenues of research
              on the puzzling phenomenon of increases in genome size, which are so great in
              these organisms as to strongly effect cellular and organismal levels (the
              classic C-value paradox).





