Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Stone Tools and the Brain: A Positron
               Emission Tomographic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0105265

Award Number: 0105265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Toth toth@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Nicholas Toth, Mr. Dietrich Stout will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of the research is to gain insight into
              the cognitive abilities of early humans and to accomplish this, Mr. Stout will
              examine the brain activity associated with the production of simple "Mode 1"
              stone tools. The first such objects appear in the archaeological record ca. 2.5
              million years ago and because of their durable nature, over most of the period
              of human evolution they comprise the primary evidence available to reconstruct
              behavior. They provide the best, and often, the only insight into early human
              mental ability. Archaeologists have experimentally replicated Mode 1 tools
              which consist of simple flakes removed from a larger core of raw material as
              well as the successively more complicated succeeding lithic technologies.
              However it is difficult to draw a direct link between these manufacturing
              techniques and cognitive organization. It is unknown exactly what minimal basic
              cognitive abilities are necessary to produce simple stone tools and the degree
              to which early humans were capable of abstract thought. To address this
              problem, Mr. Stout will conduct Positron Emission Tomography (PET) to determine
              mental ability by establishing a more direct link between flintknapping and
              brain activation. Six technologically naive subjects will participate in a
              longitudinal study. PET images of three experimental conditions (control,
              novice flintknapping and experienced flintknapping) will be collected. Use of a
              slowly decaying tracer for imaging will allow experimental tasks to be
              performed under relatively naturalistic conditions outside a scanner, prior to
              image collection. 

Three kinds of data will be collected: PET images,
              attributes of the tools produced, and videotapes of task performance. The main
              research goals to be pursued with these data will be 1. dissection of
              sensorimotor and cognitive aspects of flintknapping skill and 2. exploration of
              neural, artifactual and behavioral aspects of skill acquisition. PET image data
              will be used to test specific hypotheses derived from both the literature and
              from results of a pilot study. Of particular interest will be putative
              activation of "cognitive planning" areas in novices and potential overlap with
              classic cortical "language" (Broca's and Wernicke's) areas. The ultimate
              objective of the research is to apply the results to the archaeology of human
              origins. A large body of research in the experimental neurosciences now allows
              patterns of brain activation to be interpreted in terms of mental processes
              such as motor or strategic planning. In this fashion, imaging of tool
              replication experiments will provide insight into the necessary information
              processing requirements of particular flintknapping tasks. This insight may
              then be judiciously applied to cognitive interpretations of the archaeological
              record.

