Title       : Architectural Support for Scalable High-Speed Routers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0105529

Award Number: 0105529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nian-Feng Tzeng tzeng@cacs.louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Scalable high-speed routers are necessary to handle rapidly growing traffic in
              the Internet at the aggregated packet forwarding rates expected to reach
              terabits per second.  This proposal deals with a novel router architecture with
              good scalability and capable of forwarding hundreds of millions of packets per
              second, in order to keep up with future transmission technologies.  It aims to
              help advance the state-of-the-art of router design and to enable large
              networking configurations.  The project contains both basic research and
              experimental systems activities, including the major objectives of (1)
              developing a fast packet classification subsystem (PCS), (2)pursuing a scalable
              switching fabric (SSF) for interconnecting line cards,
(3) assessing the use
              of a simultaneous multithreading SMT) processor to replace the conventional
              processor(s) in each forwarding engine, and 4) investigating into effective
              fault-tolerant schemes for key router components.  The first three objectives
              are related to router scalability and performance,
whereas the last one is for
              reliability improvement, which is especially crucial as the router sizes grow. 
              The fast PCS proposed comprises multiple forwarding engines and a novel
              cache-oriented multistage structure (COMS), which directs packets arriving at
              line cards to those forwarding engines for table lookups.  The COMS caches
              lookup results at its constituent switching elements to enable fast and
              concurrent lookups of subsequent packets.  Each forwarding engine keeps only
              partial routing/filter lookup tables, rather than full ones (as in any other
              router design).  The SSF is based on PI's earlier switching fabric work, with
              an appropriate set of wrap-around connections and additional logics for
              hardware multicast support. An initial study on the use of an SMT processor to
              handle multiple table-lookup processes, with one thread for a process, is
              encouraging, and its extensive assessment will be conducted in this project. 
              Caching lookup outcomes optimally in COMS will be modeled formally as a graph
              optimization problem, with its solution being developed.  Research results from
              this project are likely to have material, positive impacts on future router
              design, advancing networking technologies to facilitate the continuous
              expansion of the Internet for years to come.  They will also enrich the
              lecturing materials of such courses as computer communications and networks,
              network computing, and distributed systems.

