Title       : Moving Horizon Estimation and Nonlinear, Large-Scale Model Predictive Control of
               Chemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0105360

Award Number: 0105360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210636             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Rawlings jbraw@che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: James B. Rawlings 
Institution: University of
              Wisconsin
Proposal Number: 0105360

To maintain economic competitiveness,
              maximize product quality and operate more environmentally benign processes, the
              chemical process industries need to invest in process monitoring and control
              technology.  Industrial process operations are becoming increasingly integrated
              and complex, operation against constraints is common and the dynamic process
              behavior requires more sophisticated online analysis and decision making in
              order to optimize the process performance.  The goal of this research is to
              address three outstanding challenges in the further development of advanced
              chemical control methodology:
1. State estimation based on dynamic models and
              online measurements is used to further improve process operations.  The moving
              horizon estimation (MHE) approach addresses this need as it allows both
              nonlinear models and estimator constraints as part of the problem formulation. 
              The PI plans to study a series of issues and application problems in order to
              understand and expand the current applicability of MHE theory.
2. Use model
              predictive control (MPC) for online optimization of an integrated, large-scale
              plant.  The PI plans to exploit the inherent communication capability provided
              by the forecast horizon in the MPC controllers.
3. Develop a suite of
              nonlinear MPC test problems for closed-loop control.  These problems should
              provide a convenient standard for the research community to test new nonlinear
              MPC theories, approaches and algorithms.

Expected impacts for this research
              include: improved understanding of the fundamental issues surrounding the
              online use of models for monitoring, inference and decision making; direct
              impact on industrial plant operations and control; and rapid and wide
              dissemination of new research results to educators by the development and
              release of high-level source code.

