Title       : Collaborative Research: Restricted Caches, An Experimental and Theoretical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0105283

Award Number: 0105283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric K. Torng torng@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Enbody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The gap between processor speed and main memory access speed
can cause
              processors to spend much of their time waiting on memory accesses.
As the gap
              has grown, this memory latency has become an
increasingly significant
              bottleneck in processor performance.
Existing cache designs have worked well
              to fill the gap,
but new cache designs are needed as the gap continues to
              grow.
A promising new class, restricted caches, includes
skew caches, assist
              caches, victim caches, and other multi-lateral caches.
Experiments have
              indicated that some restricted caches
offer significant potential for
              improvement over traditional
set-associative caches.  They also have revealed
              some interesting
phenomenon that are not possible in traditional caches.  For
              example,
skew caches seem to exhibit self-reorganization.
However, no
              theoretical explanation exists for this behavior or for
why these restricted
              caches perform well.

The investigators study the performance of distinct
              restricted cache
structures and algorithms for managing them.
The
              investigators first identify an underlying structural difference
between
              restricted caches and traditional fully-associative
caches: all cache lines
              are not identical.  Specifically, in a
restricted cache, unlike in a
              traditional set-associative cache,
there exist pairs of memory blocks whose
              sets of legal cache lines
are not identical and have a non-empty
              intersection.
Using this insight, the investigators evaluate and
compare
              different cache structures using new techniques.
Most other analytical studies
              of caches focus only on the performance
of algorithms for a given cache
              structure and do not explicitly
compare the effectiveness of distinct cache
              structures.  The
investigators also study the performance of various
              algorithms
for these cache structures using a variety of techniques such
as
              resource augmentation, standard competitive analysis,
and trace-based
              simulation.  Their results indicate that traditional
cache management
              algorithms behave very differently on restricted
caches than they do on
              traditional set-associative caches.
For example, the least recently used (LRU)
              algorithm that is strongly
competitive for traditional caches is not
              competitive at all for
restricted caches unless explicit rearrangement of
              items in the
cache is allowed.  Finally, the investigators construct a
trace
              warehouse to facilitate the comparison of distinct trace-based
simulation
              studies as well as to help new researchers learn this
this evaluation
              technique.
