Title       : Meta-MAC Protocols: A New Dimension to Adaptation in Medium Access Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0105985

Award Number: 0105985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras Farago farago@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Violet R. Syrotiuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   In all networks that have a broadcast channel as the basis of
              communication, the medium access control (MAC) protocol serves a vital role, as
              it directly controls the access to communication resources.  As the networks
              and the traffic they carry both become more heterogeneous the question is how
              to best adapt to the unknown or changing network conditions.                   
                                                                                             
                               The natural answer provided by most existing protocols is to
              include some kind of adaptivity in order to dynamically adust their operation
              to the actual network conditions. Examples of adaptivity include hybrid
              protocols that periodically recompute slot assignments, adjustment of
              retransmission probabilities (e.g., backoff mechanisms), as well as many other
              ad hoc solutions that tend to become unstable under high load.            
              Rather than what amounts to essentially tuning parameters of the protocol "on
              the fly," we instead propose a new "meta-MAC" protocol framework that
              implements new dimension of adaptivity, on top of existing MAC protocols. 
              Specifically, we propose research on a method, whose roots are in Artificial
              Intelligence (A1), to systematically and automatically combine a set of
              existing protocols into a single MAC protocol in a novel way, such that the
              resulting combined protocol has provable optimality properties.                
              Each protocol in the set may be a good candidate for certain situations.  For
              example, a randomized contention based protocol is good for low loads, due to
              its low delay, while an allocation based protocol is desirable for high loads,
              as it avoids the breakdown induced by too many collisions.  Then the
              meta-protocol will automatically find combined decisions that dynamically
              represent the "best of the team," under the actual network conditions, without
              having to know in advance which of the conditions will actually occur and how
              they will change.  Thus, rather than tuning parameters in an ad hoc manner, we
              systematically and automatically optimize the medium access approach itself.   
                                                                                             
                    The proposed research program intends to fully explore the promising
              potential of the novel meta-MAC protocol aggregation approach, in which
              encouraging initial results of the PI and co-PI have already shown the
              principal feasibility.  Specifically, the three main research directions
              include aggregating more sophisticated MAC protocols (such as IEEE 802.11),
              dynamically altering the protocol mix to support Quality of Service (QoS) at
              the MAC layer, and an in-depth study of the correctness, stability, and
              consistency of meta-MAC protocols.                                             
                                                                                             
                                      Our proposed meta-MAC optimization runs autonomously
              without any centralized control or any message exchanges.  This makes the
              meta-MAC approach inherently scalable to arbitrarily large networks.  Thus, the
              meta-MAC approach is ideally suited for the evolving application requirements
              of today's increasingly heterogeneous networking environments.                 
                                                                                             
                                In addition to the above, we plan to incorporate the general
              approach into the graduate curriculum in the new Telecommunications Engineering
              Program at the University of Texas at Dallas, thus enriching the traditional
              telecommunications curriculum with novel adaptive methodologies that provide
              intelligent, highly  adaptive solutions in large, dynamically changing,
              heterogrneous networks.
