Title       : Dissertation Research: Domestication in a Tropical Fruit Tree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0105134

Award Number: 0105134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Schaal
0105134

Domestication occurs as humans select and cultivate plants
              from wild populations.  In many crop species, the adoption of high-yielding,
              uniform cultivars has resulted in the abandonment of genetically variable,
              indigenous varieties.  It is well known that during these later stages of
              domestication, genetic diversity is lost as high-yield crops are developed;
              however, the fate of genetic variation during the early stages of domestication
              (prior to intensive plant breeding) is not known.  This study examines the
              process of domestication in a tropical fruit tree, the purple mombin (Spondias
              purpurea L.), which is believed to be in the early stages of domestication. 
              DNA sequence data will be used to pinpoint the geographic origin of the purple
              mombin, and to examine relationships among cultivated and wild populations. 
              Genetic variation will be quantified to determine the proportion of total
              variation captured in the cultivated populations.  

Recently, much attention
              has refocused on crops and their wild relatives as concerns mount about the
              lack of genetic diversity in cultivated species.  This proposal will result in
              a comprehensive assessment of the origin, distribution, and amount of genetic
              variation in a tropical fruit tree, providing insights into the evolutionary
              processes involved in the domestication of our cultivated plants.  Historical
              knowledge of cultivated plant populations will yield critical information
              required for developing conservation strategies. 

