Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecological Genetics of Life-history Evolution in Mimulus
               guttatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0105177

Award Number: 0105177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9390               (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Willis jwillis@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A central goal of biology is to understand ecological and genetic factors which
              have contributed to the diversity of life.  Adaptation to different ecological
              conditions occurs through changes in the genome and in visible traits.  Few
              studies have analyzed the genomic differences underlying divergence.  This
              project aims to answer fundamental questions regarding the adaptive differences
              between two dramatically different wild populations of Mimulus guttatus (yellow
              monkeyflower).  One population consists of tiny, small flowered annual plants
              living in extreme alpine conditions. The other population includes
              large-flowered perennials inhabiting sand dunes in a coastal temperate
              environment.  This study will use genome mapping approaches to identify and
              characterize the genetic basis of trait differences in a common garden
              environment.  
In addition, this experiment will reveal how particular
              genotypes perform in different natural environments with respect to fitness. 
              By analyzing recombinant inbred lines (advanced generation hybrids between
              annual and perennial) in a reciprocal transplant experiment, fitness variation
              associated with specific genomic regions in each of the two natural
              environments will be assessed.  This genetic dissection of local adaptation
              will help clarify which traits and chromosome regions are associated with
              performance in the wild.

Results of these experiments will provide an
              unusually complete understanding of basic evolutionary questions, such as how
              genetic differences contribute to an organisms' ability to occupy diverse
              ecological environments.

