Title       : Collaborative: Electro/Magnetoencephalography Signal Processing Methods and
               Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0105504

Award Number: 0105504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Lewine jeffreylewine@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative:  Electro/Magnetoencephalography Signal Processing Methods and
              Performance

Arye Nehorai
EECS Department
University of Illinois at
              Chicago

Detecting electric sources in the brain is important for both
              understanding its function and for clinical applications.  Examples include
              mapping the brain activities and finding foci of epilepsy activities before
              surgical treatment.  We are developing detection methods that find the sources
              through computer processing of measurements from arrays of sensors around the
              head. More specifically, we employ eletro/Magnetoencephalography (E/MEG)
              sensors that measure electric potentials on the scalp and induced magnetic
              field outside the head.  We are developing several new methods of processing
              the E/MEG signals, analyzing their performance and validating with real data
              their applicability, thus contributing to improvements in the use and
              performance of E/MEG equipment and to increase the capabilities of neurological
              data processing tools.

We hope to solve some of the most currently relevant
              E/MEG problems: (i) estimating and tracking paths of functional and neuronal
              connectivity, following the trajectories of cerebral sources, (ii) estimating
              concentrated and extended sources, in the presence of noise with unknown
              spatio-temporal covariance, (iii) simultaneously estimating source parameters
              and tissue conductivities, (iv) developing computationally efficient methods
              for realistically-shaped head models, which reduce the demands on segmentation
              algorithms, (v) estimating source parameters for evoked responses with
              inhomogeneous epochs. 

We are also deriving performance measures for
              evaluating the newly proposed methods allowing comparison with existing systems
              and techniques; identifying those that are effective and helping in the optimum
              design of future systems. 

Finally, we are using empirical data sets
              evaluate and validate methods.  These data sets are being derived by the Dr.
              Jeffrey Lewine's group from Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences studies where
              whole-head MEG and high-density EEG are recorded simultaneously.  The Nehorai
              group is developing the processing methods and the two groups will collaborate
              on their evaluation and validation. 

