Title       : Investigation of Stability and Approximation Issues via Renorming for
               Distributed Parameter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0105253

Award Number: 0105253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Fabiano fabiano@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project is concerned with issues related to exponential and asymptotic
              stability of solutions to linear and nonlinear distributed parameter systems. 
              Particular attention is focused on the investigation of how stability
              properties are preserved by finite dimensional semidiscrete approximation
              schemes and how stability properties are affected by disturbances or by system
              parameters.  The PI studies most issues by making use of an appropriate
              renorming of the underlying state space.  The idea of the renorming method is
              that while every mathematical model is associated with a natural norm (which
              measures an important quantity in the model, such as energy), it is often the
              case that a judicious choice of a new norm can be especially useful for insight
              into a specific issue such as exponential stability.  Frequently a new norm
              also allows construction of improved Galerkin approximation schemes.  For
              linear models, the PI considers applications including hybrid systems (i.e.
              coupled dynamics, such as models of thermoelasticity) and systems of delay
              equations, as well as questions such as the implications of renorming in
              feedback control problems.  For nonlinear models, the renorming is an issue for
              investigation at the stages of linearization and approximation. 

Today's
              scientists and engineers are using increasingly complex and sophisticated
              mathematical models, and they often require quite accurate answers to difficult
              and delicate questions.  A particularly important issue for many models, and
              the main focus of this project, is exponential stability.  Typical of questions
              related to exponential stability would be - do vibrations of a mechanical
              structure (robot arm, smart material actuator, satellite antenna, digital
              reading device, ...) dissipate and at what rate; does the flow of a fluid
              (around a wing or rudder, in a mixing process, ...) stay smooth or become
              turbulent; do computer simulations preserve the stability behavior of the
              original model; etc.  These and other issues will be investigated using a
              mathematical method known as renorming, which also often leads to the
              construction of improved computer simulation methods (approximation schemes). 
              Undergraduate students will be actively involved in some lines of research,
              giving them an exposure to topical and scientifically relevant mathematical
              models, training in the use of the latest scientific computing algorithms and
              software, and an appreciation of applied mathematics.
