Title       : Spatially-Resolved Polymer Degradation Via Electron Spin Resonance Imaging
               (ESRI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0105622

Award Number: 0105622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shulamith Schlick schlicks@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is directed to the study of polymer degradation due to UV irradiation
              and thermal treatment in the presence of air and ozone/air mixtures.  The
              proposed studies will be performed on polymers containing hindered amine
              stabilizers (HAS) as protecting additives.  The main method of study is
              electron spin resonance imaging (ESRI) of nitroxides and other radical
              intermediates formed in the degradation process.  Spatial information will be
              encoded in the spectroscopy by collecting ESR spectra in the presence of
              magnetic field gradients.  1D ESRI will provide the spatial distribution of the
              radical intensity, and 2D spatial-spectral ESRI will allow visualization of the
              line shapes along the sample depth.  The experiments will be performed as a
              function of treatment time, wavelength of the UV source, and temperature in
              thermal degradation.  Additional information will be obtained by spin probe
              ESR, UV, FTIR, and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC).  Photo- and thermal
              degradation will be performed on two classes of polymers: 1. Polymers based on
              styrene, acrylonitrile and butadiene, as homopolymers and in different
              combinations as copolymers.  This group will include the copolymers
              poly(styrene-co-butadiene), poly(acrylonitrile-co-butadiene) and
              poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile), and poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene)
              (ABS).  2. Copolymers of polypropylene and ethylene prepared by sequential
              polymerization.  These polymers consist of a semicrystalline polypropylene (PP)
              matrix and a dispersed amorphous elastomeric component, and have a
              phase-separated morphology; the study of these systems will benefit from the
              rich literature available on polypropylene degradation, but will present the
              challenge and advantage of properties modification by addition of the elastomer
              phase.  The ability to perform nondestructive profiling via ESRI is an
              important advantage compared to other (destructive) methods now in use for
              probing the spatial dimension.
%%%
The proposed research is expected to:
              identify specific morphological domains where the degradation process is
              accelerated; map the consumption of the stabilizer within the sample depth on
              the scale of mm, and within the morphological domains on the scale of
              micrometers, contribute to the understanding of environmental factors, for
              instance the effect of irradiation wavelength and ozone; and lead to
              nondestructive spectral profiling as a method for the detection of early events
              in polymer degradation and stabilization.

