Title       : A Numerical Investigation of Convection Initiation by Instabilities along
               Outflow Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0105279

Award Number: 0105279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Lee bdlee@bentley.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Finley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      SPARC
	      Greeley, CO  80639    970/351-1910

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Three-dimensional aspects of storm outflow play an important role in the
              initiation of convective storms.  In many forecast scenarios, the primary
              question is not whether deep convection will develop along a given boundary but
              where and when along this boundary will storms be favored.  Preliminary and
              related modeling studies by the investigators as well as recent observations
              suggest a link between anomalies/instabilities along outflows and other
              convergence boundaries and convection initiation.  A three-dimensional
              convective cloud model will be employed to improve understanding of the
              processes that prompt deep convection initiation at specific locations along
              outflow and other convergence boundaries.  As part of this study, the detailed
              three-dimensional structure of outflow boundaries and related moist convective
              forcing will be investigated in environments favoring specific instabilities
              along the outflow leading edge.  Observations will be used where possible to
              validate the results from the numerical simulations.  The underlying objective
              of the project is to improve the prediction of initial storm location by
              applying the knowledge obtained from this research.  Specific primary
              objectives of the project include:

1. Investigating the role misocyclone
              circulations along outflow boundaries with marked horizontal shear (i.e., a
              vertical vortex sheet) play in moist convection initiation;
2. Examining the
              moist convective forcing and basic structure and morphology of lobe and cleft
              instability along outflow boundaries.  This second objective will include a
              comprehensive examination of the fine-scale three-dimensional structure of
              outflow boundaries in environments without marked leading edge horizontal shear
              (in contrast to item 1).

These objectives involve critical elements for
              furthering our understanding of convection initiation along outflow boundaries.
               Further, these objectives are consistent with a key goal of the U.S. Weather
              Research Program involving the refinement of precipitation forecasts with
              improved knowledge of boundary layer processes.

