Title       : The Lagrangian Averaged Navier-Stokes Equations with Applications to Turbulence
               Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0105004

Award Number: 0105004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94599              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Shkoller shkoller@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0105004
Shkoller

This three year research effort is founded upon the
              author's recent 
development of a novel Lagrangian averaging procedure for the
              Euler and 
Navier-Stokes equations of fluid dynamics.  The method is based on
              
expressing the exact Lagrangian fluid flow as a composition of a smooth
              
deterministic volume-preserving Lagrangian flow and a rough stochastic 
flow
              consisting of volume-preserving near-identity transformations.  This
              
decomposition is asymptotically expanded about the identity, substituted
              
into the variational principle, and then averaged.  The resulting
              
deterministic system of equations is termed the Lagrangian averaged
              
Navier-Stokes (LANS) equations in the presence of viscosity, and the
              
Lagrangian averaged Euler (LAE) equations in the ideal case when 
viscosity
              is absent.  Both the LAE and LANS models are parameterized by 
a small spatial
              scale alpha, and are derived in such a fashion as to 
accurately reproduce the
              dynamics of the Euler and Navier-Stokes 
equations at spatial scales larger
              than alpha, while averaging (or 
homogenizing) the fluid motion at scales
              smaller than alpha.  Unlike 
current approaches such as Reynolds averaged
              Navier-Stokes (RANS) or 
Large Eddie Simulation (LES) models which add
              artificial dissipation to 
the system to remove subgrid scales, the LAE/LANS
              equations preserve 
the underlying structure of the inviscid dynamics, namely,
              energy, 
helicity, and circulation, by instead using a geometric, nonlinear
              dispersive 
mechanism.  As a result, our LANS model, unlike RANS or LES, does
              not 
artificially suppress intermittency, a fundamental feature of fluid
              
turbulence. The resulting system is a set of dynamically coupled partial
              
differential equations for the mean velocity field and covariance tensor. 
              
This system will be the backbone of a massive analytic and computational
              
assault on the modeling and understanding of fluid turbulence.

Although
              heavily studied by numerous researchers for over a century, 
incompressible
              fluid turbulence elusively remains one of the last great 
challenges of modern
              scientific exploration.  Its understanding is of 
paramount importance in a
              wide range of engineering and physical 
applications, ranging from the design
              of airplanes and automobiles, to 
daily weather forecasts and global climate
              prediction.  Roughly speaking, 
a flow becomes turbulent when all of the
              spatial scales in the fluid are 
activated, or in other words, when the fluid
              is moving so chaotically, as to 
create smaller and ever smaller vortices.  In
              such a flow regime, the 
trajectory of each fluid particle appears
              unpredictable, yet the challenge is 
to derive a mathematical set of equations
              which can describe this 
unpredictable motion.   About 150 years ago, the
              Navier-Stokes equations 
were introduced for this very purpose, and although
              it is now generally 
accepted that these equations do indeed provide a
              remarkable physical 
model of reality, it remains a mathematical mystery as to
              whether or not 
unique solutions to these equations exist for all time. 
              Moreover, even 
numerical approximations of these equations on the world's
              fastest 
supercomputers are incapable of modeling the small-scale structures
              and 
patterns which are formed in a turbulent regime -- the computer simply
              
runs out of memory long before it can simulate the prohibitively small
              
vortical motion.  The LANS model, described above, is intended to 
alleviate
              these fundamental difficulties, and make the computational 
simulation of
              turbulent flows feasible.

