Title       : Ground Motion and Source Kinematics Studies of the 21 September 1999 Taiwan
               Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0105998

Award Number: 0105998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Dreger dreger@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ground Motion and Source Kinematics Studies of the 21 September 1999 Taiwan
              Earthquake

PI: Douglas S. Dreger
Proposal EAR-0105998

The kinematic
              source process of the 1999 MW7.6 Taiwan (Chi-Chi) mainshock and large
              aftershocks, and the effects of three-dimensional velocity structure on the
              generation of strong ground motions are investigated. The Chi-Chi earthquake,
              which occurred in a heavily urbanized region, inflicted considerable damage and
              human suffering once again underscoring the need for better understanding of
              the processes that control the generation of strong ground motions. This
              earthquake is unique in terms of data quality and quantity. More than 400
              three-component strong motion stations recorded the earthquake waves, and this
              high quality data set provides an opportunity to study the earthquake source
              and wave propagation at scales never before possible. Three fault models, each
              with a distinct geometry, have been proposed to describe the kinematics of
              thrust faulting in the Chi-Chi earthquake, and are being tested by fitting
              observed and synthetic seismic waveforms and ground deformation (GPS) data.
              These geometries are tested by performing kinematic inversions of the strong
              motion and GPS data sets to determine the optimal distribution of fault slip.
              Additionally, several large aftershocks exhibited either shallowly or steeply
              dipping reverse focal mechanisms. Of particular interest is whether any of the
              aftershocks actually slipped on the low angle planes indicating the presence of
              a controlling basal decollement. By investigating the source kinematics of the
              mainshock and the large aftershocks it is possible to map the slip distribution
              of the earthquake sequence thereby obtaining an image of the active fault
              surface. The active mountain building of the Taiwan arc-continent collision has
              resulted complex crustal structure, as evidenced in recent tomographic studies
              and the considerable topographic relief. Three component seismic waveforms,
              phase arrival times, and peak ground motion parameters for the mainshock and
              large aftershocks are being modeled to constrain the three-dimensional wave
              propagation, and effects of free-surface topography using an elastic,
              velocity-stress staggered-grid, finite difference algorithm. Finally, the
              sensitivity of simulated strong motion waveforms due to the coupled nature of
              extended finite-fault source representations and three-dimensional structure is
              being analyzed. The results from this study will form the framework for future
              waveform modeling studies to refine the 3D structure of Taiwan, and will also
              provide an essential examination of strong ground motion variability
              contributing to the US earthquake hazard mitigation effort.

