Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny, Reconstruction of Ancestral States and
               Divergence Times of the Lichen-forming Fungi Acarosporaceae and Acarospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0105194

Award Number: 0105194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois M. Lutzoni flutzoni@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
	Lichens are obligate mutualistic ectosymbioses between fungi (mycobionts),
              and green algae or cyanobacteria (photobionts). Despite the importance of the
              photobiont in providing  carbohydrates to the mycobiont, the identification of
              lichens relies almost exclusively on morphological and chemical (secondary
              compounds) features of the mycobiont. Members of Acarosporaceae and Acarospora
              have putative ancestral character states suggesting a basal position within the
              lichenized ascomycetes. Therefore, the study of this family and genus is likely
              to provide information essential to our understanding of the diversification of
              lichens. However, morphological features found in Acarospora and Acarosporaceae
              are also found in other genera and families, resulting in their uncertain
              circumscriptions. In the present study, phylogenetic relationships of the
              Acarosporaceae and Acarospora within the Ascomycota will be reconstructed based
              on three molecular data sets. This phylogeny will be the framework to: 1) date
              major speciation events within the lichenized ascomycetes, while comparing
              three new methods for dating divergence events; and 2) test the validity of
              traditional diagnostic features used to circumscribe Acarosporaceae and
              Acarospora.
	About 1/5 of all known extant species in the fungi kingdom are
              lichenized. The proposed research will generate a considerable molecular
              database relevant to phylogenetic relationships among fungi, in particular of
              the Acarosporaceae with other lichenized and non-lichenized ascomycetes. The
              use of DNA sequences to reconstruct the phylogeny of the Acarosporaceae and
              Acarospora will also answer long-standing and important systematic questions at
              the family and genus levels, that have not yet been answered using traditional
              tools (morphology, anatomy and chemistry). The study of Acarosporaceae
              diagnostic characters will contribute to a better understanding of the
              delimitation of the family. Finally, major dates of origin and radiation of
              lichenized ascomycetes will be estimated for the first time.


