Title       : Two-Phase Model of Damage, Shear Localization and Plate Boundary Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0105269

Award Number: 0105269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310360             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bercovici david.bercovici@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bercovici, David
EAR-0105269 

The investigator proposes to study the process
              of lithospheric shear localization (focussing of deformation in solid materials
              due to nonlinear weakening mechanisms) and plate boundary formation through his
              newly developed two-phase damage theory. The theory states that a damaged
              material (i.e., with microcracks and voids) is, in its simplest form, a two
              phase material (a matrix phase representing solid host, and a fluid phase
              representing void-filling material such as water or air). It also states that
              the energy going into making microcracks is the surface energy of the crack
              wall, which in the two phase model is the surface energy of the interface
              between phases. Preliminary results show sharp localized weak zones under
              intense shear, and distributed damage with extreme shear (suggestive of
              processes such as crack-branching instabilities). The theory, however, is still
              in a very basic form and has only been tested for simple one-dimensional
              geometries. Thus, the proposed project entails further development and testing
              to 1) apply it to more mantle/lithosphere-relevant geometries and conditions;
              and 2) include further pertinent physics. The model will be applied to cases of
              uniaxial compression; compressive folding and tensile necking; gravity-driven
              flows (as in slope and continent stability); source-sink driven flows (to
              examine the excitation of toroidal motion from purely poloidal flow); and
              convectively driven motion. The new physics to be studied and incorporated
              includes healing and annealing processes; inter-phase reactions (e.g.,
              hydration); anisotropy (to account for pore/microcrack alignment);
              thermomechanical effects (e.g., fluid thermal expansion which affects pore
              pressure, thermoviscous behavior of matrix material, and temperature
              sensitivity of interface surface tension); and partitioning of deformational
              work between irreversible dissipative heating and semi-reversible storage as
              interface surface energy. This project will further our understanding of the
              fundamental processes of lithospheric and other shear localization mechanisms,
              as well as the origin of tectonic plates and plate boundaries. 




