Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Revisiting Nawinpukyo: Toward a
               Reevaluation of the Early Intermediate Period in Ayacucho, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0105252

Award Number: 0105252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Isbell, Mr. Juan Leoni will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork at the site
              of Nawinpukyo which is located in the Ayacucho region of highland Peru.
              Situated on a rocky hill the site contains concentrations of stones which have
              been interpreted as public buildings and elite residences. A supposed
              "ceremonial compound" with a platform mound, a series of storage granaries,
              administrative buildings, courts and patios has also been described. Although
              studied by previous researchers the site is enigmatic because its surface has
              been affected by centuries of farming and related earth moving activities.
              Ceramics indicate occupation during more than one period. The original
              excavator interpreted Nawinpukyo as the capital city of an early Andean state
              and believed that the size and arrangement of ruins testified to this fact.
              Later archaeologists have disagreed and asserted that the remains reflect a
              less complex form of social organization. To address this question, Mr. Leoni
              will conduct a multistage research project. He will survey and map the site
              core, conduct surface collection of pottery and other artifacts and also carry
              out limited excavation. The resulting materials will be subjected to laboratory
              analysis. Through this approach Mr. Leoni will determine what portions of the
              site were occupied at particular periods of time and then focus on the earliest
              of these. (Archaeologists agree that by the latest represented interval state
              level societies were, in fact, present in Peru.) In particular Mr. Leoni will
              examine the distribution of materials across residences to determine whether
              their amount and variety differ significantly among them. Differential
              distribution of wealth which reflects the presence of a governing elite is one
              of the hallmarks of state level society.

The question of how complex
              societies arose and were maintained is central to anthropological archaeology
              and considerable disagreement exists. The process has taken place independently
              in many parts of the world - the Andes is one - and thus archaeologists can
              compare geographically discrete occurrences to look for underlying patterns.
              Some believe that the same basic processes and principles apply in all cases
              and that it is possible to define a clear-cut series of developmental steps.
              Others argue that historical contingency plays a major role and that the
              process varies in fundamental ways from region to region. Because complex state
              level societies developed in the Andes, data from sites such as Nawinpukyo
              speak directly to this question. This research will also provide data of
              interest to regional archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

