Title       : Advanced Load Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0105320

Award Number: 0105320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Keyhani keyhani.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B L. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Heydt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Ohio State University, Arizona State University and Arizona Public Service
              Company will undertake a collaborative research effort in a fundamental study
              on the modeling of power system loads. In the next decades, the power systems
              of the United States will face bottlenecks of bulk power transfer capabilities
              because of the virtual absence of new transmission facilities. The increased
              utilization of the existing
facilities to cope with growing magnitude of bulk
              power transfers and third-party access will require a closer look at system
              dynamic performance. Accurate power system models are needed for accurate study
              of system dynamic performance. The motivation is to make load modeling accuracy
              commensurate with generation and system modeling accuracy.

 The main theme
              of this project is to utilize the advanced system identification concepts
              developed for generator parameter estimation and generator modeling for power
              system load modeling. Features of the load modeling include: automatic updating
              of the model, utilization of an artificial neural network model, and work with
              actual industrial data throughout the project. If successful, the work would be
              a major advance in the automated load modeling of power system loads as well as
              a significant increase in system modeling accuracy for dynamic studies.
              Therefore, the economic impact of the proposed research is significant in
              permitting operation of power systems closer to the stability limit by
              increasing the transfer capabilities and postponing the need for new
              construction. 
