Title       : The Role of Defects in Two-Dimensional Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0105232

Award Number: 0105232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide funds to a senior researcher for
              a project to investigate the role of defects in two-dimensional phase
              transitions.  The concepts of symmetry, dimensionality, and disorder all are
              central to the description of phase transitions.  It is generally recognized
              that defects can play a critical role in phase transitions, especially in
              reduced dimensionality.  The combination of the atomic resolution available
              with the variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscope (STM) coupled with
              the ability to grow artificially structured two and one-dimension
              configurations out of equilibrium on a surface promises to change the way we
              think about the role of defects in phase transitions in reduced dimensionality.
               This project will utilize a variable-temperature STM, which renders spatial
              images of the atomic and electronic distributions at the surface as a function
              of temperature.  Surface structure and lattice dynamics will be determined with
              elastic and inelastic electron scattering as well as surface x-ray scattering. 
              Surface magnetism will be probed with a combination of linear and non-linear
              magneto-optical Kerr rotation utilizing a newly designed octapole
              superconducting magnet.  Young scientists from the undergraduate through the
              post-graduate levels will be trained in techniques relevant to future careers
              in academe, industry, and government laboratories.
%%%
This individual
              investigator award will provide funds to a senior researcher for a project to
              investigate the fundamental role of imperfections or defects in phase
              transitions for material systems in two dimensions.  It is generally recognized
              that defects can play a critical role in phase transitions, especially in
              reduced dimensionality.  Many potential technological devices utilize the
              properties of a phase transition in a given material.  As the size of devices
              become smaller, it is important to understand the effect of defects on the
              phase transitions of these materials of reduced dimension.  The impact of this
              research program will be felt on two fronts.  First, these experiments, and the
              concepts that come from them, may change the way we think about phase
              transitions in reduced dimensionality.  Secondly, and most importantly, is the
              training of young scientists at the undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate
              levels in an area supporting our national agenda on nanotechnology.
***

