Title       : Trace-Driven Evaluations of the Memory Behavior of Large Commercial Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0105761

Award Number: 0105761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel Dubois dubois@paris.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer architecture research is based on experimental evaluation of
              application behavior.
One critical issue in the architecture of high-end
              enterprise servers is the design of the memory
hierarchy, which must be
              designed to support current and future data-intensive applications.

Few
              evaluations of the memory behavior of large commercial applications exist,
              especially in the
public domain. The research proposed here is based on a
              collaboration between IBM and USC to
take advantage of the IBM Watson Server
              Performance Laboratory to explore the memory
behavior of high-end commercial
              applications.

More specifically, it is proposed to use the IBM MemorIES
              board to collect bus activity
traces from a modern server machine running
              large, finely tuned OLTP, DSS and Web workloads.
Because of the sheer size of
              the traces, samples of transaction records will be collected only 
in selected
              time intervals.

Besides obtaining traces, the goal of this project is to
              characterize the memory
behavior of these applications, to evaluate
              alternative memory hierarchies for future
high-end commercial servers, and to
              explore new multiprocessor architectures for
commercial systems. 

The
              experimental environment provided by the IBM Watson Server Performance
              Laboratory
cost millions of dollars and years of effort to setup. This
              proposed research will leverage these
efforts. It is a unique opportunity to
              collect and disseminate traces and experimental data
which would be
              practically impossible to obtain under any reasonable research budget.
