Title       : Dissertations Initiative for the Advancement of Climate Change Research
               (DISCCRS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0105201

Award Number: 0105201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259462             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Susan Weiler weiler@whitman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitman College
	      345 Bayer Avenue
	      Walla Walla, WA  993622067    509/527-5111

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5209,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The DISsertations initiative for the advancement of Climate Change ReSearch
              (DISCCRS) program is an interdisciplinary, cooperative effort involving several
              professional societies including the American Geophysical Union (AGU), American
              Meteorological Society (AMS), and Ecological Society of America (ESA).
              Targeting recent Ph.D. recipients from across the spectrum of disciplines
              involved in climate change research, the program will quantify and characterize
              recent Ph.D. recipients interested in climate change to assess human potential
              and identify needs; consolidate and disseminate Ph.D. dissertation abstracts to
              highlight individual capabilities; establish electronic distribution lists to
              promote international, interdisciplinary communication; and organize an
              international "capstone" symposium for recent graduates to foster
              interdisciplinary understanding and interactions across disciplines. The
              program is structured to foster interdisciplinary understanding and accelerate
              research and insights in the vitally important and time-sensitive area of
              climate change and its impacts. It will foster international as well as
              inter-institutional networks, and favor participants from both developing and
              developed countries. Demographic data will facilitate the characterization and
              tracking of human resources across the climate-change research community.
              Tracking recent graduates through their first few years of professional
              development should tell us much about career progression and satisfaction
              during these early and most critical years of professional development. The
              on-line Dissertation Registry provides a comprehensive yet concise summary of
              new research for scientists, policy makers, and agency representatives and
              facilitate integration of this new generation of researchers into the broader
              community. Electronic distribution lists provide a mechanism to disseminate
              information and foster communication across disciplinary and international
              boundaries. The symposium will bring together individuals whose work transcends
              traditional boundaries and enable them to enhance understanding and
              perspectives and establish collegial, long-term associations to advance the
              field in new ways. In addition to presenting their research, participants would
              discuss emerging science and policy topics. Perspectives and recommendations
              will be published.
