Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of an Endocrine Disrupter on the Development of
               Behavior in Threespined Stickleback (Gasterosteus Aculeatus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0105105

Award Number: 0105105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy A. Stamps jastamps@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Judy A. Stamps
Alison M. Bell


Despite considerable public and scientific
              concern about the presence of anthropogenic chemicals in the environment that
              can interfere with the endocrine system (endocrine disrupters), little is known
              about the effects of chronic exposure to low levels of endocrine disrupters on
              animal behavior. The proposed project will:

1) Determine how lifetime
              exposure to environmentally-relevant levels of ethinyl estradiol affects
              behavioral development, life history traits and biomarkers of endocrine
              disruption in threespined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus);
2) Determine
              how chronic exposure to low levels of ethinyl estradiol affects the
              developmental trajectories of full sib families of stickleback from two
              populations where adults differ in behavior, morphology and life
              history.

	The proposed experiment will examine the influence of lifetime
              exposure to low levels of an exogenous estrogen on the development of
              behavioral traits. It will contribute to the growing literature on endocrine
              disruption by relating widely-used toxicological biomarkers with ecologically
              relevant traits, such as life history and behavior. In addition, the study
              explicitly examines intraspecific variation (among full-sib families and
              populations) in susceptibility to endocrine disruption. These data will shed
              light on important questions regarding the source of population-level variation
              in stickleback.

