Title       : Computing the Nonlinear Vibrational Response of Liquids and Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0105623

Award Number: 0105623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger F. Loring RFL2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Roger Loring of Cornell University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods for modeling nonlinear
              infrared spectroscopy in liquids and biomolecules with an atomistic level of
              description.  Experimental observables in two-pulse and three-pulse vibrational
              echo measurements will be computed using classical molecular dynamics
              simulations.  The fundamental theoretical issue underpinning this research is
              determining the optimal use of classical mechanical molecular dynamics data for
              complex systems to calculate nominally quantum mechanical observables.  Two
              closely coupled research directions will be pursued: (1) to establish
              rigorously the validity regime of classical mechanical echo calculations, by
              performing numerically exact classical and quantum calculations for the same
              model system, and (2) to perform classical echo calculations for liquid-state
              and biomolecular models, for which quantum treatment is not feasible. 
              Calculations will focus on myoglobin-CO, for which experiments are now
              characterizing the nature and time scales of protein fluctuations.  Computing
              vibrational echoes in myoglobin-CO will identify the specific protein dynamics
              sensed by the CO ligand, and will guide the application of these new laser
              laboratory techniques to other bimolecular systems.

Molecular motions in
              liquid solvents and in the heterogeneous environments of proteins are an
              integral part of the dynamics of chemical reactions and biological processes. 
              A new generation of spectroscopic techniques can probe these motions directly. 
              This research will allow for a detailed molecular picture of these processes by
              interpreting these new measurements.
