Title       : The Geochemical Characteristics of the Hawaiian Plume: Constraints From Studies
               of Lavas Forming the Koolau and Kahoolawe Shields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0105557

Award Number: 0105557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Frey fafrey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Frey
EAR-0105557


Terrestrial volcanoes are associated with three different
              tectonic
settings.  Two are associated with plate boundaries, that is, regions
              of
plate divergence and convergence, and the third is intraplate
              volcanism.
Magmas erupted in these different environments differ significantly
              in
geochemical characteristics.  In this proposed research the goal is
              to
understand the source and processes which determine the
              geochemical
characteristics of Hawaiian lavas.  This endmember is of great
              interest
because it may in part represent the consequences of subducting
              oceanic
crust deep into the mantle at subduction zones.

The approach will
              be to determine abundances of major and trace elements
and isotopic ratios of
              O, Sr, Nd, Pb, Hf and Os in lavas of varying
relative age from these two
              shields.  For Koolau the samples to be studied
are from a recently drilled
              core, that penetrates the shield to a greater
depth and older age than
              previously studied surficially exposed samples.
For Kahoolawe, which has not
              been intensively studied, the samples will be
from several stratigraphic
              sections across the shield.  The principal
objective is to understand the
              source components contributing to these
magmas; hence emphasis will be on
              evaluating correlations between abundance
ratios of highly incompatible
              elements, e.g., Ba/Th, Ce/Pb and La/Nb, and
isotopic ratios.  These
              geochemical characteristics will be determined
using analytical facilities
              such as inductively couples plasma mass
spectrometry and thermal ionization
              mass spectrometry.

Because of their oceanic plate setting, relatively simple
              mineralogy and a
wealth complementary studies, Hawaiian volcanoes present the
              best
opportunity for understanding the role of recycled crustal components
              in

oceanic island volcanism.  In particular, this research will aid
              in
constraining the processes and source components which create a
              geochemical
endmember of Hawaiian shield lavas.


