Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Studies in the Lasiosphaeriaceae (Fungi,
               Ascomycetes, Sordariales)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0105077

Award Number: 0105077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9985               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sabine M. Huhndorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The family Lasiosphaeriaceae is one of the largest and least studied families in
              a group of fungi known as pyrenomycetes.  It contains several ecologically and
              economically important genera, which occur throughout temperate and tropical
              regions and produce minute, dark-colored, flask-shaped fruiting structures on
              wood and dung.  Numerous genera have been transferred into this family without
              critically assessing their evolutionary relationships.  This study will (1)
              provide a monophyletic circumscription of the Lasiosphaeriaceae and test
              hypotheses about morphological characters currently used in ascomycete
              systematics; (2)  provide a taxonomic revision of Lasiosphaeria, one of the
              largest and most complex genera in the family.  Lasiosphaeria; (3) focus on the
              L. hirsuta and L. ovina species complexes, establishing species boundaries. 
              This study will serve as a model system for future studies in ascomycete
              systematics by using a multi-gene approach, incorporating both protein-coding
              and ribosomal genes, along with morphological characters for determining
              phylogenetic relationships at the specific, generic and familial levels.
     
                The Lasiosphaeriaceae and its type genus Lasiosphaeria are of particular
              systematic interest for several reasons.  Phylogenetic analyses of DNA
              sequences that included single representatives of four of the ten families of
              Sordariales suggested that the order is not  monophyletic. A detailed
              assessment of the evolutionary relationships among these families is needed to
              address this issue, but a meaningful sampling strategy requires revision of key
              genera like Lasiosphaeria.  The Lasiosphaeriaceae either contains, or is
              closely related to, the family containing Neurospora and Sordaria.   
              Representatives of the Sordariaceae will be included in our analyses to
              evaluate these generic and familial relationships. Ascospore morphology has
              been used extensively throughout the filamentous ascomycetes for distinguishing
              families and genera even though this one-character taxonomy has never been
              rigorously tested.  This study will be the first to objectively test the
              evolutionary potential of this character system.  Although many
              Lasiosphaeriaceae are encountered throughout temperate and tropical areas,
              identification guides are not available.  With the aid of digital image
              capturing systems, this study will produce detailed hardcopy and web-based
              identification guides for taxa in the Lasiosphaeriaceae.

