Title       : Reproduction and Representations of Family Among Malian Migrants in Paris,
               France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0105192

Award Number: 0105192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn F. Sargent csargent@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Cordell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Immigrants in the contemporary world are faced with significant problems of
              identity, since modern technology facilitates a transnational existence with
              ties in both current and original cultures. A major issue faced by migrants is
              adjusting their desired family size to their new circumstances. Traditional
              societies stressed large numbers of children while modern societies have a
              reduced vision of a reasonable family size. This research by an anthropologist
              and a historical demographer studies how Malian immigrants to Paris restructure
              and negotiate their identities as parents. Within the family men and women face
              contradictory pressures. Biomedical messages promoting fertility control,
              Islam, and French immigration policy have generated conflicting responses of
              accommodation and resistance resulting in marital conflicts over family size
              and composition.  Men oppose contraception, citing Islamic doctrine, while
              women justify contraceptive use based on fatigue, sickness and economic
              security.  This research on Malian immigrants in Paris will examine the role of
              Islam in shaping migrant responses to fertility control messages.  The project
              will trace Malian representations of appropriate family size and shape over the
              past three decades, focusing on the role of village associations in France
              mediating between family in France and West Africa.  Systematic sampling of
              migrants will be done in sites of village and community associations, workers'
              hostels and health services in Paris districts with substantial African
              populations. Structured interviews with 180 women and men over a two-year
              period will be carried out. Hypotheses will be tested relating immigration
              policy and different reproductive strategies of men and women. The research
              will contribute to the anthropological understanding of the politics of
              reproduction, documenting the local and global processes implicated in
              reproductive relations of Malians in France. By focusing on men's and women's
              objectives and preferences, the research will provide insights into how
              reproductive goals are shared, contested, and how transnational linkages shape
              family organization. 

