Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Examining Genetic Similarity, Mating Behavior and Fitness
               Consequences in a Simultaneous Hermaphrodite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0105086

Award Number: 0105086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Sargent   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Sih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Examining genetic similarity, mating behavior and fitness
              consequences in a simultaneous hermaphrodite

Dr. Andrew Sih
Thomas M.
              McCarthy

Genetic similarity may play an important role in both mate choice
              and reproductive success, but few studies integrate these inter-related fields.
              Physid snails are simultaneous hermaphrodites that can both self-fertilize and
              outcross, and are thus an excellent system for addressing questions about the
              role of genetic similarity in mating behavior, mate choice and reproductive
              fitness. This study includes a series of experiments that integrates these
              issues. It will also consider additional factors that may affect the interplay
              between genetic similarity, behavior and fitness.
The study will be comprised
              of three experimental sections. The first section tests for any effects of
              genetic similarity on mating behavior in paired snails, and for effects of
              genetic similarity on reproductive output and offspring hatching rate. These
              reproductive consequences will also be examined for self-fertilizing
              individuals. The second section of the study tests whether the genetic
              similarity of potential mates affects mate-choice decisions in groups of three
              individuals. The behaviors and reproductive consequences observed in the first
              section of the study will be used to make a priori predictions about mating
              frequencies during these interactions. The third section tests whether
              additional factors (predation risk, food availability, temperature regime and
              reproductive status) affect mating interactions and measures of reproductive
              fitness within pairs of snails with varying levels of genetic similarity.

