Title       : Criticality in Regional Seismicity: How Do We Test It and What Does It Mean?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0105405

Award Number: 0105405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles G. Sammis sammis@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert Saleur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0105405 (PH # 43x)

Title: Criticality in Regional
              Seismicity: How Do We Test For It and What Does It Mean?

PI's: C. Sammis and
              H. Saleur, University of Southern California

There is mounting observational
              evidence that large earthquakes are followed by tens of years of regional
              quiescence of intermediate-size events, and preceded by a comparable time
              period of accelerating seismic release. This acceleration (due mostly to an
              increase in intermediate-size events) can be fit to a power law of the
              time-to-failure equation, which offers the possibility of predicting large
              earthquakes on an intermediate-term basis, of perhaps a few years. The radius R
              of the optimally accelerating region scales with magnitude as log R ~ 1/2 M,
              which is equivalent to R being proportional to fault length L. This
              phenomenology has been interpreted as signifying the approach of a region to,
              and retreat from, a critical state. Power law scaling and growth of the
              correlation length of the stress field leading to increasingly larger events
              are expected behavior when approaching a critical point. We plan to devise and
              implement quantitative observational tests of this analogy between regional
              seismicity and critical phenomena. This does not require having a detailed
              understanding of why earthquakes should be critical phenomena. Criticality,
              like self-organized criticality, leads to universal features like power laws
              and scaling relations, that are independent of the mechanisms involved. To
              develop the tests, we will explore the evolution of the spatial, temporal, and
              magnitude distributions of seismicity that are predicted by critical point
              models. We shall be especially interested in the behavior of the smaller
              events, which have not, as yet, been used to help monitor the approach to
              criticality. 



