Title       : Studies of Magnetohydrodynamic Turbulence and Turbulence in the Corona and
               Interplanetary Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0105254

Award Number: 0105254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505180             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Matthaeus whm@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will perform theoretical investigations of incompressible and
              nearly incompressible magnetohydrodynamic turbulence and anisotropic linear
              cascades in the corona and interplanetary medium.  Complex nonlinear dynamical
              behavior, or turbulence, is observed in space plasmas over a wide range of
              scales that may be described by a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model.  Many
              phenomena in the extended solar corona, including the solar wind, in the
              magnetosphere, and in the interstellar medium may involve turbulence. 
              Turbulence is likely to have importance in coronal heating, the acceleration of
              solar wind, and the acceleration and diffusion of energetic particles.  An
              integrated approach will be adopted using MHD and fluid simulation techniques,
              transport theory, analytic theory of turbulence and particle diffusion, and
              related analysis and interpretation of spacecraft observations.  Work in basic
              MHD theory will include development and refinement of phenomenologies for MHD
              relaxation and decay processes, further characterization of the nature of MHD
              spectral anisotropy, and information theory-based attempts to advance a
              description of coherent structures in MHD turbulence.  Advances in
              phenomenologies and transport models will be used to further develop scattering
              and transport theories of cosmic rays.  Long-term goals are self-consistent
              models of coronal heating and the acceleration and evolution of the solar
              wind.


