Title       : Graph-theoretic Approximation Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0105548

Award Number: 0105548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramamoorthi Ravi ravi@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for GRAPH-THEORETIC APPROXIMATION ALGORITHMS (NSF #0105548)
PI:
              Ramamoorthi Ravi, Carnegie Mellon University.

The increasing size of
              communication and information networks has motivated
several new problems in
              the design of networks with low cost and high
resilience; Many of these
              problems are known to be prohibitively expensive
in terms of computing power
              to solve to full accuracy. Yet these problem
abstractions capture models from
              a variety of application areas such as
communication network routing,
              multicasting messages in large
networks, VLSI layout, and transportation
              networks with economies of scale.
The research in this proposal aims to
              advance our fundamental knowledge of
the structure of good solutions to such
              inherently intractable computational
problems involving networks.  The
              investigators will develop approximation
algorithms for these problems --
              these are heuristic methods that trade off
some accuracy in the solution in
              return for lowered computational resources,
in a quantifiable way. The
              research will involve the application of and new
discovery of results in the
              theory of graphs to guide the design of these
heuristic solutions.

In
              particular, the investigators will design polynomial-time
              approximation
algorithms with improved performance ratios for many basic
              graph-theoretic
problems including the problem of augmenting a tree to make
              it
two-connected, buy-at-bulk network design problems and the minimum
              $k$-cut
problem. The investigators will continue their ongoing study of
              bicriteria
network design problems (problems that involve two objective
              functions to be
optimized simultaneously) to design improved bicriteria
              approximation
algorithms for many spanning tree problems arising in practice;
              These
problems involve a combination of commonly studied objectives such as
              the
maximum node degree, diameter and total cost of the tree. The
              research
effort will focus on the theme of studying natural mathematical
              programming
formulations for these NP-hard problems and attempt to derive
              improved
approximation guarantees via rounding algorithms that will also
              establish
the integrality gap of these basic formulations.


