Title       : Markov Chain Algorithms for Computational Problems from Physics and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0105639

Award Number: 0105639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana J. Randall randall@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              C-CR 0105639
Dana Randall
"Markov Chain Algorithms for Computational Problems
              from Physics and Biology"

This research in Markov chain Monte Carlo methods
              has three 
primary goals: (i) developing new, general techniques for
              
analyzing convergence rates of Markov chains; (ii) designing rigorous,
              
efficient algorithms for specific computational applications, focusing 
on
              problems from statistical physics and biology with relevance 
to computer
              science; and (iii) exploring the connections between 
the phase structure of
              physical models and the inherent limitations 
of various sampling
              methods.

The research is concentrated in these areas.  1) Coupling has been
              
a very popular method for bounding the convergence rates
of Markov chains
              based on local updates, but only works in 
restrictive settings.  Heat bath
              algorithms, which allow possibly 
nonlocal updates, appear to circumvent
              potentially bad situations 
arising from simpler chains, but tend to be
              prohibitively complex 
for analysis. Decomposition theorems provide a new tool
              which 
allow a Markov chain to be broken into pieces whereby a hybrid
              
approach can be used to analyze each piece. The investigator 
studies how
              these methods can be used together to approach some 
new sampling problems. 
              2) Computational biologists have developed 
a Turing-universal model of
              computation based on Wang tiles using 
double-stranded DNA.  New efficient
              sampling algorithms for some
of these simple models are explored with the goal
              of providing ways
to test the model predict outcomes of experiments.
3) The
              research additionally explores the connection between 
rapid mixing of locally
              defined Markov chains and the uniqueness 
of the Gibbs state of the underlying
              physical system, also 
characterized by the lack of a phase transition. 
              Knowledge of 
this phase structure is used to develop algorithms which will
              allow 
sampling below the critical point, where local Markov chains 
are
              inefficient.

