Title       : Conformational Motion of Enzymes Studied by Evanescent Wave Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0105903

Award Number: 0105903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Zocchi zocchi@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award provides support to an assistant professor
              for a project working at the physics/biology interface.  The project
              investigates conformational motion of biological macromolecules which is
              coupled to substrate recognition and enzymatic catalysis. This mechano-chemical
              aspect is crucial in two ways: it ensures the high specificity of enzymatic
              reactions and it produces the ordered motion at the molecular scale by which
              the cell's devices operate (channels, motors, receptors). The study develops
              and applies a micro-mechanical technique which allows the detection of
              conformational changes of single proteins or DNA oligonucleotides and at the
              same time applies a controlled force to the molecule. It is an extension of
              earlier methods that were successfully applied to motor proteins, and it will
              allow the study a broader class of enzymes. The object is to gain insight into
              the physical principles under which these molecular devices operate; eventually
              this will generate design criteria for artificial molecular devices. The
              project provides excellent opportunities for training graduate students in this
              fast growing interdisciplinary field. Students will learn to use and develop
              state-of-the-art molecular biophysics techniques, such as single molecule
              detection and manipulation, nanomechanics, optical tweezers. This know-how is
              presently much in demand both in academics and the biotechnology industry.
              
%%%
This individual investigator award provides support to an assistant
              professor for a project working at the physics/biology interface.  The project
              focuses on one of the distinctive characteristics of biological macromolecules
              (proteins, DNA): their ability to change shape in response to an external
              (chemical) stimulus. This is the bases for nature's molecular devices in the
              cell, and it will  form the basis of operation of artificial molecular sensors
              and actuators in the future. The project develops a single molecule
              micro-mechanical technique to study these conformational changes from the point
              of view of the physical principles underlying such molecular machines. Students
              participating in the project will acquire experience in an array of
              state-of-the-art molecular biophysics techniques, such as near field optics,
              nanomechanics, optical tweezers. Being able to participate in all aspects of
              the experiments, from design to implementation to analysis, students will
              acquire the ability to devise original solutions to technical challenges. Such
              background in the interdisciplinary field of biophysics is at present much
              sought after both in academics and the biotechnology industry. 
***


