Title       : Topological Methods in Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0105256

Award Number: 0105256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kari K. Vilonen vilonen@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0105256
Kari Vilonen

The goal of the the work of the principal
              investigator 
is to develop geometric techniques for applications in
              
representation theory and the geometric Langlands program. 
From this point
              of view  the basic geometric problem is to 
understand  perverse sheaves from
              the microlocal point of 
view.  A sufficiently deep understanding of
              microlocal 
perverse sheaves on flag manifolds should lead to interesting
              invariants of irreducible representations of reductive 
Lie groups and,
              hopefully, in the end, to an understanding 
of unipotent representations. 
              Similar techniques are also 
being applied to modular representation theory. 
              The goal of 
the last project is to gain insight in the geometric Langlands
              conjecture in its various forms. In addition to microlocal 
techniques  the
              point of view of Whittaker models is used.

The fundamental theme of the 
              project is the interplay 
between geometry and representation theory.  The
              idea of 
reducing the understanding of various geometries to their 
groups of
              symmetries goes back to Felix Klein at the end 
of the nineteenth century.
              From this point of view the 
basic objects, the "atoms" of the theory, are the
              
irreducible representations of the group of symmetries 
of a given geometry.
              It turns out that these atoms arise 
from a particular geometric situation and
              hence we can 
apply geometric methods to analyze the properties of the
              
irreducible representations.  This is the goal of the 
first part of the the
              proposal. The second part of the 
project deals with the deep conjectures of
              Langlands. 
Here the geometry in question arises from  an arithmetic
              
situation and this brings number theory in the mixture of 
geometry and
              representation theory.


