Title       : Signal Transduction Pathways in Drosophila Head Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9905684

Award Number: 9905684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Finkelstein finkelstein@mail.med.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The molecular pathways that control the development of the head are not well
              understood.  In this project, we will use the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster
              as a model system to study these pathways.  Analysis of the central trunk
              region of the fly led to greater understanding of the genes that govern pattern
              formation.  Although head and trunk development utilize many of the same genes,
              the molecular interactions that pattern the two regions are very
              different.

We showed previously that the Hedgehog (Hh) protein, which
              mediates intercellular communication in invertebrates and vertebrates,
              specifies the fate of the medial region of the fly head.  Our preliminary
              results suggest, however, that Hh acts through a different pathway in the head
              primordium than in other tissues.  We also identified a new gene that
              participates in medial head specification.

In the first aim of this
              proposal, we will continue to study the molecular pathways through which Hh
              acts during head development.  We will test the hypothesis that Hh activates a
              second signal transduction cascade, controlled by the Notch protein.  We will
              also determine whether proteins involved in Hh signaling in other tissues act
              downstream of Hh during head development.  In the second aim, we will study the
              new gene we identified, which appears to encode a kinesin-like protein.  WE
              will analyze its expression and function during embryonic and imaginal
              development and determine if it acts directly in the Hh pathway.

Using the
              powerful experimental approaches possible in Drosophila, we will learn more
              about the molecular basis of head development.  Since the genes that pattern
              the head have been evolutionarily conserved, our results will provide a
              foundation for studying head formation in higher animals.  Ultimately, these
              studies will contribute to understanding how genetic defects disrupt normal
              pathways of development.


