Title       : Dissertation Research: Interest Groups, Regulators, and Clean Air: A Structural
               Policy-Making Framwork
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905636

Award Number: 9905636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7333               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Teske pteske@datalab2.sbs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              While scholarship on the political control of bureaucracy has long recognized
              the importance of administrative structures to policy outcomes, there exists
              limited empirical evidence of strategic actions actually taken by various
              actors in this regard.  In this Dissertation Support Research project the
              student elaborates a "structural policy making framework," placing organized
              interest groups as central catalysts to policy change, evolution, and focus. 
              The framework identifies the design, of, and utilization of, administrative
              arrangements as the two dimensions most central to policy outcomes.  In
              examining the linkages between a series of critical components of policy
              structure, inferences about the nature of strategic behavior and relative
              influence of various policy actors are drawn.   This project differs from prior
              work on bureaucratic control through administrative design mechanisms because
              of its effort to provide a systematic empirical account linking interest group
              strategic action to bureaucratic output.

Applying the framework to American
              air quality regulation since 1990, the project measures characteristics of
              structural policy-making at both state and national levels.  The project
              provides tests of policy design, utilization, and performance outcomes.  It
              directly assesses the relative impact of competing policy actors in each of
              these areas, and possesses significant for scholarship on environmental
              regulation, interest group policy behavior, and federalism's impact on
              policy-making.

