Title       : Regulation of Sodium Channel Density and Localization in Polarized Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9905991

Award Number: 9905991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Isom lisom@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lorie Isom
9975490

LAY SUMMARY

Voltage-gated sodium channels are the
              membrane proteins responsible for initiation of action potentials in excitable
              cells such as neurons, cardiac myocytes, or skeletal muscle myocytes.  In
              neurons, sodium channels are localized at high density at axon initial segments
              and nodes of Ranvier.  This arrangement allows for efficient, saltatory
              conduction of action potentials. The long-term goal of this proposal is to
              understand the molecular basis of sodium channel targeting and localization,
              with particular emphasis on the role of the auxiliary b subunits in this
              process.  It is proposed that sodium channel a subunit isoforms contain an
              intrinsic molecular targeting domain in their amino acid sequence that directs
              newly synthesized channels toward specific plasma membrane locations. 
              Furthermore, it is hypothesized that sodium channel localization in polarized
              cells is modulated by the combination of particular a and b subunits.  Four
              specific aims are proposed: 1.  To characterize the effects of b subunit
              expression on sodium channel a subunit membrane localization in polarized
              Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. MDCK cells have proven to be a powerful
              model system in which to study the membrane targeting of a variety of ion
              channels and receptors. This aim will reveal whether b subunits modulate a
              subunit localization or whether the information for sodium channel targeting is
              encoded in the a subunit isoform cDNA only.  2.  To identify molecular
              targeting signals encoded in a and/or b subunit cDNAs. Truncation mutants and
              chimeras will be used in an attempt to localize the molecular targeting signals
              encoded in a and/or b subunit cDNAs.  3.  To characterize the localization of
              sodium channel a and b subunits expressed endogenously by human NT-2 neurons. 
              Recognizing the limitations of the use of epithelial cell models to study
              targeting of neuronal proteins to axonal membranes, the localization of a and b
              subunits that are endogenously expressed in a neuronal cell culture model
              system, NT-2 neurons, will also be studied.  The results of these studies will
              be correlated with the results obtained from MDCK cells.  4. To analyze the
              contribution of b subunits to a subunit localization in targeted embryonic stem
              (ES) cells differentiated to neurons in culture. Targeted mouse ES cell lines
              that lack the gene for the sodium channel b2 subunit have recently been
              established in the lab. One of the cell lines was also doubly targeted in
              culture to produce the homozygous genotype using high concentrations of the
              antibiotic G418.  These cells now lack both alleles of the b2 subunit gene.   A
              similar experiment is underway that is designed to knockout the b1 subunit
              gene. The doubly targeted ES cells will be differentiated in culture to neurons
              using retinoic acid.  Immunocytochemical localization of a subunits in the
              differentiated neurons will be performed to assess the contribution of b
              subunits to a subunit membrane targeting and localization.  The results of
              these proposed studies will contribute to the fields of ion channel biology and
              brain development.  A basic understanding of the mechanisms involved in sodium
              channel subunit assembly and membrane targeting is essential to understanding
              the establishment of neuronal polarity, formation of nodes of Ranvier, and
              efficient action potential conduction.


