Title       : Dissertation Research: Policy Preferences and Legislative Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905432

Award Number: 9905432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7033               (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Bianco wbianco@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation research investigates differences in policy
              preferences and legislative activities of men and women state legislators as
              well as the impact of these differences on states' social welfare policies. 
              Rather than assuming that the observed differences in the attitudes and
              activities of male and female legislators are solely based in gender, as most
              previous research has assumed, this research will show that much of these
              differences arises from differences in the kinds of constituencies that male
              and female legislators represent.

A second goal of the research is to show
              that the institutional organization of the legislature mediates the extent to
              which women's preferences influence state policy.  Prior work assumes that
              there is a non-linear relationship between the number of women a legislature
              and the content of policy outputs.  This literature also posits that the same
              relationship holds across all states.  The current research demonstrates that
              the impact of women's preferences varies with the nature of the committee
              system, the strength of political parties in the legislature, and the
              distribution of women across the two parties.

This research and its
              hypotheses build on previous empirical analyses that show gender differences in
              legislators' preferences and behavior, as well as formal models of legislative
              organization.  Data, needed to test these predictions, are obtained from a mail
              survey sent to 2,529 legislators in 24 states.  The survey data is supplemented
              with information on the activities and characteristics of individual
              legislators, the content of state welfare policies, and the rules and
              procedures that structure policymaking in state legislatures.

The
              substantive focus of the research is welfare policy.  This is a timely
              legislative issue where legislators and their constituents likely have opinions
              on a variety of specific welfare policy alternatives.  The study has important
              implications for research on women elected officials and,  more generally,
              representation.  Specifying how the organization of legislative institutions
              affects the ability of women to translate their unique preferences into policy
              helps to define the relationship between descriptive and substantive
              representation.

