Title       : Water, Poverty and Sustainable Livelihoods in Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9905293

Award Number: 9905293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210681             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Wescoat wescoat@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study examines the geography of water and poverty in the western U.S.
              following on the groundbreaking work by F. Lee Brown and Helen Ingram in 1987. 
              Previous research has focused on areas of widespread rural poverty (e.g.,
              Indian reservations and counties with Hispanic populations), but it has not
              encompassed the acute water problems faced by low income urban, suburban, or
              rural populations in otherwise prosperous regions, nor has it adopted a
              geographic perspective on the structure and prevalence of these problems.  It
              is hypothesized that acute water problems are driven by land use processes,
              spatially linked by water rights administration, and mitigated or exacerbated
              by different forms of water organizations.  By combining structured interviews
              with field mapping methods,  this research will describe and explain the
              geographic distribution of acute water problems at the county and watershed
              scale in Colorado.  By compiling these local interviews and maps within a river
              basin framework, it will identify spatial linkages among the acute water
              problems faced by low income groups in headwater, tributary, mainstem, and
              groundwater-fed subregions of the state.  By interviewing and mapping within a
              sample of water districts, the research will assess the difference that
              institutions make in mitigating, or aggravating, the acute water problems faced
              by low-income groups.

Acute water problems faced by low-income persons in
              Colorado include inadequate and unsafe domestic water supplies, unsafe
              floodplain occupance, vulnerability to waterborne disease and industrial
              contamination, and shut-off of water supplies to poor members of urban and
              rural water districts.  Water rights administrators, county land use planners,
              environmental health officers, and welfare officers will be interviewed to
              describe and explain the geographic location and magnitude of acute water
              problems.  It will compile results from local areas to better understand how
              problems, and solutions, that occur in montane, foothills, and plains regions
              of major river basins (e.g., the South Platte, Upper Arkansas, Upper Rio
              Grande, and Upper Colorado) are related to one another.  In addition to basic
              scientific research on water problems that are poorly documented and
              understood, the research addresses growing social concerns about the safety,
              reliability, and vulnerability of regional water supplies.

