Title       : Cognitive Processes in Bilinguals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9905850

Award Number: 9905850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll JFK7@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to use the bilingual as a vehicle to
              
illuminate basic cognitive processes that serve as the interface between
              
memory and language. Because bilinguals typically have at least two 
words
              available for any given concept, one in each of their languages, 
the process
              by which they select the appropriate word to speak provides 
a useful tool for
              investigating language production and competition 
across cognitive systems.
              Recent research on the way in which bilinguals 
understand and produce words
              in their two languages suggests that both 
languages are always active to some
              degree. How then do bilinguals 
manage to speak words in the intended language
              most of the time? The 
specific focus of the planned research is to examine
              the factors that 
modulate the competition that occurs when the bilingual's
              two 
languages are active. The experiments have two aims. One is to identify
              
the conditions that give rise to cross-language competition. Each of the
              
proposed experiments involves spoken language production in the first
              
language (L1), the second language (L2), or under mixed conditions in 
which
              the two languages are directly competing with one another. A 
second aim of
              the proposed experiments is to identify the factors that 
modulate the
              activity of each language. These factors are hypothesized 
to include external
              cues that serve to signal one of the bilingual's two 
languages as well as
              internal attentional strategies that function to 
control the consequences of
              activation from the unintended language. 
The results of this work will have
              specific implications for models of 
bilingual language processing but will
              also provide important 
constraints for understanding the way in which skilled
              performance is 
controlled.


