Title       : Agenda Power in Democratic Legislatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9905224

Award Number: 9905224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Cox gcox@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mathew D. McCubbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	In this proposal, we describe research into the nature and consequences of
              agenda power in democratic legislatures.  We focus in particular on two (sets
              of) questions.  The first set asks:  is agenda power a "natural monopoly" that
              one should expect routinely to see in the hands of the government or majority?;
              should we generally expect a group of legislators to act as a "legislative
              cartel" that concentrates agenda power in the hands of their chosen leaders and
              excludes those not in the group?; or do the positional advantages of the median
              legislator or group trump procedural powers, so that policy outcomes are
              centrist, regardless of which party or coalition is in government?  The second
              set asks:  what would the observable consequences be if agenda power is
              cartelized by a governing (government or majority) coalition?; how would
              agendas constructed by governing coalitions differ from agendas constructed
              directly on the floor by majority votes and what would be the effect on public
              policy?
	We believe that the cartelization of agenda power is generally to be
              expected in democracies around the world.  We show that the consequences of
              cartelizing agenda power are far more striking on the negative side (keeping
              things off the legislative agenda) than they are on the positive side (pushing
              bills through to final passage).  We expect little variation in governing
              coalitions' success at preventing bills that majorities of those coalitions
              dislike from appearing on the floor agenda, and we find little variation
              empirically in the cases that we survey.  Homogeneous coalitions, heterogeneous
              coalitions, and in-between coalitions all compile near-perfect records in terms
              of negative agenda control.  In contrast, the heterogeneity of the governing
              coalition should theoretically and does empirically seem to covary with the
              size of the coalitions' positive agenda:  more homogeneous coalitions attempt
              to pass, and succeed in passing, more bills.  To put this conclusion in another
              way, party governing is not "conditoinal" when it comes to negative agenda
              control, only when it comes to positive agenda control.
	To complete this
              project, we plan to assemble a multi-chamber cross-national dataset on
              legislative organization and decisionmaking.  The primary data in which we are
              interested are (1) votes (or other pertinent information, such as committee
              dissents) that bear on the setting of the floor agenda: and (2) votes on final
              passage of bills.  Of secondary interest are (3) use of party resources in
              pursuing the agenda of the government or majority party, (4) intermediate
              votes, either those setting the terms and rules of debate on the floor or those
              concerning substantive amendments, and (5) identification of the reversionary
              policy, if any.    


