Title       : A Perfectly Archived, Continuously Updated Database System for Analysis of North
               American Vegetation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9905838

Award Number: 9905838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Peet peet@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn D. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis H. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

DBI: 9905838, Peet, Robert, UNC Chapel Hill. A perfectly
              archived, continuously updated database system for
analysis of North American
              vegetation.

Vegetation classification is of central importance to biological
              conservation for planning and inventory, to resource management for monitoring
              and planning, and to basic scientific research as a tool for organizing and
              interpreting ecological information. All of these activities require that
              ecological units be defined and that their distribution on the landscape be
              known and understood. Technological advances have made practical large-scale
              analyses that cross agency jurisdictions or geographic regions and address
              applied ecological issues as diverse as global change, ecosystem management,
              and conservation planning. However, all such efforts depend on having available
              a common set of well defined and broadly accepted classification units. The US
              federal government, through the activities of the Federal Geographic Data
              Committee, has approved standards for a US national vegetation classification
              system. However, before such a system can be operational and broadly accepted
              an information infrastructure is needed to manage the anticipated 10*7
              vegetation plot records and 10*4 plant associations. The focus of this award is
              on the development of such an information infrastructure, designed so that the
              information can be distributed across the web while being both continually
              updated and perfectly archived.

This project will design, develop and test
              prototypes of core components of the information infrastructure necessary to
              support the U.S. National Vegetation Classification. A working group will meet
              periodically at the National Ecological Analysis and Synthesis Center to advise
              the PIs and a dedicated postdoc/programer. The first component is a stand-alone
              vegetation plot database. Plot data provide the essential information that
              underlies any credible vegetation classification. This database will be
              designed to allow inclusion of a diversity of plot types, and will be tested
              using 4 large and divergent datasets. Component data will be useful, not only
              for revision of the national classification, but also for numerous studies of
              vegetation composition, structure and dynamics. The second component is a
              database that holds the vegetation classification. Tracking of start and stop
              dates for records that are never discarded should allow the communities
              recognized and the supporting data to be reconstructed for any time in its
              history. A third component, to be developed in concept only, is a database that
              contains the botanical nomenclature needed to identify the species referenced
              in the other two databases. Plant nomenclature as treated in current databases
              is inadequate for use in the plots and classification databases because the
              meanings associated with plant names do change, leaving old usage
              ambiguous.

Once developed and peer reviewed, the prototypes will be adopted
              and maintained by some combination of TNC, USGS (NBI I), FGDC and ESA.. The
              USGS National Biological Information Infrastructure (NBII) anticipates
              maintaining and serving the plots database, and TNC anticipates maintaining and
              serving the vegetation classification database as part of its new Heritage Data
              Management System. The plant nomenclature database attributes to be developed
              are likely to be incorporated within the USDA Plants Database and the USGS ITIS
              Database.

