Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Effects of Strengthened
               Racial Cues in Candidate Evaluations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905269

Award Number: 9905269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4610               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Holbrook homeboy@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The goal of this research is to understand the effects of strengthened racial
              cues in candidate evaluations.  As the racial cue of the candidate is
              strengthened with multiple indicators of race, voters evaluate the candidate
              differently from a candidate whose race is not reinforced or strengthened. 
              This research tests these effects regarding an African-American candidate.  The
              research determines if respondents evaluate candidates negatively or favorably
              as the race of the candidate becomes stronger or is reinforced with other
              racial indicators.  Furthermore, do voters make more stereotyped judgements as
              the racial cue is strengthened and is evaluation based more heavily on
              stereotypes and racial prejudice when the racial cue is strengthened?  Three
              indicators are used:  race (as indicated in a photo), ethnic first name, and
              membership in an organizatin whose members are predominatly black.  As more of
              these attributes are present for the candidate, the race of the candidate
              become stronger.  Respondents are asked to evaluate the cadndiate on a variety
              of policy questions and perceived candidate ideology, and to indicate their
              perceptions of African Americans.  This research also tests for differences in
              evaluation when respondents must infer the race of the candidate from the other
              racial indicators.
