Title       : Mechanism of Heat Shock Signaling Repression by the Glucocorticoid Receptor
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9905117

Award Number: 9905117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin R. Sanchez ESANCHEZ@MCO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3035 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436145804    419/383-4252

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a hormone activated transcription factor
              that acts by regulating specific gene expression.  In the absence of hormone,
              the GR forms complexes with heat shock proteins (HSPs).  Since heat shock
              proteins are produced as adaptive response to stress, speculation has existed
              that communication between the heat shock and glucocorticoid hormone signal
              pathways must exist.  Only recently has evidence supporting this hypothesis
              been reported, in that  heat shock  can cause a potentiation of the
              glucocorticoid response.   Preliminary data demonstrates that heat shock
              signaling can be regulated by glucocortiocids.  The goal of this project is to
              determine the nature of  this communication at the molecular level.  The stage
              of the GR signal pathway involved in regulating activity of the heat shock
              transcription factor (HSF) will be examined.  The results of initial
              experiments are expected  to show that regulation of HSF occurs either through
              release of HSPs from the GR complex in response to hormone, or as the result of
              new synthesis of a GR-regulated gene product.  Follow up experiments will then
              focus on the mechanism indicated.   General approaches and techniques to be
              used include: analysis of the effects of wild-type and mutant forms of the GR
              on stress induced HSF DNA binding and transcription enhancement,  purification
              of HSF complexes from cells subjected to various treatments, assay for
              activities of  known negative regulators of HSF, and screening of cells for GR
              regulated gene products.  These studies will aid in  understanding the
              molecular mechanism by which two important cellular responses to stress
              communicate.




