Title       : Modeling Change in Fields of Organizations: A Simulation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9905149

Award Number: 9905149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40244              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miller McPherson mcphersn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops a set of computer simulations to extract the logical
              implications of the PI's ecological theory of the competition of social groups
              for members over time. The theory argues that groups interact with each other
              through the population of individuals which flow into and out of these
              groupings. The population of individuals is characterized as a set of points
              whose locations are defined by sociodemographic dimensions. These dimensions
              form a "phase space" within which social forms grow, decline, and change their
              characteristics over time. The short term (10-15 years) implications of the
              theory have been successfully tested in populations of voluntary associations,
              of U.S. occupations, and of cultural forms. A set of computer simulation
              studies will allow the exploration of how social groups and other entities
              develop under a larger range of population parameters. The Group Action
              Simulation Program (GASP) examines the effects of variations in several
              important parameters governing the behavior of the theoretical model, including
              (1) the rates at which people enter and exit from organizations, (2) the force
              of homophily among individuals' network ties, and (3) the extent of competition
              among groups. Outcome variables to be studied include tie stability, group
              size, group age, group overlap, group dispersion, and the number of groups in
              the system. In addition, the project explores the conditions under which
              organizational populations stabilize or fail to stabilize under these varying
              behavioral parameters.
