Title       : Collaborative Research: Genetic Variation Among Linguistically Divers Tanzanian
               Populations: Implications for East African History and Modern Human Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a9905574

Award Number: 9905574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna L. Mountain mountain@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Human mitochondrial, autosomal, and sex chromosomes exhibit relatively high
              levels of genetic diversity within sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting complex
              patterns of population history, migration, and subdivision and possibly the
              origin of modern humans within this region.   The current challenge is to
              better characterize the genetic diversity within sub-Saharan Africa and to
              reconstruct the complex demographic history of the region.  East Africa, in
              particular, is thought to be a likely source of a human migration out of Africa
              within the last 100,000 years.  This region, however, remains highly
              under-sampled and under-represented in studies of genetic variation.  Tanzania
              occupies a region of Africa which is linguistically, culturally,
              sociologically, and genetically complex.  Populations speaking languages
              representing all four of the linguistic super-families present in Africa are
              located in close proximity to one another. In addition, these populations
              practice a variety of subsistence methods.  Although they have been the focus
              of many ethnographic, linguistic, and archaeological studies, Tanzanian
              populations have been studied very little at the genetic level.  
	The Hadzabe
              and Sandawe, two populations that currently practice (or in the recent past
              have practiced) a predominantly hunter-gatherer lifestyle, are linguistic
              isolates whose languages contain click consonants and have been a challenge to
              classify.  Little is known about their relationship to one another, to
              neighboring peoples who speak distinct languages and practice different
              subsistence methods, or to southern African Khoisan-speaking peoples who also
              speak languages containing click consonants and are hypothesized to have
              originated in East Africa. The specific goals of this research project are to
              characterize genetic variation in the Hadzabe, Sandawe, and neighboring
              populations; to reconstruct the relationship of these East African populations
              to one another and to southern African Khoisan-speaking populations; and to
              test hypotheses regarding the possible origin of modern humans in East Africa. 
              
	This proposed project is divided into three overlapping phases.  Phase I
              includes the collection of blood and/or buccal cells from the Hadzabe, Sandawe
              and neighboring populations in central Tanzania.  Phase II consists of DNA
              isolation and molecular typing of the samples collected in Phase I.  Samples
              will be genotyped for markers on autosomes, X- and Y-chromosomes, and mtDNA
              analyzed both independently and as haplotypes.  Phase III includes exploratory
              data analysis and hypothesis testing given the data generated in phase II.  The
              data collected will be analyzed within the context of a broader African and
              global data set that currently exists and is expected to contribute both to the
              general knowledge of genetic diversity within sub-Saharan Africa and to the
              understanding of ancient and historical relationships among East African
              populations.  In addition, because East Africa is the likely source of
              populations migrating out of Africa, these data will provide important new
              insights into the origin and evolution of modern humans in Africa and will make
              possible the testing of a wide range of hypotheses concerning the global spread
              of modern humans out of Africa. 

