Title       : Trade Adjustment Strategies Among U.S. Machine Tool Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9905479

Award Number: 9905479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. MacPherson geoadm@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the extent to which US industrial firms in the machine
              tool  (MT)  sector have been  adjusting to global competition  via  business 
              strategies  that  emphasize export-expansion  and/or  import-containment. 
              Particular  attention  is given to the role of product design and  product 
              policy  in  the commercial  performance  of  MT  firms  (both  exporters and
              non-exporters).  A national survey of US-owned MT manufacturers  will be 
              conducted  with  a view to constructing taxonomic models that can  accurately 
              discriminate  between  successful  versus   less successful firms in this
              industry.  A key hypothesis to be tested is that superior export performance
              and/or import-containment can be  traced  to  product  design  strategies  that
              emphasize close customer  involvement  at  the  early  stages  of   new  
              product development.  A related hypothesis is that regional variations in the 
              business  performance  of MT firms are likely to be present, reflecting 
              geographic   differences   in   local   techno-market conditions. 
              Specifically,  firms  located outside major clusters of  MT  production  are 
              expected  to  exhibit  weaker   business performance  than their counterparts
              located in core regions that contain large numbers of firms in similar or
              related industries. Data for the study will come from a postal survey of the
              entire national population of MT producers, as well as from follow-up
              interviews with a representative subsample of firms. Logistic regression and/or
              discriminant analysis will be used to predict successful versus less successful
              trade adjustment among respondents.

The overall goal of the project is  to 
              identify  those business strategies that best contribute to the commercial
              viability of US firms  in an import-competing sector (machine tools).  This is
              an important topic at this point in time,  if only  because  the  US machine 
              tool  industry  is  widely  viewed as being of strategic importance to other US
              industries  (notably  the  automotive  and aerospace sectors).  The project
              will highlight the effectiveness of different types of business  strategies  in
               terms  of  export success  and/or adjustment to import competition.  The
              results of the project will be made available to  all  project  participants
              (i.e.  firms),  as  well  as to public policy agencies and the US Federal 
              government.  Ultimately,  the  project  is  designed  to supply strategic
              blueprints to US machine tool firms that want to compete successfully in the
              international marketplace.  


