Title       : Collaborative Research: Persuasion by a Single Route: The Unimodel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9905212

Award Number: 9905212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86385              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik P. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a new theory of how persuasive communications influence
              social attitudes. The new theory challenges many prevailing views of persuasion
              and attitude change. Most contemporary theories of persuasion identify two
              distinct ways in which  persuasive influence occurs:  (1) through the
              persuasive message itself, based on the force of the arguments it contains, or
              (2) through features external to the message, such as the communicator's status
              or prestige, or the number of different people supporting a certain position.
              These theories also suggest that persuasion accomplished through message
              arguments is more robust, long-lasting, and resistant to subsequent change than
              is persuasion achieved through external features. The current project
              introduces a new theory in which the two seemingly different modes of
              persuasion actually constitute special cases of the same underlying process.
              These cases differ in the contents of evidence by which one may be persuaded,
              but not in the way those contents function to change people's attitudes. Seven
              experimental studies test this novel theory of persuasion. The experiments are
              based on an analysis showing that prior experiments have confounded general
              informational features (such as length/complexity, order of presentation, and
              relevance) with whether the information is contained inside (vs. outside) the
              message itself. By controlling for these confounds, it should be possible to
              demonstrate the functional equivalence for persuasion of these different types
              of information. A significant implication of the new theory is that robust,
              long-lasting, and resistant persuasion may be accomplished on the basis of
              external cues. This analysis has fundamental implications for a large number of
              areas in which persuasion plays a role, such as education, therapy, health and
              environmental-protection advocacy.

