Title       : Geography of Poverty and Intrametropolitan Fiscal Disparities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9905866

Award Number: 9905866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer R. Wolch wolch@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juliet A. Musso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1092,1349,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although considerable attention has been devoted over recent decades to issues
              associated with urban poverty and public programs designed to ameliorate
              poverty, relative little attention has focused on geographic dimensions of
              urban poverty, the dynamics of immigrant assimilation, and intrametropolitan
              fiscal disparities.  Building on recent research of urban poverty and welfare,
              spatial analyses of immigration, and new urban public finance models, this
              project will investigate the intrametropolitan distribution of uncompensated
              poverty costs, which are defined as costs for nonredistributive services
              provided by cities that are not offset by intergovernmental or other transfers
              in aid of the poor.  In particular, the investigators will consider how those
              costs vary according to spatial patterns of urban poverty, other
              characteristics of localities and their resident populations, and their impact
              on intrametropolitan fiscal disparities.  The researchers will conceptualize,
              estimate, and test a model of relationships between urban poverty rates and
              uncompensated poverty costs, conducting a case study of the Los Angeles
              metropolitan region, which is characterized by local fiscal stress, large
              volumes of immigration, and high rates of poverty.  For municipalities in this
              five-county region, the investigators will measure the scope of anti-poverty
              revenues (in the form of direct payments and tax expenditures) provided to
              residents and localities, and they will characterize municipalities using a
              range of other indicators that appear to be associated with uncompensated
              poverty costs.  These measures include local fiscal capacity, employment base,
              spatial configuration of poverty, mix of working versus non-working poor,
              levels of racial and ethnic segregation, demographic features including the
              share of immigrants by birth and arrival cohort and other key characteristics,
              strength of voluntary sector services to the poor, and municipal fiscal
              strategies, institutional features, and land use patterns that may moderate the
              impacts of poverty.  Multivariate regression models will be used to estimate
              the extent to which poverty compensation rates varied according to key
              demographic, fiscal, and institutional features of municipalities over the
              1980-1996 period, a time of dramatic shifts in fiscal federalism, welfare state
              organization, and metropolitan demographic and labor market conditions.  The
              uncompensated poverty cost model that will be developed through this project
              will provide a valuable tool for analyzing the geopolitical implications of
              concentrated urban poverty, focusing attention on intrametropolitan disparities
              that might deepen regional problems over time.  This study thus will increase
              understands of the ways in which the nation's success in resolving problems of
              urban poverty may be connected to broader issues of metropolitan economic
              growth, social equity, and environmental quality, and indeed national well
              being.

