Title       : The Mechanism of Substrate (aglycone) Specificity and Binding in
               Beta-Glucosidases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9905698

Award Number: 9905698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asim Esen aevatan@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Bevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9905698
Esen
The major goal of this research is to understand the mechanism of
              substrate (i.e., aglycone) specificity in the enzyme Beta-glucosidase
              (Beta-D-glucoside glucohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.21).  Maize and sorghum
              Beta-glucosidases are chosen as model systems for the study because they each
              have isozymes exhibiting substrate specificity differences.  The approaches of
              domain-swapping, random and site-directed mutagenesis, in combination with 3-D
              structure determination and modeling, will be used to accomplish the objective.
              To define broadly the domains involved in substrate specificity, chimeric
              Beta-glucosidases are constructed by domain-swapping between two different
              isozymes.  Then cDNAs encoding parental enzymes are subjected to random
              mutagenesis to generate mutants that are able to hydrolyze a chromogenic or
              fluorogenic substrate that is not hydrolyzed by parental enzymes.  Sequencing
              DNA of such mutants will identify specific amino acids that play a key role in
              determining substrate specificity.  Finally, specific amino acids that are
              located at or around the active center and implicated in aglycone recognition
              are replaced by site-directed mutagenesis individually and stepwise to
              determine their effects on substrate specificity and kinetic parameters.  In
              addition, the site of aglycone recognition and binding is directly identified
              using X-ray diffraction of crystallized enzyme-aglycone or enzyme-substrate
              analogue complexes and modeling.

The enzyme Beta-glucosidase plays a key
              role in many biological processes, which makes it a suitable target for genetic
              engineering to address problems in agriculture, forestry, and biomass
              conversion.  These processes include chemical defense of plants against pests
              by producing toxic substances from Beta-glucosides and Beta-glucosinolates;
              production of simple sugars from large carbohydrates, specifically cellulose
              (wood), the most abundant substance in the biosphere and a potential source of
              renewable fuels in the future; and lignin synthesis by trees and the effect of
              lignin on wood strength and quality for paper production.  Thus, the results of
              the proposed research will have a universal impact on a wide a range of basic
              and applied research areas dealing with Beta-glucosidases.


