Title       : Dissertation Research: Evaluating Individual Tradable Quotas - A Case Study of
               New Zealand's Fisheries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9905271

Award Number: 9905271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8345               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Natural resource policy is an important and complex issue for policy analysts
              and political scientists.  Much of political science is concerned with the
              governance and distribution of power, goods, and services.  But ultimately,
              most goods come from natural resources. Today, the need for politically,
              economically, and scientifically sound natural resource management policy is
              more important than ever.  One natural resource management issue that has
              received considerable attention is fisheries.  Over the last few decades the
              situation has become acute.  Fisheries management research has accelerated, as
              the scope of the management problem becomes apparent.  As a result, there is a
              large body of literature in a variety of social sciences addressing problems
              and innovations in fisheries management.

Fisheries policy analysis can be
              divided into three categories  conservation, market-based, and community-based.
               Each approach has a distinct perspective.  These different criteria for
              success embedded in each of these approaches, the literature in this field is
              characterized by different approaches critiquing each other, with limited
              communication among the approaches.  The Institutional Analysis and Development
              (IAD) Framework is one theoretical approach that can accomplish this goal by
              providing a guide for analyzing common pool resources (such as fisheries). 
              Furthermore, the IAD Framework offers a full set of transaction costs and
              institutional performance criteria that are well suited to evaluate fisheries
              policy.

This Doctoral Dissertation Research project evaluates New Zealand's
              fisheries Quota Management System (QMS).  The QMS is a classic market-based
              system that relies on individual tradable quotas to restrict catch to a
              sustainable yield.  Since the QMS is more than ten years old, there is an
              excellent opportunity to evaluate a relatively mature individual trade quota
              system.  The QMS has two primary goals - - maintaining (or building) healthy
              fisheries, and building an economically efficient industry.  In conducting this
              research, the student answers questions arising from the fisheries management
              literature, and performs an evaluation based on the institutional performance
              criteria outlined in the IAD Framework.
This Dissertation Research Project
              promises to enhance substantially our understanding of this interesting and
              important policy area.

