Title       : A Minimalist Account of Verbal Morphology in Child Grammar: Evidence from VP
               Ellipsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9905199

Award Number: 9905199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalind J. Thornton rt58@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Rosalind Thornton
Proposal Number SBR-9905199

"A Minimalist
              Account of Verbal Morphology in Child Grammar: Evidence from VP
              Ellipsis"

According to the Minimalist Program, movement takes place within
              the syntactic/computational system only when needed to derive a representation
              that can be interpreted by the conceptual system (or one that is 'legible' to
              the phonetic/articulatory component). Interface conditions such as these make
              it highly unlikely for a sentence to yield more than a single convergent
              derivation. By contrast, empirical investigation of early child language has
              led to the view that children's early grammars are characterized by optional
              structural derivations. This view is at odds with the spirit of the Minimalist
              Program. One recalcitrant observation is that children younger than two and a
              half years old appear to vacillate between a derivation in which the verb is
              tensed (undergoing verb movement if the language requires it) and one in which
              the verb is a nonfinite (infinitival) form.

The present project seeks a
              better fit between linguistic theory and investigations of child language. The
              research strategy involves searching for children's sensitivity to linguistic
              distinctions that have gone unnoticed or unexplained in previous
              investigations, using careful longitudinal experimentation over an extended
              period with a few young children. One distinction that is hypothesized to lie
              at the heart of the apparent optionality of verbal morphology in early child
              grammars is the semantic distinction between stage-level and individual-level
              predicates; individual-level predicates appear with verbal morphology, as
              finite forms, and stage-level predicates appear as non-finite (or infinitival
              forms). The suggestion is that this "pure" reflection of Universal Grammar in
              early child language is obscured, as language-specific processes such as verb
              movement are incorporated into the childs grammar. Another hypothesis to be
              investigated is that the apparent optionality of verbal morphology is
              overridden by syntactic processes, even during the so-called optional
              infinitive stage. One syntactic process that results in obligatory
              morphological marking of tense and possibly agreement is VP ellipsis, which is
              licensed only by "strong agreement" carried by an auxiliary verb. Childrens
              obligatory use of tense and agreement in VP ellipsis structures would challenge
              many current theoretical proposals which view optionality as the product of
              some sort of deficit or biologically-induced constraint of developing grammars.
              Positive findings from the present research could also inform the search for
              the triggering experiences that guide children in selecting the correct
              parameter settings for their target language. These and other hypotheses
              concerning VP ellipsis and type of predication will be tested in experiments
              using the methodology of elicited production, in addition to data from
              spontaneous production and from the CHILDES database.

