Title       : Collaborative Research: Interactions of Heavy Metals With Biofilm-Coated Mineral
               Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9905755

Award Number: 9905755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon E. Brown gordon@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred M. Spormann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,4444,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Brown/Sporman
9905755
Microbial biofilms are common coatings on mineral
              surfaces in many environments and are known to sorb metal ions such as Pb(II).
              However, little is currently known about the chemical form(s) of these metal
              ions at a molecular level, their spatial distribution in the biofilm, and the
              mechanisms by which the biofilm affects metal ion sorption on mineral surfaces.
              This multidisciplinary project will address these and related issues through
              laboratory studies of Pb(II) sorption on biofilm-coated surfaces of aluminum
              and iron (hydr)oxides and quartz as a function of several solution variables.
              The molecular-scale speciation and spatial distribution of Pb(II) in biofilms
              grown on these surfaces will be studied using synchrotron-based x-ray and
              electron microscopy methods. In addition, we will use infrared spectroscopy to
              study the effects on Pb(II) uptake of the common inorganic ligand PO43- and
              several organic ligands that are dominant functional groups on bacterial
              surfaces and biofilm exopolysaccharides. Burkholderia cepacia, an aerobic
              gram-negative bacterium that readily forms biofilms under nutrient-limited
              conditions, was chosen for the initial phases of this work. Our choice of
              system variables will be guided by the results of our ongoing studies of Pb
              speciation in several Pb-contaminated tailings at Leadville, CO and soils in
              northern France. The role of extracellular phosphate and of intracellular
              ortho- and polyphosphate metabolism in the biofilm in producing Pb-phosphates
              will be explored. Our approach starts with relatively simplified model systems
              and systematically adds some of the complexities of natural systems. The
              ultimate goal of this work is to develop a fundamental understanding of some of
              the factors that control the geochemical cycling (and potential
              bioavailability) of Pb and other metals in aquatic environments.

This
              proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental Geochemistry and
              Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 99-9, and is being funded jointly by the
              Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Ocean Sciences, and MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.

