Title       : Effects of Language of Testimony, Defendant's Ethnicity, Juror's Language
               Dominance and Ethnicity on Jury Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9905741

Award Number: 9905741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harmon M. Hosch hhosch@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the influence of Spanish to English interpretation of
              defendants' testimony and of juror language dominance on the judicial
              processing of Hispanic defendants. Specific factors to be evaluated include the
              influence of the defendant's language of testimony, defendant's ethnicity, and
              jurors' ethnicity and language dominance on judicial processing of criminal
              defendants. The research will fill a void in our understanding of several
              issues. First, little is known about the disposition of cases involving
              Hispanic defendants. The national Hispanic population (10.95%) is growing so
              rapidly that it is projected to surpass the black non-Hispanic population
              (12.14%) within the next 6 years (U.S. Bureau of Census, 1996). Second, in
              multilingual environments, trials are conducted with courtroom interpretation
              of testimony with increasing frequency.  As the monolingual Spanish-speaking
              population has increased, Spanish-English interpretation is critical to the
              processing of many Hispanic defendants. Almost no data are available to
              evaluate the impact of interpreted testimony on trial outcomes where juries
              have deliberated. Third, the project focuses on the influence of interpretation
              on jurors' decision-making in a context in which the population is
              predominantly Hispanic and where many jurors are themselves bilingual. To study
              these variables, an experiment high in mundane realism is being conducted. Six
              versions of a burglary trial are shown to participants via videotape. Three
              thousand jury-eligible community residents will serve as mock jurors. After
              seeing and hearing the evidence, jurors deliberate to decide if the defendant
              is guilty or not. If they find him guilty, they will make a recommendation for
              a sentence. The data will be analyzed at the jury and juror levels, using
              multivariate statistical techniques that will enable the researcher to assess
              the attributions jurors have of the defendant and the case disposition
              patterns. The results will contribute to a better understanding of how Hispanic
              defendants are treated in the criminal justice system, the influence of
              courtroom interpretation, and the effects of jurors' language dominance on
              their decision--making and jury verdicts. They will also inform policy makers
              about the bilingual courtroom.

