Title       : Combinations of Contributions and Group Decision Making: Quantitative Judgments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9905397

Award Number: 9905397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Verlin B. Hinsz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,1332,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Small groups often make decisions involving quantities, such as budget
              decisions, jury damage awards, and forecasts. These decision-making situations
              arise frequently in government, business, finance, legal, and other
              organizational settings. The research supported by this grant aims to provide
              increased understanding of how group decisions of a quantitative nature are
              made in organizations. It is expected that no single group decision process
              will account for group decisions involving every type of quantitative decision
              task. Rather, differences among decision tasks are expected to result in
              different group decision processes. Some group decision tasks incorporate
              beliefs that are shared by a set of group members about what would be
              appropriate responses. These tasks allow for arguments during discussion that
              correspond to a particular choice, and are predicted to lead to group decisions
              that reflect the shared belief. In contrast, decision tasks that involve social
              attitudes are expected to foster discussion that focuses on reaching agreement
              among the group members. In these cases, the group interaction should create
              pressure to reach agreement, and larger factions are expected to dominate the
              group decision. Still other group judgment tasks lead members to be relatively
              indifferent to many of the alternatives. In these cases, the group decision
              process can be summarized as the average of the group member preferences. The
              average is expected because it efficiently resolves the differences in the
              group member opinions. Three experiments will test these hypotheses. The
              theoretical, conceptual, and empirical contributions of this research will
              deepen our knowledge and understanding of the group processes that ultimately
              guide the many important decisions that get made in financial, educational,
              governmental, and legal settings.
 

