Title       : Stabilization Mechanism of Emulsions and Latexes in CO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9905531

Award Number: 9905531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith P. Johnston kpj@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9905531
Johnston, Keith P.
U. of Texas @ Austin

The objective
              is to develop a knowledge of colloid and interface science in compressed
              CO2-based systems in order to design surfactant for stable (1) organic polymer
              latexes and (2) emulsions composed of water and CO2.  The adsorption of
              surfactant at organic-CO2 and water- CO2  interfaces will be described as a
              function of the balance between the surfactant's "CO2-philic" and "CO2-phobic"
              segments.  Simultaneously, steric stabilization of latexes and emulsions will
              be controlled by varying the length and degree of solvation of the CO2-philic
              segment of the surfactant.  The ability to relate interfacial properties and
              colloid stability to surfactant structure is of vital importance for the
              rational design of surfactants for these novel colloids in CO2.

Novel types
              of diblock or triblock copolymer surfactant structure will be develop to
              stabilize an organic polymer latex in CO2, which can then be transferred to
              water form a stable aqueous latex.  In CO2, the CO2-philic segment of the
              surfactant will provide steric stabilization.  Upon transfer to water, this
              segment will collapse onto the surface, and another segment will ionize to
              provide electrostatic stabilization.  The stability of the latex will be
              related to the adsorption of the surfactant in CO2 and water, the latex
              particle size, the CO2 density and the surface charge (in water) as a function
              of pH.

A knowledge of the properties of surfactants at the water-in-CO2
              interface will be developed to guide studies of the stability of water-in-CO2
              (W/C) and CO2-in-water (C/W) emulsions.  From measurements of the interfacial
              tension, the point where the "CO2-philic" and "CO2-phobic" or hydrophilic parts
              of the surfactant are balanced will be identified.  This balance state will
              serve as crucial reference point to understand emulsion stability and type
              (curvature) (W/C or C/W) as a function of surfactant structure, pressure,
              temperature and salinity. Novel sub-micron emulsions will be formed where the
              interfacial tension is very low, and then the pressure or temperature will be
              adjusted to manipulate the stability of the emulsion.

Emulsions composed of
              water and CO2 may be utilized for solvent-free coatings, reactions and
              separations of biomolecules, heterogeneous polymerization, enhanced oil
              recovery, formation of high surface area material, and cleaning of metals,
              fabrics, semiconductors, and contaminated soil.  The potential for waste
              reduction is enormous given that more than 30 billion pounds of organic
              solvents are used worldwide each year.       
  

