Title       : The Philosophical Roots of Engineering Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9905950

Award Number: 9905950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86712              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Channell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the historical, intellectual, philosophical and
              cultural frameworks that has led to a sustained and institutionalized
              interaction of science and technology that has become known as engineering
              science. The project will have three major objectives: (1) discovering the
              philosophies that helped to shape engineering science; (2) analyzing how the
              epistemological aspects of those philosophies led to a methodological framework
              that drew from both science and technology; (3) investigating how those
              philosophies were linked to an ideological framework which allowed for the
              integration of science and technology. In order to accomplish these three main
              objectives, the project will focus on the lives, technical accomplishments and
              cultural/philosophical backgrounds of eight of the leading figures in the
              creation of engineering science during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
              The eight individuals that will be the focus of the project are, John Smeaton,
              William John Macquorn Rankine, Gaspard Monge, C.-L.-M.H. Navier, Ferdinand
              Redtenbacher, Franz Reuleaux, Benjamin Franklin Isherwood, and Robert H.
              Thurston. This group is representative of the national, disciplinary and
              methodological diversity that contributed to the creation of engineering
              science. The project should provide new insights into the relationship between
              science and technology in such areas as industrial and economic development,
              public policy, and engineering education. Through a study of the epistemologies
              of various philosophies that influenced engineering science, the project should
              be able to determine what aspects of engineering science are dependent upon
              particular national/cultural frameworks and what aspects transcend those
              frameworks. Also, the project should provide a foundation for establishing a
              new dialogue between the history of science and the history of technology.
              Finally, the project will make a significant contribution to a major book on
              the history of the interactions between science and technology that is under
              contract to Oxford University Press.


