Title       : Numerical Investigation of Conditions Required for the Creation of
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9905023

Award Number: 9905023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Bice kbice@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The research combines expertise in the paleoceanographic record and
              modern large-scale ocean circulation and air-sea interactions to examine the
              "warm saline bottom water" hypothesis. Previous early Cenozoic modeling
              attempts routinely failed to support the hypothesis; the proposed research
              differs from any previous modeling attempts in that ocean bottom water will be
              forced to form in the net evaporative latitudes. The distribution of the
              resulting warm saline watermass, its stability, and the conditions required to
              produce the response will then be rigorously scrutinized. Geological data
              suggests that the most plausible interval of warm saline bottom water
              for-mation may be the Late Paleocene Thermal Maximum (LPTM), a brief interval
              of dramatic global climate change at or near the Paleocene/Eocene epoch
              boundary. The MOM v.2.2 ocean model will be used to determine the moisture flux
              boundary conditions required for the formation of bot-tom water in the low- to
              mid-latitude Tethys Seaway given boundary conditions appropriate for the warm
              interval of the LPTM. A number of global ocean general circulation simulations
              will be performed using surface conditions 1) as predicted by an atmospheric
              model with boundary con-ditions appropriate to 55 Ma, and 2) in which the
              model-simulated moisture flux is perturbed by gradually increasing aridity over
              the Tethys, or some portion thereof, until deep convection occurs. When a warm
              saline (WS) bottom watermass is simulated, a number of issues can be
              eval-uated, including the following: Is a WS source possible as a steady-state
              condition over thousands of years? Does WS bottom water coexist with bottom
              water formed at high latitudes or does one source always dominate? Is the
              moisture flux required to form WSBW a plausible surface condi-tion? Does
              perturbation of the moisture flux in different regions produce significantly
              different thermohaline responses or deep water flow paths? How are global
              temperature patterns and oce-anic heat transport affected by a WS source? When
              a WS source is simulated, are any features of the marine geologic record
              reproduced?


