Title       : The History of Igneous Petrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9905627

Award Number: 9905627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70182              (Estimated)
Investigator: Davis A. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES  99-05627 - Davis A. Young (Calvin College) 
The History of Igneous
              Petrology

Despite a wide range of studies in the history of geology, no
              comprehensive survey of the history of igneous petrology, one of the
              fundamental geological disciplines, has yet been written. The investigator has
              been working on such a survey since 1995 and will complete writing the history
              of igneous petrology during a year-long sabbatical leave in Academic Year
              1999-2000 and Summer 2000.

The fundamental objectives are to discover the
              ways in which scientific, technological, social, geographical, institutional,
              educational, philosophical, personal, and political factors have influenced the
              overall development of the discipline and to write a narrative, Mind and Magma,
              addressed to petrologists, mineralogists, geochemists, and historians of
              geology that analyzes the interplay of these factors on the unfolding of
              igneous petrology. The text will contribute to our understanding of early ideas
              about volcanoes, the origin of basalt controversy, early views on plutonism,
              early petrographic concepts, the advent of microscopic petrography, the role of
              geologic age in early petrographic classification, spatial aspects of igneous
              petrology, nineteenth-century theories of igneous petrogenesis, early
              experimental petrology, Bowen's theory of fractional crystallization, the
              reaction to the theory of fractional crystallization, the discovery of layered
              igneous intrusives, the granite controversy, the mechanics of igneous
              intrusion, the development of trace-element geochemistry, plate tectonics in
              relation to igneous petrology, isotopic geology in petrology, magma dynamics,
              igneous petrogenesis in the latter twentieth century, recent petrographic
              classification, and planetary igneous petrology.

Because a comprehensive
              history of igneous petrology has never been written, the investigator will base
              the survey primarily on published sources including technical petrological
              articles; monographs; petrology textbooks; histories of geology departments,
              government surveys, and research institutions; personal memoirs of geologists;
              and historiographic literature pertinent to igneous petrology. The investigator
              will spend Fall 1999 and January 2000 in Ann Arbor, Michigan, examining the
              geological literature in the library of the University of Michigan. The
              investigator will also spend one month during Summer 1999 in the library of the
              University of Cambridge examining geological literature and archival materials
              pertaining to Cambridge petrologists.

The library phase of the project
              should be essentially concluded by February 2000. The investigator will devote
              February through Summer 2000 to writing the manuscript.

