Title       : Field Potential and Optical Intrinsic Signals in Active Short Term Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9905053

Award Number: 9905053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Bodner mbodner@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Toga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joaquin M. Fuster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Part of the brain called the prefrontal cortex plays an important role in active
              memory of sensory experience, but short-term memory apparently involves
              cortical memory networks that are more widely distributed.  The general
              objective of this study is to clarify how the cerebral cortex retains
              information in the short term for goal-directed behavior.  This project uses
              two methods of recording cortical activity in monkeys performing visual
              short-term memory tasks: the recording of surface field potentials and the
              recording of optical intrinsic signals. This combination will allow the study
              of neural network activity within and across cortical areas with high spatial
              and temporal resolution.  Correlation of location and time course will be
              examined between electrical and optical measurements during task performance. 
              Two specific hypotheses will be tested: (a) neuronal activation develops over
              prefrontal and parietal cortex during retention of spatial and nonspatial
              memoranda; and (b) in parietal cortex, that activation is more prominent during
              retention of spatial memoranda than during nonspatial memoranda.  Because of
              the phenomenological relation between active memory and consciousness, an
              understanding of the dynamics of active memory may help elucidate the role of
              the cerebral cortex in conscious states.  Analysis of electrical and optical
              signals should reveal underlying topographic specificity in the retention of
              memoranda within the cortical areas explored.  In addition, by contrasting the
              optical data against those from an established electrical method, this study
              should help substantiate the biophysical basis of optical imaging and its use
              in cognitive neuroscience.
    Results will have an impact beyond cortical
              physiology by leading to a better understanding of memory and consciousness,
              and will be important to technological developments in optical imaging.

