Title       : RUI: Regulation of Xenobiotic Sulfotransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9905421

Award Number: 9905421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe D. Beckmann beckmann@alma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alma College
	      614 West Superior
	      Alma, MI  488011511    517/463-7111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9905421
Beckmann      
Diverse sulfotransferases (STs) sulfurylate acceptor
              substrates using the donor 3'-phosphoadenosine-5' phosphosulfate (PAPS).  This
              project investigates the catalytic and regulatory mechanisms of STs
              preferring
phenolic substrates (PSTs).  First,  the regulation of purified
              recombinant bovine PST by CoA and its thioesters is characterized by steady
              state kinetic measurements, affinity absorption, and fluorescence quenching.
              Second,  the structures of CoA molecules and ST-bound PAP are compared using
              workstation energy  minimization studies.   Docking software models the
              interactions of CoAs with the active site of a reported ST structure.  Third,
              PST thiol reactivity toward CoA and its thioesters tests the existence of a
              chemical covalent  mechanism. The fourth aim investigates PST subunit 
              interactions through characterization of purified tryptophan replacement mutant
              enzymes, by kinetic and physical methods such as fluorescence quenching. 
              Fifth, a currently unidentified fluorophore observed prior to catalysis when
              PST
binds 7-hydroxycoumarin will be examined.  Enhancement of this band by 280
              nm excitation suggests resonant energy transfer  from tryptophan(s) to the
              ligand.   The group(s) involved will be determined using the PST mutants. In
              summary, this project investigates ST regulation by a ubiquitous factor of
              intermediary metabolism, and it explores changes in the protein and substrate
              that contribute to ST catalysis.

Metabolism of some steroids,
              neurotransmitters, other hormones, drugs, and pollutants frequently involves a
              family of enzymes known as sulfotransferases (STs).   In this project, the
              investigators examine the catalytic and regulatory mechanisms of a subclass of
              STs.  One novel observation is the inhibition of an ST by a common biochemical,
              CoA, derived from the vitamin pantotheine.  CoA normally  functions as a
              carrier of fatty acids;  therefore, this investigation may connect metabolism
              and diet.  Molecular computational approaches will model the CoA-ST
              interaction.  The investigators will also create mutant ST enzymes, using
              recombinant DNA technology, to study aspects of ST mechanisms. 

