Title       : Implicit and Explicit Contributions to Motor Skill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9905342

Award Number: 9905342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165736             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Willingham willingham@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A commonly-appreciated characteristic of motor skill learning is that much
of
              it occurs outside of awareness. Particularly at high levels of skill,
we seem
              not to be able to articulate the exact movements that make up
performance. On
              the other hand, conscious strategies are clearly important
in motor skill
              learning; consciously understood strategies are at the
heart of coaching and
              instruction.

A considerable amount of research has been directed at
              demonstrating that the
conscious (or explicit) and unconscious (or implicit)
              parts of motor skill
learning are supported by different structures in the
              brain; thus the
emphasis has been on the separability of these two components
              of learning.
Less work has been directed at understanding how these two forms
              of
knowledge work together. The goal of this project is to examine
              the
relationship of implicit and explicit knowledge in motor skill
              learning.
The experiments are motivated by a model of motor skill learning
              that
proposes specific mechanisms by which both implicit and explicit
              knowledge
contribute to motor skill learning. There are three aims of the
              project:

Aim 1: What is the representation underlying sequence learning?
              Many motor
skills involve learning a sequence (e.g., the notes of a piano
              sonata).
When one learns a motor sequence, what is it a sequence of?
              Stimulus
positions? Response locations? Muscle movements? I will utilize
              transfer
designs to determine the representation underlying implicit and
              explicit
sequence learning. 

Aim 2: What is the time course of implicit and
              explicit learning? Some
formal models of motor skill learning suggest that
              implicit knowledge is
compiled from explicit representations. Behavioral
              experiments suggest
that explicit and implicit knowledge can be acquired in
              parallel, whereas
brain imaging work suggests that only one type of
              representation can be
acquired at one time. This project will address this
              question directly. 

Aim 3: What is the mechanism by which explicit and
              implicit knowledge
interact? This project examines the possibility that
              explicit knowledge
can support performance on an implicit task if three
              conditions are met:
the subject knows that he or she has applicable explicit
              knowledge,
sufficient attentional resources are available, and the
              explicit
representation is specific in terms of the spatial targets for
              movement.

These experiments will further our knowledge about the normal
              operation of
motor skill learning, and have particular relevance to athletics,
              and to
skill learning in industrial situations.




