Title       : RUI: Regulation of Diverse Bacterial ADPGlucose Pyrophosphorylases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9905234

Award Number: 9905234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Meyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,5911,5977,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Meyer
	This research is focused on kinetic, physical, molecular, and metabolic
              studies of the uniquely regulated bacterial ADPG Ppases, the rate-limiting
              enzymes in the glycogen and starch biosynthetic pathways, from the following
              sources: Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Rhodospirillum rubrum, Agrobacterium
              tumefaciens, and Rhodobacter capsulatus. The activity of ADPG Ppase is
              modulated by the binding of various allosteric effector molecules depending on
              the carbon utilization pathway of the organism.  A complete molecular
              comparison of this family of enzymes will allow us to perform rational protein
              engineering with the goal of enhancing function.  The successful engineering of
              ADPG Ppase would allow for the overproduction of starch in transgenic plants. 
              The specific aims of this research project are I: Identification of the amino
              acids important for function and regulation and physical characterization of
              these ADPG Ppases;  II: Cloning and sequencing of unique bacterial ADPG Ppase
              genes;  III: Expression and protein engineering of ADPG Ppases; and, longer
              term, IV:  Elucidating the effect of variant ADPG Ppases and glycogen/starch
              metabolism enzymes on the structure of the end-product starch.  This
              interdisciplinary approach will allow for a detailed picture of
              structure/function relationships to emerge.  Information for rational
              mutagenesis (Aim III.) will be derived in part from the results of Aims I and
              II.  The techniques utilized in order to identify and characterize the amino
              acids in the various active and allosteric activator and inhibitor site(s)
              include enzyme kinetics, chemical modification, limited proteolysis, X-ray
              crystallography, cloning and sequencing of genes (including use of PCR),
              protein expression, bioinformatics (alignment of nucleic acid and protein
              sequences), and site-directed and random mutagenesis.  Long-range goals include
              a comparison between mutant and native crystal structures in parallel with
              kinetic and other functional analyses of the mutants.  Experiments in
              development will also involve utilizing engineered ADPG Ppases in both in vivo
              and in vitro recombinant systems in combination with various starch synthases,
              branching, and debranching enzymes to elucidate structure/function
              relationships of the end product starch.  The glucan produced from these
              systems will be isolated and analyzed with respect to yield, chain length, and
              branching pattern.
The regulation of the glycogen and starch biosynthetic
              pathways is a growing area of interest due to the increasing demand for natural
              and modified starches in a variety of industries.  These renewable and
              biodegradable carbon sources can serve as inexpensive starting materials for
              bio-ethanol, organic acids, and antibiotic synthesis and have great potential
              for use in the making of specialty plastics, adhesives, detergents,
              surfactants, and packaging materials.  Beyond contributing to enzymology and
              agricultural biotechnology, this project is well suited to training students at
              a primarily undergraduate institution in the theory and practice of
              biochemistry, molecular biology, and biotechnology.  The background and
              experience students gain in the laboratory makes them attractive candidates for
              both academic and industrial positions.

