Title       : Patterned Heteroepitaxial Processing: A New Approach to Mismatched Heteroepitaxy
               for the Fabrication of High-Performance Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9905874

Award Number: 9905874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35312              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Ayers jayers@ee.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Faquir C. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905874
Ayers

Mismatched heteroepitaxy of semiconductors is of considerable
              interest for the fabrication of many novel devices and integrated circuits. 
              This is because relatively few semiconductor substrates are available with high
              crystal perfection and suitable electronic properties.  On the other hand, many
              semiconductors not lattice-matched to the common substrate wafers (Si, GaAs,
              and InP) have important potential applications for high-speed digital
              electronics, microwave integrated circuits, optoelectronics, optoelectronic
              integrated circuits, and solar cells.  Unfortunately, the use of
              highly-mismatched heteroepitaxial semiconductors in devices and circuits has
              been quite limited due to the high densities of crystal defects such as
              threading dislocations (TD's) and stacking faults (SF's).  These defects
              degrade the performance of both majority- and minority-carrier devices,
              resulting in high leakage currents and subthreshold degradation in field-effect
              transistors, poor current gain for bipolar transistors, poor efficiency and
              brightness in light emitting diodes, and rapid degradation and failure in
              injection lasers.

At the present time, compliant substrates show great
              promise for reducing the defect densities in mismatched heteroepitaxial
              semiconductors.  However, the compliant substrate method may be difficult to
              implement in the case of highly-mismatched semiconductors on large area
              substrates.  This is because such applications require compliant layers only a
              few angstroms thick, which are difficult to produce by presently available
              techniques on large wafers.  The PI's have proposed a new approach to the
              achievement of highly mismatched heteroepitaxial semiconductors free from
              threading dislocations, which is complementary to the compliant substrate
              approach.  The PI's call their approach "patterned heteroepitaxial processing
              (PHP)."

The PHP approach involves either patterned heteroepitaxy, or the
              patterning of continuous layers followed by post-growth annealing.  Either
              variation of PBP should allow the achievement of material absolutely free from
              threading dislocations as long as the lateral size of the patterned regions is
              small enough.  To date we have developed a quantitative model for the PHP
              method, but very few experiments have been done.  Here they propose to perform
              an experimental evaluation of PHP.  Although the technique applies quite
              generally to zinc blende semiconductors, they will focus on ZnSSe material
              deposited on GaAs substrates for this work.  If this phase is successful, then
              further experimental verification will be warranted, especially with other
              heteroepitaxial material systems.

The scope of the proposed work is the
              following.  They will deposit continuous layers of ZnSSe on GaAs (001)
              substrates using metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE).  Different
              compositions will allow them to tailor the lattice mismatch from +0.27% to -4%.
               They will pattern the ZnSSe layers after growth, to square and rectangular
              areas of different dimensions.  After post-growth annealing the patterned areas
              will be characterized using wet chemical etching and scanning electron
              microscopy to evaluate their threading dislocation densities.  They will use
              their existing quantitative model as a guide in designing our experiments. The
              results of the experiments will be used to develop their recommendations for
              the next phase of research.
***

