Title       : The Political Psychology of Crisis Negotiations: An Experimental Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9905575

Award Number: 9905575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Wilkenfeld jwilkenf@gvpt.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarit Kraus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Decisionmakers are overwhelmed frequently by the vast amounts of information
              which they must consider.  They are forced often to make partially informed
              decisions which ignore critical issues because of the complexity of the
              situation being analyzed.  This tendency becomes even more pronounced in
              international crisis situations, characterized by threat to basic values,
              finite (often short) time for response, and heightened probability of
              involvement in military hostilities.  These elements all contribute to the
              possibility that individual decisionmakers are overwhelmed with detail and
              possibly unable to identify optimal outcomes, either individually or
              collectively.  The vast literature on crisis decisionmaking shows that
              situations of intense crisis can create a reduced span of attention, cognitive
              rigidity, and a distorted perspective of time.  These factors combine to make
              utility maximization difficult to attain.
	The research proposed here attempts
              to address these structural problems associated with decisionmaking in crisis
              by focusing on the negotiation process used to manage and resolve disputes
              which reach crisis proportions.  The development of decision support systems
              for crisis negotiation is proposed as a means of reducing complexity and aiding
              in the evaluation of utilities associated with possible outcomes.  With a
              decision support system in place, two specific aspects of the negotiation
              process are targeted for investigation:  (1) the differential impact of general
              versus domain-specific cognitive complexity levels among crisis negotiators on
              negotiation processes and outcomes, and (2) the impact of various types of
              mediation on the outcome of negotiation.  We propose that when negotiators are
              equipped with tools which allow them to make projections and evaluate the
              utilities associated with alternative proposals, coupled with their greater
              understanding of the cognitive capacities which adversaries bring to the
              negotiation table, and with the intervention of mediators, they increase their
              ability to resolve conflicts.  Such parties should emerge from the experience
              having achieved mutual benefit, and therefore having laid the foundation for
              the long-term resolution of the underlying conflict.  The experimental design
              which we propose is uniquely capable of facilitating a better understanding of
              how these elements fit together in an efficient and effective
              conflict-management strategy.
	This research program builds on our earlier
              work in the development of a strategic model of negotiation.  Originally
              developed to address the problem of achieving cooperation among autonomous
              agents in distributed computational settings, this work led to the application
              of this model to crisis negotiation and bargaining situations through the
              creation of a decision support system for crisis negotiators.  This decision
              support system has been implemented recently in a Hostage Crisis simulation
              setting to support experimental work on cognitive complexity and crisis
              outcomes.  In addition, we have started conceptual work on a second crisis
              scenario and its associated decision support system, based on a fishing
              dispute, which allows us to look more closely at the role which different types
              of mediation can play in crisis negotiation. 

