Title       : Auctions: Efficiency and Existence of Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9905599

Award Number: 9905599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Reny p-reny@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are three projects making up this proposal. The first (joint with
              Professor Motty Perry, Hebrew University) is aimed at extending Vickrey's
              multi-unit auction to environments with asymmetric bidders, interdependent
              values, and heterogeneous goods, while maintaining an ex-post efficient
              outcome. Vickrey's celebrated auction is able to efficiently allocate many
              homogeneous goods among any number of, possibly asymmetric, bidders so long as
              they each have private valuations and downward-sloping demands. Our focus will
              be on the more general case of interdependent values. Unfortunately, Vickrey's
              auction is not guaranteed to yield an efficient outcome when values are
              interdependent. In addition to achieving ex-post efficiency, an important
              aspect of the present research is simplicity of the auction. For example, in a
              recent paper we have already solved the special case in which the goods for
              sale are homogeneous and demand is downward-sloping. In this solution, the
              equilibrium is simple in the sense that it requires no more sophistication from
              the bidders than they would need to play well in a single-unit Vickrey auction
              against a single other bidder. Moreover, as in standard auctions, the rules of
              our auction are independent of the details of the environment. Our intent is to
              continue along this line of research by extending this result so as to allow
              for possibly heterogeneous and complementary goods.

The second project (also
              joint with Professor Perry) will build upon the first. We hope to employ the
              sealed-bid auction developed in the first project above as a guide toward the
              design of an efficient ascending multi-unit auction. Developing an efficient
              ascending auction is important since ascending auctions are typically much
              simpler to play and so are more likely to perform well in practice than their
              sealed-bid counterparts. One reason for this is that in the homogeneous goods
              case for example, our efficient sealed-bid auction requires bidders to submit
              bid functions, while the ascending auction we seek would at most require
              bidders to keep track of finitely many drop-out prices and drop-out on various
              units when the price clock reaches them.  We have already solved the single
              unit case and this is indeed the relevant comparison. In our single-unit
              ascending auction a bidder need only keep track of his current drop-out price
              and drop out when the price clock reaches it. The difference between our
              single-unit ascending auction and a standard ascending auction is that in ours,
              bidders are allowed to become active at a higher price after having "dropped
              out" at a lower price. We are hopeful that we can extend this auction to the
              multi-unit case. As we have already done with the single-unit case, we expect
              that our simultaneous auction design and analysis will play a guiding role in
              both the design of a multi-unit ascending auction as well as in the description
              of its equilibrium.

The third project (joint with Shmuel Zamir, Hebrew
              University) centers on the existence of pure strategy equilibria in
              nondecreasing bidding functions in first-price auctions. While first-price
              auctions have been extensively studied and numerous existence results are
              available, there is no such result in what is perhaps the most natural
              environment: N possibly asymmetric bidders with affiliated signals and
              interdependent values. It is our impression that this environment has presented
              difficulties only because the standard single-crossing property can fail within
              it. That is, it is quite possible that even if other bidders employ
              nondecreasing bid functions it might be the case that a high bid is a better
              reply than a low bid when one's signal is low, but a worse reply when one's
              signal is high. Most existence proofs break down when this is the case. But it
              appears that a weaker single-crossing property suffices to push a proof through
              and it also appears that this weaker single-crossing property holds in the
              environment of interest. While we are hopeful that this will produce a very
              permissive existence result, we are also interested in how much further one can
              go. Along these lines it appears that the dimensionality of the bidders'
              signals is critical. While our weaker single-crossing property holds when
              signals are one-dimensional, it can easily fail when they are
              multi-dimensional. Indeed, it appears to us that under very standard
              assumptions a pure strategy equilibrium in nondecreasing bid functions may fail
              to exist when signals are multi-dimensional. In fact, we already have a crude
              example of this nature that we hope to refine. With any luck, our new existence
              result with one-dimensional signals together with a counterexample for
              multi-dimensional signals will provide an even more complete understanding of
              first-price auctions than we currently enjoy.
