Title       : Efficient Inference for Semiparametric and Nonparametric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9905816

Award Number: 9905816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan W. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop improved methods for drawing
              inference from economic models and data. The methods developed should help to
              make more accurate margin of error statements in several important
              applications. The project includes three specific projects and extensions:
(1)
              Efficient bootstrapping in semiparametric models. Bootstrapping, as implemented
              in application, is a resampling method that can be used to improve the accuracy
              of margin of error calculations. The degree of improvement can depend on how
              the bootstrapping is done. This project will consider the most efficient
              bootstrap available and will develop appropriate theory. Also important
              applications of the efficient bootstrap will be used to illustrate the
              potential gain. As this proposal will show, there is large potential for
              improvements through the use of an efficient bootstrap. 
(2) Efficient
              prediction intervals and regions in semiparametric models. For prediction
              purposes, the most useful approach to calculation of margins or error is
              through the construction of predictive intervals (and regions) and the
              estimation of the probability of the variable(s) of interest falling in the
              constructed interval (region.) This project will consider the estimation of
              optimal predictive intervals in the sense of minimum length intervals given the
              probability level and the dual problem of maximum probability content given the
              interval length. Aside from the obvious attraction of such intervals they have
              the added feature of rendering the estimates asymptotically independent of
              nuisance parameters estimators that might have slow rates of convergence. The
              optimal univariate predictive interval approach will be extended to the more
              relevant optimal multivariate predictive region.
(3) Nonparametric and
              semiparametric regression with nonadditive errors. The project shows that
              semiparametric consumer surplus calculations are biased due to likely
              heteroskedasticity of the additive demand disturbances. A solution is proposed
              by nonparametrically modeling the dependence of the demand disturbances on the
              regressors up to an independent component. Unlike the Hausman-Newey approach
              which only yields the mean or median consumer surplus, this approach enables
              the calculation of the entire distribution of the consumer surplus, which can
              then be used to develop confidence intervals, possibly optimal in the fashion
              mentioned above. The approach will be extended from the single equation
              approach of Hausman and Newey to systems of demand equations to the extent
              possible.


