Title       : Deconstructing the Environmental Kuznets Curve: A Theoretical and Empirical
               Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9905576

Award Number: 9905576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231073             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Scott Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arik Levinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project develops and tests theoretical models predicting the economic
              determinants of the levels and time paths of environmental quality. Several
              recent and influential papers on the relationship between economic growth and
              the environment find that many forms of pollution initially worsen but then
              improve as national incomes rise. In response to these empirical findings, a
              number of researchers have proposed theoretical explanations for what has
              become known as the "Environmental Kuznets Curve" (EKC). As yet, however, there
              has been little work bridging the gap between these two literatures by adding
              restrictions from economic theory into the empirical estimation of EKC
              relationships. Without an understanding of why observed pollution-income
              relationships exist, policy implications arising from those relationships are
              ambiguous. This research will go beyond reduced-form correlations between
              income and pollution to study more closely the relationship between pollution
              and economic fundamentals.
     The project is divided into five components.
              The first is a theoretical investigation to identify potential links between
              pollution and income per capita. It demonstrates that while increases in income
              alone can lower pollution levels, the source of the income growth also
              determines its pollution consequences. Growth arising from physical capital
              accumulation will have different pollution consequences than growth arising
              from human capital acquisition or technological progress. Empirical methods
              will then be used to show that the inclusion of relevant factors of production,
              such as human or physical capital, does indeed alter pollutionincome
              trade-offs. As a result, it is unclear whether the observed pollution-income
              relationship arises from income-induced strengthening of environmental policy
              or from changes in the composition of nations' output. To investigate this
              question more fully, the remaining four components of the project develop and
              test structural models of the links between factor accumulation, income, and
              pollution.
     The second component develops and estimates a simple model of
              pollution demand and supply. In contrast to current empirical work it allows
              the sources of economic growth to affect its pollution consequences. In
              contrast to current theoretical work it allows for sufficient flexibility in
              functional forms as to incorporate most of the current theoretical explanations
              for the EKC. The third component considers the role of transboundary pollution
              and international trade. If pollution crosses borders, pollution policies
              should be linked across countries, and the optimal domestic pollution policy
              may depend on income levels and factor endowments abroad. Furthermore,
              international interactions may considerably alter the transmission mechanism
              from growth in factor endowments to changes in the pollution-intensity of
              domestic production.
     The final two sections study intertemporal decision
              making and political economy considerations. The third section recognizes that
              environmental regulations will affect the relative return to accumulating
              pollution-intensive factors of production. Rising pollution charges lead to
              endogenous changes in the long run composition of factors that in turn affects
              pollution levels. Finally, the fourth section relaxes the assumption that all
              citizens are identical, so that the optimal pollution policy for a given
              citizen depends on his or her factor ownership. Growth in the number of
              human-capital holding citizens will have different consequences than growth in
              physical capital, not only because of the direct implications on the use of
              intermediates in production, but also because it will affect the aggregation of
              preferences into policy.
     The work described in this proposal will link
              two important areas of economic and environmental research: reduced-form
              empirical estimates of the pollution-income relationship, and structural models
              of the economic determinants of environmental quality. While the work described
              herein is preliminary, it does demonstrate the feasibility of a more
              theoretically influenced approach and the necessity of such an approach for
              drawing policy implications about the economic determinants of pollution.

