Title       : Protonation and Conformational Control of Photosynthetic Reaction Center
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9905672

Award Number: 9905672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wraight cwraight@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9905672
Wraight


The primary and secondary acceptor quinones, QA and
              QB, in the  photosynthetic reaction center (RC) of Rhodobacter sphaeroides are
              chemically identical but exhibit very distinct properties. Thus, they provide
              an ideal model for understanding how proteins determine the properties of bound
              cofactors. This project investigates the origin of these distinct properties,
              the mechanistic details of electron and proton transfer to QB, and the
              conformational events that accompany these transfers. Accommodation of the
              protein to buried charges will be examined through the decay of fluorescence
              emission from the flash-induced P+QA- state. Relaxation on the micro- to
              millisecond time scales will be determined, utilizing various quinones as QA as
              well as QA-site mutants.  Long range interactions between the two quinone
              binding sites, that give rise to reciprocal perturbations of the free energy
              levels of QA and QB redox states, will be quantified via measurements of proton
              uptake, QA-to-QB electron transfer, and delayed fluorescence emission. Specific
              models of this interaction will be tested by site-directed mutagenesis and
              quinone analogues. Control of the redox potentials of QA and QB by
              electrostatic and steric interactions with the protein will be analyzed by site
              directed mutagenesis of QA and QB site residues and specifically synthesized
              quinones, to explore the role of the methoxy torsion angles in optimizing QA
              and QB function by ubiquinones. Structural implications will be investigated by
              Fourier-transform infra-red (FTIR) spectroscopy.

Light energy conversion in
              the photosynthetic reaction center (RC) involves an initial electron transfer,
              followed by several more steps in which the separation of charge is stabilized
              and trapped. In bacterial RCs, the many reactions that the RC is capable of
              include at least 8 different electron transfer reactions, 2 distinct proton
              transfers, plus substrate (quinone) binding and protein (cytochrome)
              recognition, docking and binding. With many of the cofactors involved act as
              electrochromic reporter groups as well as reactants, and the RC provides
              unparalleled observability of charge movements and conformational relaxations
              and is exceptionally well suited for studying protein function and behavior. 
              In some bacteria, two chemically identical quinones act as electron acceptors,
              in series, exhibiting very distinct properties. This project will use
              spectroscopic and biochemical methods to study how the protein modifies the
              properties of the two quinones, including the role of conformational relaxation
              in accommodating buried charges, and the effects of electrostatics and steric
              constraints in determining the redox properties of the quinones. The outcomes
              will provide general understanding of how proteins modify and determine the
              properties and reactivities of bound cofactors and substrates, essential to
              catalysis.

