Title       : Pathogen-Induced WRKY DNA-Binding Proteins as Regulators of Plant Defense
               Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9905976

Award Number: 9905976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhixiang Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A protein (designated TDBA12) from tobacco plants has been identified that has
              sequence-specific DNA-binding activity, and that increases markedly during the
              hypersensitive response to infection with tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) and
              following treatment with salicylic acid.  Furthermore, two genes have been
              isolated that encode proteins with the same DNA-binding specificity as TDBA12
              and which are members of the novel WRKY family of DNA-binding proteins recently
              found in plants.  TDBA12 is sensitive to phosphatase treatment, suggesting a
              role for protein phosphorylation in its activation.  Potential target genes of
              TDBA12 include genes encoding proteins with protective and defensive functions
              as well as regulatory genes.  Transgenic tobacco plants expressing antisense
              WRKY genes develop spontaneous lesions and exhibit enhanced chlorosis and
              necrosis after TMV infection.  These observations suggest a general model in
              which WRKY proteins may be activated as targets of the protein kinase cascade
              that is activated during plant defense responses.  WRKY proteins in turn may
              regulate these responses.  The overall objective of these studies is to
              characterize further the WRKY DNA-binding proteins.  First, the TDBA12 complex
              will be isolated to identify the subunits associated with DNA-binding activity
              and to isolate their genes.  Second, transgenic approaches will be taken to
              decipher the functions of the WRKY genes.  The phenotypes of transgenic tobacco
              plants expressing antisense RNAs specific for different WRKY proteins will be
              characterized.  Third, in vitro and in vivo experiments will be used to
              determine if specific protein kinases are required for TDBA12 activation and,
              if so, whether WRKY proteins or their interacting proteins are the targets of
              the regulatory phosphorylation.  A major effort will also be made to isolate
              the protein kinase that regulates the DNA-binding activity of TDBA12.  These
              studies will advance our understanding of the molecular basis of plant disease
              resistance by revealing new regulatory components and mechanisms important in
              plant defense responses.
