Title       : The Teotihuacan State and the Moon Pyramid: Excavations in 1999 and Analyses
               Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9905939

Award Number: 9905939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saburo Sugiyama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The archaeological site of Teotihuacan which is located in the Valley of Mexico
              a short distance from Mexico City was, at its apogee, one of the largest and
              most populous prehistoric metropolises in the New World. Construction at its
              sacred center was initiated during the first two centuries B.C. During the
              following state of monumental construction a series of large imposing stone
              pyramids were erected; the urban area around them covered approximately 20
              square km, with about 60,000 to 80,000inhabitants by A.D. 150. The Teotihuacan
              state extended its influences throughout many parts of Mesoamerica and its
              power continued for centuries until its apparent sudden collapse in the seventh
              century. Although archaeologists most often focus their attention on large
              impressive structures associated with high ranking elites, at Teotihuacan just
              the opposite is the case. Extensive survey and excavation over decades has
              resulted in the exposure of many typical house compounds and a great deal is
              known about "ordinary" life at the site. With prior NSF support Dr. Sugiyama
              and his Mexican collaborators have conducted excavation through tunneling under
              the massive Mood Pyramid which lies at the center of the site. During one
              season of excavation they have discovered a series of buildings which represent
              smaller forms of the final massive structure. They have also discovered
              sacrificial burials associated with rich ritually significant grave offerings.
              During continued NSF supported work they hope to uncover royal burials and
              additional sacrificial remains and to analyze these materials. The Pyramids
              were designed to reflect the society's basic ideology and both the layout of
              the burials and the materials they contain will shed light on systems of
              belief, social organization and political control.

Archaeologists wish to
              understand how complex societies arise and how, with simple technological
              systems, large numbers of people are organized into state systems. Mechanisms
              that establish and maintain hierarchies and which facilitate social control
              play a vial part in this process. This research will elucidate them at one of
              the most important sites in the New World.

