Title       : Dissertation Research: Process and Project of Decentralization in Federal and
               Unitary States in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9905295

Award Number: 9905295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian F. Crisp crisp@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The recent trend toward decentralization in Latin American is in sharp contrast
              to a colonial legacy and reputation of extreme government centralization. 
              Across the region, decentralization has become an increasingly hot topic as
              more states undertake decentralizing reforms.
	My research seeks to address
              both  the causses and the process of decentralization in Latin America.  In the
              first part, I plan to collect data from the whole region in order to test
              several hypothesized causes of fiscal and political decentralization.  The
              second part complements the first by explaining the process and mechanisms of
              decentralization.  The combination of these two parts makes it possible to
              advance significantly our understanding of decentralization.
	Several
              important theoretical distinctions frame this study.  The first is a definition
              of decentralization which is distinct conceptually from that of federalism. 
              The second is a conceptual and empirical distinction between fiscal and
              political decentralization.  Finally, federalism is defined in terms of the
              constitutional structure of the state.
	In the region-wide study, several
              hypotheses are derived from the literature and are tested on data for the past
              30 years.  Federal state structure, economic crisis, higher levels of
              development, the existence of significant ethnic and social cleavages, and a
              crisis of political legitimacy are hypothesized to lead to greater fiscal and
              political decentralization.  After exploring these region-wide explanations for
              fiscal and political decentralization, it is possible to examine the causal
              relationship between them.
	Having determined the casual explanation for
              fiscal and political decentralization based on a region-wide sample in part
              one, part two takes up the question of how decentralization occurs.  Field
              studies are conducted in Colombia, Costa Rica and Venezuela in order to trace
              the process of decentralization.  Through field research, including interviews
              with local officials and municipal support organizations, I hope to understand
              the mechanism through which the causes identified above lead to
              decentralization.  These data are used to consider the importance of
              efficiency, sources of the pressure to decentralize - top or bottom, and
              whether these changes occur through constitutional change or legislative
              mandate.
	The combination of these two research strategies, case study and
              quantitative testing, permits significant conclusions about the process and the
              causes of decentralization in Latin America.  Policy makers and elites in Latin
              American are expressing substantial interest in decentralization. 
              Understanding what leads to decentralization, and how those factors bring it
              about, is the responsibility of political science.   

