Title       : Demand Uncertainty, Market Structure, and Competition in Availability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9905143

Award Number: 9905143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71663              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Dana j-dana@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                             This research will study the effects of aggregate demand
              uncertainty on retail and consumer service markets when prices do not
              necessarily clear markets. Inflexible prices imply potential stockouts so, when
              there are costs of shopping, consumers will choose where to shop based on both
              price and availability (the probability of finding the good in stock). While
              availability is often ignored in economics models, it is a genuine concern for
              consumers and firms in a wide variety of retail and consumer service
              industries. For example, companies who regularly advertise availability are car
              dealers, video rental chains, mail order suppliers, department stores, and
              appliance stores. The work will initially focus on answering two questions that
              arise in models of availability (or service rate) competition.

	The first
              question is how market structure, prices, and availability are determined when
              firms compete in availability but their capacity or inventory (and therefore
              availability) is unobservable to consumers. This research will answer this
              question by extending existing models of competition when availability is
              observable to consider oligopoly inventory choice with asymmetric information.
              Using a game theoretic model, the work will ask how prices and availability are
              determined when consumers use price as a signal of availability. In a variety
              of static models (corresponding to Bertrand and Cournot timings) the work will
              show that firms charge high prices and earn supra-competitive profits (even in
              the limit as the market structure becomes arbitrarily competitive). Dynamic
              extensions in which consumers learn over time and firms acquire reputations for
              high availability are proposed.

	The second question is how
              manufacturer-retailer contracts, specifically royalty or revenue sharing
              contracts, can correct distortions created by demand uncertainty, vertical
              separation, and downstream competition. A young literature in economics has
              begun to show how vertical restraints can increase welfare and profits by
              increasing inventory holdings when the manufacturer is a monopolist, demand is
              uncertain, and retailers compete (and also by decreasing destructive
              competition in models with flexible prices). This work will examine models of
              royalty or revenue sharing contracts, which have recently become widely used in
              the video rental industry (and others), and argue that revenue sharing is more
              efficient and versatile than other vertical restraints.

