Title       : Testing Economic Models of the Classic Maya Civilization at Motul de San Jose,
               Peten, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9905456

Award Number: 9905456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonia E. Foias antonia.e.foias@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Antonia Foias will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of Motul de San Jose, located
              in Guatemala's Central Peten. This secondary center was occupied during the
              Late Classic period and thus dates from the height of Mayan civilization. 
              Preliminary work by Dr. Foias and her colleagues indicates that the site was a
              center for the production of polychrome vessels with elaborately painted texts
              and that these were widely distributed. The goal of this work is to address the
              question of Mayan social organization and to determine the social, political
              and economic strategies which Mayan elites used to bind large numbers of
              individuals together in effectively functioning social units. Although many
              sites have been excavated, archaeologists still do not know the extent to which
              power was centralized or segmented among multiple factions. 

The research
              will include a detailed settlement survey and extensive subsurface testing in
              the monumental site core and periphery. During the 1999 and 2000 field seasons
              the primary goal will be to examine large-scale distribution of economic
              activities across the site core and periphery to understand the degree of elite
              control over economic production and exchange. An intensive survey of a 2
              square km. area around the site core and of two 250 m wide and 4 km long
              transects oriented North and South of the site core will be complemented by
              test pitting of all  plaza groups and by intensive shovel testing of refuse
              deposits surrounding structures. The extensive artifact collections provided by
              the test pitting and shovel testing programs will be used to reconstruct the
              spatial distribution of production activities as identified by manufacturing
              debris, production tools or high densities of specific artifact classes. The
              association of these production loci with elite or non-elite households will
              indicate the degree of political control over this economic subsystem. The
              scale of inter-regional exchange will be estimated through quantification of
              non-local items. Neutron activation analysis of ceramics will provide
              information on the spatial distribution of production.

Many scholars have
              considered control over economic institutions the crucial factor in
              sociopolitical evolution. Debate about Maya political organization pivots on
              the degree to which the elite controlled critical aspects of the economy. Yet
              Classic Maya economics remain the least understood aspect of this Mesoamerican
              civilization. This project promises to provide critical economic data to
              address this question.

