Title       : Methodological Equivalence of Risk Belief Measures Across Diverse Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9905852

Award Number: 9905852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Vaughan evaughan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Revised Project Summary:


"Methodological Equivalence of Risk Belief
              Measures across Diverse Samples"

Recent national discussions on ways to
              improve environmental risk management and reduce social conflict have used
              results from scientific studies to help formulate policy recommendations.  This
              is particularly true of social science research that examines the risk
              judgments and perspectives of various social groups.  Understanding how
              communities think about, respond to and evaluate environmental risk situations
              has become an important focus of research in decision analysis and
              environmental psychology.  For more than two decades, social scientists have
              documented dissimilarities between the public and experts in perspectives on
              risk problems, but also among various communities in the way in which they
              respond to and perceive environmental hazards.  Groups who differ in ethnicity,
              socioeconomic circumstances, educational levels and language frequently differ
              in their reported risk beliefs and reactions to environmental problems.  This
              has major implications for risk communication and the resolution of conflict
              about managing environmental hazards across the diverse communities affected by
              exposures.  If results of studies are to inform policy in a meaningful way,
              then scientific procedures used to measure risk perspectives must have
              demonstrated reliability and appropriateness for all groups, a question of
              measurement equivalence.  Evidence is required showing group differences to be
              "real" and not the result of faulty scientific and measurement procedures.
              
This investigation examines several risk belief questionnaires and
              measurement tools used to profile public perspectives on risk problems. 
              Selected instruments previously used will be tested for the ability to produce
              reliable and valid information for groups who differ in ethnicity, primary
              language, educational levels and economic circumstances.  The investigation
              will include as participants a variety of African-American, Anglo and Latino
              individuals residing in lower and middle-income communities.  Individuals
              selected for the study will participate in a series of scientific procedures
              that will generate information for a statistical exploration of the question of
              measurement equivalence across groups. 

