Title       : Peptidergic Regulation of Body Patterning Behavior in the Cuttlefish, Sepia
               officinalis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9905989

Award Number: 9905989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan J. Tublitz tublitz@uoneuro.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              NJ Tublitz
99-05989

	The long term goal of this research project  is to
              obtain a mechanistic understanding of behavioral plasticity, the ability to
              vary the performance of an individual behavior depending upon the internal
              state 
of the organism or on environmental conditions.  This behavioral
              plasticity is the result of subtle variations in the motor output due to small
              changes in the motor network both centrally and peripherally.

	The issue of
              behavioral plasticity will be explored experimentally by studying a unique
              behavior, Body Patterning Behavior , in the European cuttlefish Sepia
              officinalis, a cephalopod mollusc related to 
octopus and squid. Cuttlefish
              and other unshelled cephalopods generate a fascinatingly rich  repertoire of
              transient and sustained body patterns that are used for numerous purposes such
              as camouflage, prey capture, 
courtship, and intraspecific communication. One
              of the most intrinsically interesting behaviors in the animal kingdom, body
              patterning behavior in cephalopods is unique due to the complexity and variety 
              of patterns as 
well as the speed of pattern formation, usually within 500 ms.
              The ultimate objective of this research is to elucidate the central mechanisms
              underlying the production of these complicated patterns, and to 
understand
              the role of neuropeptides in modulating this behavior.  

	The work to be
              performed in the up-coming year will focus on the role of neuromodulators in
              mediating chromatophore activity.  We have demonstrated that the FMRFamide
              family of neuropeptides, known 
as FMRFamide-related peptides (FaRPs),
              stimulate the chromatophore muscles, which in turn causes expansion of the
              pigmented chromatophores. Previous work has identified a brain transcript that
              
encodes FMRFamide and three other FaRPs. One focus will be to determine the
              spatial distribution of the FMRFamide-coding transcript in the Sepia brain
              using in situ hybridization methods and to determine the 
extent of the
              overlap between transcript expression and FMRFamide expression as assessed by
              immunocytochemical techniques. The second goal will be to identify other FaRP
              coding genes in Sepia using molecular methods. The results from these
              experiments will provide new information on the role of these peptides in
              modulating aspects of body pattern behavior in cephalopods.
