Title       : Knowing Manchuria: Biological Science in the Making of Asian Empires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9905943

Award Number: 9905943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Rogaski rogaski@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9123,9179,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-05943 - Ruth Rogaski (Princeton University)
"Knowing Manchuria: 
              Biological Science in the Making of Asian Empires"


This project seeks to
              rethink recent paradigms in the history of science by considering how science
              functioned in the process of empire-building by Asian powers. The central goal
              of my research is to illuminate how Manchu, Chinese, Russian and Japanese
              scholars produced knowledge about the natural environment of the contested
              Manchurian frontier, beginning with the seventeenth century Russo-Manchu
              struggle for the region, and culminating in the Chinese scientific
              "indiginization" of Manchuria's flora and fauna on behalf of the PRC during the
              Korean War. This focus on Manchuria will highlight how Asian nations, while
              often the object of Western scientific study, also used science to further
              their own imperial goals. The project will also attempt to re-evaluate the
              notion that "indigenous" non-Western ways of knowing nature were divorced from
              the politics of expansion and domination. Rather than seek a simple
              relationship between science and empire, however, I hope to examine the complex
              question of how Asian scientists negotiated their intellectual and political
              allegiances, first in an era of shifting imperial regimes, and then in an era
              marked by the global rivalries of the Cold War.

The study will begin by
              comparing systems of knowledge about the natural world developed by the
              expanding Qing Empire with the sciences of botany, zoology, and natural history
              associated with the emerging empires of early modern Europe. The project will
              then consider how the "Eurasian" empire of Russia employed European scientists
              to help further its expansion into the Far East. Significant space will be
              dedicated to the role of the biological sciences in Japan's administration of
              Manchuria Manchukuo, an area of investigation that until now has only focused
              on the heinous biological warfare experiments conducted by the Kwantung Army's
              notorious Unit 731. Finally, particular attention will be paid to the emergence
              of a Chinese scientific community in Manchuria and the role of Chinese
              scientists in claiming Manchuria as an "indigenous" Chinese territory,
              particularly after the establishment of the People's Republic in 1949. By
              focusing on an Asian frontier encompassed by several different imperial
              projects of widely divergent nature, the study will offer a more nuanced
              appraisal of the relationship between the politics of empire and the
              motivations of scientists associated with empire.

