Title       : The Prehistory of the Eastern Mediterranean: Dendrochonological, Radiocarbon,
               and Dendrochemical Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9905389

Award Number: 9905389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter I. Kuniholm peter@dendro.mail.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Kuniholm and his
              collaborators will continue to construct a master dendrochronology for the
              Eastern Mediterranean and to provide precise dates for sites of archaeological
              interest. `Dendrochronology`, or tree ring dating, is the most accurate dating
              technique available to scientists. Because the thickness of wood rings which
              trees add annually is affected by temperature and rainfall, these vary from
              year to year and it is possible to start with living trees, plot a thickness
              curve back from a known starting date and then extend the series further
              backwards in time with the addition of samples from geological and
              archaeological contexts. One can take wood of unknown age from archaeological
              sites and match it against the master curve to determine the absolute age of
              the rings. Dr. Kuniholm and his colleagues have single-handedly worked for many
              years to construct such a master chronology for Greece, Turkey and other
              countries in the Eastern Mediterranean. This has resulted in a chronology which
              covers some 6,500 of the last 9,200 years. The longest part of the chronology
              is 2,160 years long and absolutely dated from B.C. 2687 to 627. Over the next
              three years the team will work to fill gaps by visiting and analayzing wood
              from over 91 sites in the eastern Mediterranean. The group will also also
              conduct elemental analysis on a large series of decadal and single year samples
              to determine trace element composition. Dr. Kuniholm's research indicates that
              changing elements can serve as markers for major climatic events such as
              volcanic eruptions. Location of these signals could both serve to date past
              events and to help in tree ring correlation. The project is extremely important
              because the resulting sequence will permit the absolute dating of large numbers
              of archaeological occurrences. Because the laboratory involves many
              undergraduate students it will continue to play an important role is science
              education. 
