Title       : FRG: Microstructure Design of Advanced Multi-Domain Magnetic Materials Under
               Applied Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a9905725

Award Number: 9905725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $924259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunzhi Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Laughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Armen G. Khachaturyan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9905725
Wang

This Focused Research Group (FRG) integrated program includes
              experimentation, analysis and simulation to develop a fundamental and
              technological understanding of the formation of complex multi-domain (e.g.,
              compositional, structural and magnetic) microstructures under applied magnetic
              and stress fields in magnetic materials.  This allows for the possibility of
              tailoring multi-domain microstructures for desired properties through advanced
              thermomechanical and thermomagnetic treatments.  Material systems investigated
              include the high-coercive magnetic alloys of Fe-Cr-Co and Co-Pt, whose magnetic
              domain structure is self-adjusted to the evolving complex multi-phase
              microstructure.  Advanced characterization techniques are used to provide
              accurate descriptions of the alloy systems upon which realistic analytical and
              simulation models are formulated.  A series of three-dimensional (3D) computer
              simulations are performed to characterize the size, shape, orientation, spatial
              arrangement and dynamic switching of the structural and magnetic domains as
              functions of internal misfit strain and applied magnetic and stress fields. 
              Effects of these microstructural features on the magnetic properties of the
              alloys are examined.  In parallel with the simulations, thermomagnetic and
              thermoelastic treatments and magnetic property measurements are carried out to
              validate the simulation predictions and to test key assumptions.  Early stages
              of the program focus on fundamental understanding and model development, while
              later stages address practical applications of the integrated approach to the
              design and development of novel multi-domain microstructures for new
              technological challenges.  The grant is co-funded between the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities and the Metals Research Program in the Division of
              Materials Research.
%%%
This FRG should have important impact on science,
              technology and education.  Improved understanding of the complex
              microstructures in these systems under applied fields is expected.  The
              numerical methods developed will allow realistic 3D computational prototyping
              of the multi-domain microstructures for a range of advanced applications. 
              These advances will minimize the need for trail-and-error experiments in
              microstructural engineering for new alloy development.  The computational
              design tools with user-friendly interfaces to be developed are uniquely suited
              for adoption to undergraduate and graduate instructions.  The project will also
              provide a unique opportunity for the students involved to be exposed to a
              combination of advanced simulation methods and experimental characterization
              techniques.  It will provide an excellent vehicle for knowledge transfer to a
              new generation of materials scientists and engineers who are able to contribute
              directly to science based microstructural engineering in their
              workplace.
***

