Title       : Experimental and Analytical Seismic Studies of MRF's and MRF-CBF Dual Systems
               with Concrete Filled Tube Members
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9905870

Award Number: 9905870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328389             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Ricles jmr5@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le-Wu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Sause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Pessiki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Composite construction for buildings provides an effective system for resisting
              non-seismic (e.g., gravity and wind) loads.  Concrete filled steel tube (CFT)
              columns are one form of composite construction.  CFT-related research studies
              to date under the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research Program on Earthquake
              Engineering have investigated the performance of individual members and
              connections under seismic loading conditions.  However, there currently is a
              lack of knowledge of the seismic performance of complete structural frames with
              CFT members and related connections.

This project will focus on the seismic
              performance of CFT structural frame systems.  The project will: (1) investigate
              the seismic performance of CFT column-wide flange beam MRF; (2) investigate the
              seismic performance of MRF-CBF dual frame systems with CFT columns and CFT
              braces; (3) evaluate analytical modeling and analysis procedures for CFT
              column-wide flange beam MRFs and MRF-CBF dual frame systems with CFT columns
              and CFT braces; and (4) review and improve design criteria and methodologies
              for structural frame systems with CFT members.

The objectives of the project
              will be achieved through integrated analytical and experimental investigations.
               The analytical investigation will focus on nonlinear time history analysis of
              MRFs and MRF-CBF dual systems.  Using the improved design criteria, three CFT
              test frames will be designed.  Each test frame will be a 5/6 scale model of the
              lower three stories of a two-bay six-story frame designed for the theme
              structure of the U.S. Japan Cooperative Program.  The three frames include: (1)
              and MRF with square CFT columns and wide flange beams; (2) an MRF-CBF dual
              system with square CFT columns and CFT unbonded braces; and (3) a MRF-CBF dual
              system with square CFT columns and CFT bonded braces.  The experimental
              investigation will execute a series of pseudo-static tests on each test frame
              using a simulated seismic loading that consists of imposed lateral displacement
              histories at the first, second, and third floor levels.  

The project will
              acquire new knowledge of the seismic performance of structural systems with CFT
              members that cannot be obtained from studies of isolated members and
              connections, and will generate technical information needed by design
              professionals for the seismic resistant design of composite structural systems.
              

This project is supported under initiative NSF94-154 "US-Japan-Cooperative
              Research in Composite and Hybrid Structures."

