Title       : Property Rights Institutions and Resource Conditions: A Study from the Western
               Himalaya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a9905443

Award Number: 9905443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85426              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Agrawal arum.agrawal@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this research investigation is to compare the impact of
              institutional arrangements vs. broad socio-economic and demographic factors on
              resource conditions, and to examine whether different types of institutional
              regimes lead systematically to different resource related outcomes.  Property
              rights are the form of institutional arrangements that will be the focus of
              research.  Forests constitute the resource type to be studies.  
The research
              is carried out in the Kumaon region of the Indian Middle Himalaya where nearly
              5000 village-level community forests exist side by side with privately held
              forests and other forests managed by the Revenue and Forest Departments of the
              Indian government.  The investigator selects 100 cases and, in each case, four
              different forms of tenure over forests exist.  The existence of different
              tenurial forms in the same region provides an ideal setting in which to examine
              l) the effect of pro0perty rights in comparison to other factors that are often
              asserted to influence the condition of resources (the research pays specific
              attention to population, migration, market, and cultural perceptions about
              resources), and 2) the different impact of variations in property regimes on
              forest condition, and 3) the importance of different monitoring and enforcement
              mechanisms in the effectiveness of property rights regimes. 
The data set
              constructed and analyzed through the research complements an earlier data set
              created by the investigator through research in the Kumaon region to study
              intensively forest management institutions in 24 villages.  The existing data
              was collected using a stet of ten questionnaires that allow researchers to
              relate resource condition to biological, climatic and edaphic, socio-economic,
              demographic, and institutional variables.
By locating and identifying the
              processes and precise means whereby institutional arrangements influence
              resource management and conditions, the research lends greater specificity to
              attempted policies on the subject.  In addition, few studies have undertaken a
              comparative examination either of the relative importance of property rights in
              comparison to larger socio-economic or climatic variables, or of the variable
              influence of different property regimes.  Thus, this research enhances
              significantly our understanding of the topic.


