Title       : SGER: Developing a Database Supporting Cell Biology Modeling - A Feasibility
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9905820

Award Number: 9905820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dong-Guk Shin shin@cse.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY


	The Virtual Cell Project aims at developing a framework
              designed for modeling cell biological processes that contains the mathematics,
              physics and numerics as a transparent infrastructure.  A successful
              implementation of the project will make it possible for cell biologists to
              construct and test models as an aid to understanding their experiments.  An
              important complement to this project would be a database containing models,
              images, and biochemical and eletrophysiological data; such a database would not
              only support the Virtual Cell, but would also, independently, be an invaluable
              resource for the cell biology community.
	This proposal aims at investigating
              the feasibility of developing a database that can support the Virtual Cell.  We
              will attempt to build a database that includes sets of equations that describe
              biochemical and electrophysiological reactions, cell geometry derived from
              microscopic images and spatial relationships amount the compartments of a cell.
               During this feasibility study, our data gathering will focus mostly on the
              data that are already available from our own laboratories.  In addition, we
              will attempt to compile, group, and store a limited set of published reaction
              kinetics, eletrophysiological data, images and models into the database. 
              Overall, our research focus associated with the database construction will be
              to study feasibility of organizing diversified sets of heterogeneous
              computational data so that the data can be seamlessly integrated into
              production and evaluation of computation models demonstrating complex cell
              biochemistry processes.
	The impact of the Virtual Cell Project is to
              revolutionize the way cell biologists study complex functions and behaviors of
              a living organism.  A successful implementation of our feasibility study will
              allow us to produce a longer-term research framework.  The longer-term research
              framework, once successful, will allow scientists to observe and examine
              detailed steps of chemical and kinematic changes without performing an actual
              experiment.  We anticipate that such a resource would be very useful in both
              the laboratory and the classroom.

