Title       : Modular Structure and Function of RNase lll, a dsRNA-Binding Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9905406

Award Number: 9905406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Simons bobs@microbio.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Simons
RNA-binding proteins are involved in all aspects of gene expression,
              including replication, transcription, translation, ribosomal and messenger RNA
              processing and decay, RNA splicing and editing, and RNA transport and export. 
              Ribonucleases are key players in these events.  Ribonuclease III (RNase III) is
              a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-specific endonuclease that is widely conserved,
              playing vital or essential roles in RNA processing and decay.  Each RNase III
              monomer (of the functioning dimer) contains a single copy of the dsRNA-binding
              motif (dsRBM) found in a large number of diverse proteins known or thought to
              bind dsRNA.  RNase III also contains a highly conserved catalytic domain
              (catD), so far unique to this enzyme.  Recent and important evidence reveals
              how the dsRBM binds to dsRNA as an independently folded protein module.  Other
              recent evidence shows that catD is also an independent module, possessing
              robust and specific endoribonuclease activity under specific conditions.  These
              studies suggest that the dsRBM and catD subdomains of RNase III likely interact
              with one another through a network of intimate contacts, to stabilize binding
              and to create a more efficient catalytic site.  Subdomain contacts within
              otherwise modular proteins, including other RNA-binding proteins, are not
              well-understood.  This research project comprises an integrated genetic assault
              on RNase III structure and function at the subdomain level, through
              well-defined specific aims.  Key biochemical work will directly test genetic
              predictions.  The principal determinants of RNase III dimerization will be
              examined in vivo, through the isolation of point mutations in a novel genetic
              screen.  The potential contribution of dsRNA substrate binding to dimer
              stability will be carefully assessed, aided by existing well-characterized
              dsRBM point mutations that prevent binding.  Substrate-binding determinants in
              catD will also be sought.  Potential interactions between dsRBM and catD will
              be studied carefully, with a newly developed in vivo assay in which RNase III
              activity is reconstituted from the individually expressed subdomains, as well
              as with the recently developed prokaryotic two-hybrid system and other means. 
              These efforts will yield important insights into dsRNA-binding, RNase III
              catalysis, and modular protein structure and function in
              general.



Simons
RNA is one of the storehouses of genetic material in
              all cells.  RNA-binding proteins are involved in all aspects of RNA function. 
              RNase III is one such RNA-binding protein.  It is found in most cells.  RNase
              III contains an RNA-binding module (RBM) found in a large number of related
              proteins that bind RNA.  RNase III also contains a catalytic module (catD),
              unique to this protein family.  Recent and important evidence suggests that the
              RBM and catD modules interact with one another through a network of intimate
              contacts.  In general, subdomain contacts in modular proteins are not
              well-understood.  This research project will mount an integrated genetic and
              biochemical assault on RNase III structure and function, at the modular level. 
              These efforts will yield important insights into RNA-binding, RNase III
              function, and modular protein structure and function in general.

