Title       : An Experimental Study of Learning in Repeated Games Using Real Beliefs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2000       
File        : a9905227

Award Number: 9905227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Schotter andrew.schotter@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yaw Nyarko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      In recent years game theorists and experimental economists have focused
              a great deal of attention on the question of how people learn when repeatedly
              playing a simple matrix game. While some, investigators focus on reinforcement
              learning in which people learn by looking back at their experience and seeing
              what has been successful in the past, others, focus on belief learning and look
              to the past to update beliefs about their opponent's future action. Still
              others, select the best features of both of these models (among other things)
              in an approach that has proven to be remarkable successful.

        In all
              of this research, however, there is an assumption that while past actions and
              payoffs are observable, beliefs are unobservable and therefore must be
              represented by proxies and inferred. The research proposed here attempts to
              take advantage of laboratory techniques by directly eliciting the beliefs of
              subjects in our experiments using a "proper scoring rule" which provides
              subjects with an incentive to report their beliefs truthfully. As a result,
              this proposed research presents, an investigation of belief learning in which
              all relevant variables are observable; i.e., it studies belief learning with
              real beliefs.,

        In a just completed paper on two-by-two constant-sum
              games with real beliefs, the principal investigators, come to two broad
              conclusions. First, under the assumption that people best-respond to some
              beliefs, they find that stated beliefs fit the data better than the other
              beliefs studied (Cournot, fictitious play and more generally, the class of
              gamma-weighted empirical distributions). Second, under the assumption that
              people choose strategies via a logistic belief learning rule generated by some
              beliefs, we again find that stated beliefs fit the data the best.

       
              The research proposed here extends our previous work in four different
              directions. First we propose to investigate whether our data can better be
              explained by a reinforcement learning model. This comparison is interesting
              since we intend to compare the performance of "the best" reinforcement learning
              model to our stated belief learning model, a model which has out-performed all
              of the other history based belief learning models we have compared it to. In
              other words, we intend to compare the best reinforcement learning model to the
              best belief learning model.

        Second, using our elicited beliefs, we
              intend to see if, in the repeated play of matrix games, subjects converge to an
              "equilibrium in beliefs" in which each subject believes their opponent to
              behave as dictated by the equilibrium of the theory. This will allow an
              additional test of the veracity of game theoretical equilibrium notions since
              relying on actions alone to support the theory can be misleading. In short,
              what may appear to be disequilibrium with respect to actions may still be an
              equilibrium with respect to beliefs.

        Third, we construct new
              theoretical models of belief formation and test them using the data generated
              by our previous and proposed experiments.

        Finally, we will expand
              the set of games we investigate beyond the two-person constant sum games to
              determine how the belief formation process changes as we change the normal form
              of the game subjects play.

