Title       : Quantifying Bacteria-Metal-Mineral Adsorption: Wet Chemistry and Advanced Photon
               Source Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a9905704

Award Number: 9905704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy B. Fein fein.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Bunker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Kulpa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Schneegurt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,4444,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fein
9905704
The proposed research will use bulk adsorption and EXAFS
              experiments to calibrate a surface complexation approach to quantifying
              bacterial adsorption of aqueous metals in groundwater systems. In order to
              remediate dissolved heavy metal contamination in groundwater, we must
              understand the chemical controls on contaminant mobilities. Bacteria are
              ubiquitous in low-temperature water-rock, and depending on conditions, they can
              either enhance or retard contaminant transport through adsorption reactions. 
              With our current knowledge, it is impossible to predict if bacterial adsorption
              effects occur given a set of conditions, or to predict the magnitude of such
              effects. The primary questions we will answer with the proposed research are as
              follows:  (1) Does a reversible equilibrium state exist for metal-bacteria
              adsorption reactions, or do kinetics, inorganic metal precipitation, or cell
              metabolic processes prevent equilibrium from being attained?; (2) Do the
              reaction stoichiometries that we obtain from bulk adsorption experiments agree
              with direct observations of the metal-bacteria surface complexes that we will
              make using XAFS studies on the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National
              Laboratory?; and, (3) Can we expand the surface complexation equilibrium
              thermodynamic approach to describe bacteria-mineral adsorption reactions?  We
              will conduct bulk adsorption and desorption experiments, examining both
              isolated metal-bacteria and bacteria-mineral systems, to rigorously test the
              reversibility of the metal-bacteria-mineral adsorption reactions. Furthermore,
              we will quantify the importance of adsorption/desorption kinetics, surface
              precipitation, and metabolism on metal uptake by the cell.  Coupling the direct
              observations of the surface complex that are possible with the Advanced Photon
              Source with the laboratory adsorption/desorption experiments is a powerful
              technique to unequivocally determine both the reaction stoichiometry and the
              equilibrium constants for the important adsorption/desorption
              reactions.

This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
              Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 99-9, and is being funded
              jointly by the Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, Ocean Sciences, and MPS
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.

