Title       : Empirical Models of Inventory Investment and Price Determination by Durable
               Commodity Intermediaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9905145

Award Number: 9905145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226924             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Hall george.hall@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Rust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops and empirically tests dynamic programming models of
              inventory investment and price determination by durable commodity
              intermediaries. These firms acquire bulk quantities of durable commodities such
              as steel, lumber, or coal from producers and subsequently sell their
              inventories to customers at a markup. The investigators have established a
              working relationship with one such intermediary, a U.S. steel supplier, which
              has provided them with detailed daily data on purchases, sales, and inventory
              holdings for over 2,000 products since June, 1997 with monthly updates on an
              on-going basis.  A major component of the research is micro-oriented, focusing
              on developing computational and econometric methods to determine whether the
              firm's behavior can be accurately approximated as an optimal trading strategy
              from the solution to a dynamic programming problem. Since the data provide
              identities of each of the intermediary's customers and the prices and
              quantities they purchased, the investigators can study whether dynamic models
              of optimal price discrimination can explain significant variations in prices
              charged to different customers. The project develops new econometric procedures
              for correcting the problem of dynamic selectivity bias resulting from
              endogenous sampling of the prices at which the intermediary acquires new
              inventories.  The research also draws macro-level implications by aggregating
              the micro-level models to develop a market-level (disequilibrium) model of
              price determination. The investigators analyze the impact of macro shocks and
              cyclical fluctuations in interest rates on the behavior of these markets to
              provide new insights into the role of inventories as propagating or stabilizing
              mechanisms in business cycles.  Finally, this research program extends the
              state of the art on numerical methods for continuous dynamic programming
              problems such as the inventory problem by comparing discrete approximation
              methods such as uniform discretization, quadrature-based methods, and random
              and low-discrepancy multi-grid methods to continuous approximation methods
              based on polynomial and neural network approximations to the value function and
              decision rule. The investigators also evaluate Euler equation methods (e.g.
              parameterized expectations), and methods from the AI/learning literature such
              as "Q-learning" and neuro-dynamic programming.




