Title       : Sry and Signals Controlling the Origin and Specification of Sertoli Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9905685

Award Number: 9905685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blanche Capel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of Dr. Capel's lab is to learn how the male sex determining gene, Sry,
              controls organogenesis of the testis.  Sry is thought to be expressed in
              precursors of Sertoli cells, the cells believed to play a central role in sex
              determination by orchestrating male-specific organ development.  Recently she
              has used DiI to lineage trace Sertoli cells and have shown that they arise from
              the coelomic epithelium of the gonad during a phase of proliferation, a single
              cell can give rise to a Sertoli and another somatic cell of the testis.  In
              situ expression data suggests that this asymmetric fate decision is under the
              control of the Notch/Delta pathway.  To investigate this possibility, a
              constitutive Notch gene will be introduced by adenovirus infection in organ
              culture to test whether overexpression of Notch disrupts commitment to the
              Sertoli cell fate.  XX Sry transgenic experiments show that male-specific
              proliferation in the gonad depends on Sry.  To determine whether Sry's effect
              on proliferation is cell autonomous and/or non-cell autonomous, proliferation
              in an XX_SYGFP chimeric gonad will be analyzed.  To explore a view in the field
              that mesonephric tubules represent another source of Sertoli precursors, a
              transgenic mouse carrying a green fluorescent protein reporter gene under the
              control of a tubule-specific promoter will be generated.  Tubule cells will be
              marked by GFP such that the fate of these cells can be analyzed.  Elucidating
              the function of the male sex determining switch, Sry, in biological and
              morphogenetic processes like cell fate decisions, proliferation, and cell
              reorganization will provide novel information about the molecular genetic
              mechanisms controlling organogenesis and differentiation.


