Title       : Civic Community and Civic Welfare: A Study Based on Economic Census Microdata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9905094

Award Number: 9905094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Tolbert, II   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental thesis of this project is that local capitalism and civic
              engagement are associated with beneficial civic welfare outcomes. Previous
              research has shown that a civic community perspective has substantial promise
              as an alternative to neoclassical theories of development and change. Still,
              much remains to be done to improve measures of the key concepts of local
              capitalism, civic engagement, and civic welfare. This project will use
              facilities at the Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census. It
              will expand coverage from rural small towns to metropolitan areas, allow
              measures at multiple points in time, and explore the use of decennial Census
              household microdata in the construction of measures of civic welfare and civic
              engagement. We also propose to expand measures of civic welfare to encompass
              local civic infrastructure, public safety, and public health. This will be done
              with Economic Census microdata and Center data on local governments, as well as
              exploratory work with population Census long-form microdata. To test the basic
              thesis, the investigators will develop a database on more than 6,000 cities and
              towns in the U.S. Within selected larger metropolitan areas, they will conduct
              exploratory analyses at the Census tract level, identifying civic spaces within
              larger urban settings. Net of the effects of standard control variables,
              changes over time in measures of local capitalism and civic engagement (e.g.,
              small, locally-oriented manufacturing establishments and retail establishments,
              family farms, civically-engaged religious denominations, and other charitable
              associations and organizations) are hypothesized to vary positively with
              changes in measures of civic welfare including lower infant mortality, higher
              income levels, less out-migration, more per capita expenditures on schools and
              libraries.
