Title       : Preschool Age Children's Friendships: Formation, Maintenance, and Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9905926

Award Number: 9905926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Vaughn vaughbe@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn R. Bradbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Making and keeping friends is a life-span developmental task that is related to
              general psychosocial adjustment, to feelings of well-being, and to feelings of 
              'connectedness' with others from early childhood through old age. Young
              children failing to make and keep friends are often characterized as lacking
              social competence, older children/adolescents without friends are frequently
              characterized in terms of personality deficits and social deviance, and
              friendless elderly persons are often described as disconnected from the larger
              social world. Having friends and being a friend are considered generally
              positive qualities, but recent reviews and descriptive empirical studies have
              also pointed out that having the 'wrong' friends or participating in 'low
              quality friendships' can promote sub-optimal developmental trajectories. There
              is, however, relatively little research evidence documenting the formation and
              maintenance of friendships varying in terms of "quality," and even less
              research has focused on potential influences of friendship quality over
              significant periods of time in stable and changing groups of young children.
              Very few studies of children's friendships adopt experimental designs to test
              hypotheses concerning the role of friendship (or friendship quality) as a
              determinant of developmental outcome. Finally, studies of friendships rarely
              attempt to coordinate this domain with other relational dimensions salient to
              children, such as social dominance. This project is proposed as an effort to
              provide both descriptive and quasi-experimental data concerning antecedents to,
              correlates of, and outcomes associated with participation in a range of
              friendships in a large sample of preschool-age children. In a longitudinal
              study, observations of peer-directed behavior, interviews, and adult ratings
              (teacher, parent) will be used to characterize individual differences in
              children's social competence and social dominance with peers. Relevant academic
              readiness/accomplishment data will also be gathered from parent/teacher ratings
              and classroom documentation. Antecedent variables will include child
              temperament/personality, demographic attributes (gender, age, ethnicity,
              socioeconomic status, general physical health and attendance records), and
              teacher/child relationship indicators. Friendship dyads will be determined on
              the basis of sociometric and/or proximity data (as appropriate for children of
              different ages). Outcome measures will include assessments from domains of peer
              social competence, social interactions with friends and acquaintances in
              natural and laboratory contexts, competition and aggression based social
              hierarchies, and stability of friendships over time. Descriptive analyses will
              document the range of friendship quality (along multiple cross-tabulated
              dimensions) characterizing children from the late toddler period (30-42 months)
              to kindergarten age (approximately 60-70 months), relations between friendship
              quality, social competence, and social dominance across this range of ages, and
              relative influences of adult/child (teacher) versus peer relationships on
              subsequent measures of social competence, social interactions, and stability of
              friendships. This study will provide broadly descriptive and prescriptive
              characterizations of friendships and friendship quality across the preschool
              period and will explicitly consider friendship and dominance relationships as
              interactive co-determinants of peer-directed social behavior in the peer groups
              of young children.

