Title       : Arrangement and Description of the Paul A.M. Dirac Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905919

Award Number: 9905919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33669              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. McElrath mcelrath@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The purpose of this project is to make available to historians of science the
              Florida State University collection of the papers of theoretical physicist Paul
              A.M. Dirac (1902-84). To this end, two objectives will be reached by the close
              of the six-months grant period:  the arrangement of all items by an archivist
              who will also take appropriate preservation measures; and the creation of a
              web-based finding aid documenting at the folder level the contents of the
              collection.
	This body of approximately 20,000 items was donated without
              special restrictions to FSU by Mrs. Margit Dirac. Unequaled in depth and
              breadth by any other assemblage of Dirac-related materials, it will, when the
              arrangement is completed, occupy at least 87 linear feet of shelf space -- only
              27 of which are given to books owned by Dirac. Included are: Dirac's drafts,
              final manuscripts and proofs of published works; notes for and typescripts of
              lectures; notebooks; sheaves of mathematical calculations; groups of various
              kinds of documents related to particular subjects such as "War Work" (atomic
              bomb research); letters written by him; and a much more substantial corpus of
              incoming correspondence from distinguished colleagues such as Bohr, Heisenberg,
              Schrodinger, and Tamm. Noteworthy are Dirac's marginal comments on others'
              manuscripts and proofs, as well as in offprints of his and others' articles.
              Complementing the collection are photographs, conference programs, personal and
              professional memorabilia, and a large cache of family papers dating from the
              1880s through the early 1980s.
	The significance and potential impact of the
              project may be gauged by, first, Dirac's undisputed importance as one of the
              major contributors to the "Physics Revolution" of this century. Second, the
              archival resource in question is a rich one not only for students of Dirac's
              life and thought but for researchers focusing on the contemporaries with whom
              he interacted in correspondence and in person. Such is the testimony of not
              only Dr. Robin Rider but of three other project consultants who also surveyed
              the materials on-site in 1998: Drs. Peter L. Galison, David Cassidy, and John
              Albright. It is a virtual certainty that Dirac biographers and historians of
              science will find grist for the mill in these papers. Cultural historians
              measuring the long-term consequences of the new images of physical reality
              promulgated by 20th-century physicists will also benefit, directly or
              indirectly, from the availability of this grand legacy making possible research
              findings unobtainable nowhere else.

