Title       : An Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) Solution to Handling Spatial Autocorrelation
               Latent in Georeferenced Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9905213

Award Number: 9905213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Griffith griffith@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to exploit mathematical quantities
              related to the geography of georeferenced data-that is, data that are tagged to
              locations on the earth's surface.  Its importance lies in its ability to allow
              scientists to work with more sophisticated and realistic models of various
              kinds of processes distributed across regions of the earth.  The essence of the
              research is motivated by a recognition that the Moran Coefficient (a spatial
              autocorrelation index) can be decomposed into orthogonal map pattern
              components.  This decomposition relates the Moran Coefficient directly to a
              standard linear regression, in which corresponding eigenvectors can be used as
              predictors.  The algebraic structure is very similar to that of restricted
              maximum likelihood (REML) estimation.  The analytical work will be complemented
              by numerical approaches that will focus on Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
              analysis, empirical Bayes analysis, and simulation experiments. 

The basic
              knowledge advancement will be a description of auto-Poisson distributions
              containing positive spatial autocorrelation, and thus, a better understanding
              of how to interpret spatial data that are georeferenced (e.g. most satellite
              data).  This research is significant to the advancement of scientific knowledge
              because it will establish the statistical theory necessary to convert
              georeferenced data into value-added information.  The project addresses
              relevant societal concerns in at least three different ways:  (1) it will
              contribute to an integration of satellite and social science data, a current
              goal of NASA; (2) it will help demystify spatial statistics, allowing maps to
              be viewed where today equations must be viewed; and, (3) it will make a
              sizeable part of statistics for spatial data more accessible to a larger
              audience by recasting this topic in conventional regression terms that are
              readily understood. Thus, the research will enable society's better
              understanding of such concerns as superfund remediation strategies pursued by
              the EPA, small-area estimation programs being implemented by various federal
              data collection agencies, and geographic disease cluster evaluations by
              national health organizations such as the NCI.

