Title       : Collaborative Project: Metabolic Specificity and Regulation in the Methanogenic
               Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9905068

Award Number: 9905068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244503             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grahame   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Grahame
	The long range goal of this research is to obtain a detailed
              understanding of the biochemistry of one-carbon metabolism.  Investigations are
              focused on discovering how C-1 metabolism is regulated in the methanogenic
              Archaea, which has broad significance toward developing an understanding of how
              gene regulation takes place in these unusual organisms.  This project
              specifically concerns two isozymes of methyl-cob-amide:coenzyme M
              methyl-transfer-ase (MT2-A and MT2-M).  The MT2 isozymes function in separate
              C-1 metabolic pathways in Methanosarcina barkeri, in which they catalyze methyl
              group transfer from different corrinoid (B12) protein substrates to the thiol
              group of coenzyme M.  The relative amounts of the two isozymes differ 200-fold
              in M. barkeri grown on methanol versus trimethylamine, with evidence suggesting
              control at the level of transcription.  The research will uncover the
              biochemical mechanisms responsible for regulating the differential
              transcription of the two MT2 isozyme genes.  In addition, the work will define
              the molecular basis for the functional specificity of MT2 isozymes in different
              metabolic pathways by characterizing the interactions of the MT2 isozymes with
              different corrinoid proteins.  The structural basis for MT2 isozyme-corrinoid
              protein substrate specificity will be identified by engineering the MT2 genes
              to produce defined structural changes in both MT2 isozymes.  Wild type and
              modified MT2 proteins will be used in physicochemical and kinetic studies to
              characterize their interactions with different corrinoid protein substrates. 
              The Co-PI will carry out a collaborative study on the thermodynamics of
              corrinoid protein binding to the mutant and wild-type MT2 isozymes.  The MT2
              isozyme system will be used to investigate regulation of carbon substrate
              utilization pathways in the Archaea by exploring the molecular events that
              control the wide variation in the levels of the isozymes in response to changes
              in growth substrate.  The focus is to identify the biochemical mechanism(s)
              responsible for differential expression of the two MT2 genes.  

	Methanogens
              make up the largest genetically and metabolically distinct division within the
              Archaea (a group of unusual organisms that constitutes a fundamental domain of
              life separate from Bacteria and Eukaryotes).  Methanogens growing on a variety
              of simple carbon substrates contribute approximately one-billion tons of
              methane to the yearly production of this gas on Earth.  In every
              methane-generating pathway known, one or more vitamin B12-dependent reactions
              is required.  In Methanosarcina barkeri alone there are as many as seven
              different B12-containing proteins involved in different methane forming
              pathways.  Despite their metabolic importance, only recently has progress been
              made in studying these B12 proteins and their associated methyltransferase
              enzymes in purified form.  At present, little is known about the molecular
              details of how the expression of these enzymes is regulated in response to
              physiological or environmental changes.  Moreover, this is true in general for
              the mechanisms by which gene regulation takes place in the Archaea, and the
              means by which environmental signals bring about control of gene expression in
              these organisms have yet to be identified and characterized.  In this work, we
              will gain an understanding about the specificity of B12 methyltransferase
              interactions in different metabolic pathways, and the mechanism by which the
              levels of these enzymes are differentially controlled depending on nutrient
              availability.  The research carried out here will advance our knowledge of the
              structural basis for specificity in B12 protein interactions, and will play an
              important part in understanding the basic mechanisms of global regulation of
              gene expression involved in nutient utilization.  It will further our knowledge
              of ecology and the environment, and ultimately improve our usage of the
              metabolic potential of the methanogenic Archaea for agricultural, biomedical,
              and industrial applications.

