Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Bandwidth and Capacity Study for Multimedia
               Applications Over IP Backbone Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9905085

Award Number: 9905085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Magda El Zarki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5944,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9905085
El Zarki

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Magda El Zarki, Department of Electrical Engineering, University
              of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Dr. Tarek Kamel, Computer
              Communications and Networking Department, Electronics Research Institute,
              Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study and analyze the telecommunications market in
              Egypt and define the needs and requirements of the Internet Service Providers
              (ISPs) and the constraints and needs of the society and the evolving Internet. 
              They plan to build a framework and develop a tool that can be used by the ISPs
              and other telecommunications agencies to improve their performance and help
              with the capacity planning and bandwidth provisioning for Internet Protocol
              (IP) backbones that will service multimedia applications.  The two scientists
              will collaborate on the development of the bandwidth optimization and
              capacity-planning framework.  The analysis will be based on recent developments
              in the IP technology such as Ipv6, mobile IP, multicasting, and asymmetrical
              satellite based services for rural areas.
 
Scope: Dr. El Zarki is recognized
              for her scientific and academic accomplishments and for her early involvement
              at Columbia University's NSF-supported Telecommunications Center.  Dr. Kamel
              has major scientific responsibilities in development and management of computer
              networks and in the Internet society in Egypt.  El Zarki and Kamel's
              laboratories in the United States and in Egypt respectively have excellent and
              complementary facilities to conduct this research.  The proposed activities
              could lead to development of tools for the newly emerging multimedia
              applications that require stringent Quality of Service (QoS).  The results will
              be especially useful in developing countries where the cost of capacity
              resources is a crucial limiting factor in the development of high-speed
              communications.  A graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania will
              participate in the research, and will gain experience in an international
              science activity.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities.

