Title       : Dissertation Research: Third Party Interventions in Intrastate Disputes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905857

Award Number: 9905857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7160               (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Dixon dixonw@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation research evaluates the occurrence and timing of third
              party interventions in intrastate disputes.  Specifically, what factors
              influence whether or not a third party will intervene in an intrastate dispute?
               What factors influence when a third party will intervene in an intrastate
              dispute?  Third party interventions and intrastate disputes are defined in this
              study so as to incorporate a wide range of intervention and dispute types.  As
              a result, this study is original in that it broadly analyzes the phenomena of
              third party interventions in intrastate disputes, as opposed to analyzing just
              one type of intervention (i.e. military intervention) or one typo of intrastate
              dispute (i.e. ethnic disputes)>  Several hypotheses are derived from major
              theoretical perspectives in the filed on international relations in order to
              explain the occurrence and timing of third party interventions.  The hypotheses
              are tested against the historical record of third party interventions in
              intrastate disputes in the post World War II period.  The primary objective of
              this project is to evaluate a set of hypotheses relating various factors to the
              occurrence and timing of third party interventions.  In doing so, this study
              provides a better understanding of why, when, and how third parties intervene
              in disputes that occur between domestic groups within the borders of a state. 
              A secondary objective of this project is the collection and dissemination of a
              new source of data pertaining to third party interventions in intrastate
              disputes in the post-World War II period.  There are no existing sets of data
              containing a broad range of third party interventions in intrastate disputes
              for this period.
