Title       : Innovation, Technology, Transfer, and Institutional Change in Chinese Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9905259

Award Number: 9905259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary H. Jefferson jefferson@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam B. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Chinese industry is at a critical stage - it is on the threshold of a second
              transition. Following a generally successful initial transition that has
              largely occurred within the envelope of transitional technologies and
              institutional forms, China's industrial economy is now marked by a productivity
              slowdown and excess capacity. With easy gains achieved, the Chinese are looking
              at the need for a vast restructuring that might involve millions of
              enterprises.

In order to sustain high rates of industrial output and
              productivity growth, China's industrial enterprises will have to learn to
              innovate and adapt new technologies that are closer to the international
              frontier. The incentive and institutional capabilities required to achieve
              technological catch-up will require accelerated reform of both systems of
              governance and China's emerging property rights market. The central idea of
              this proposal is that, with the support of a strikingly rich database, we can
              examine the determinants of innovation and technology transfer across a wide
              range of institutional settings within China. The relevant institutions include
              industrial enterprises of various ownership types, universities and research
              institutes, markets, and government policies and programs that shape incentives
              and capabilities.

Consisting of 3 U.S. scholars, 5 Chinese scholars, and
              recent and current doctoral candidates, our research team proposes to pool its
              experience in the areas of U. S. and Chinese industrial organization and
              technical change. We expect our collaboration to enlarge the scope and quality
              of research at the intersection of innovation, technology transfer, and
              institutional change in Chinese industry.

Our research program can be
              summarized by a 5-equation model that explains R&D effort, technology
              acquisition, R&D output, technology transfer, and firm performance. The
              variables that drive these outcomes include a wide range of enterprise
              characteristics, market and industry characteristics, institutional
              characteristics, and government policy and programs. The body of industrial
              organization theory and empirical results largely based on the experience of
              advanced industrial countries guides our investigation of these relationships.
              The empirical work builds on seven data sets, of which 6 are enterprise level
              surveys. At least one of these provides the data required to estimate the
              5-equation model as a system. The other data sets allow for estimating one or
              more of the equations with varying degrees of emphasis on forms of non-state
              ownership, international technology transfer, and the impact of managerial
              property rights, objectives, and attitudes on the innovation process.

A
              central purpose of our research is to combine the complementary training of the
              U.S. researchers with the capabilities of the Chinese researchers to publish
              collaborative research in mainstream U. S. journals. Introducing this work into
              the U. S. academic literature will at once subject it to scholarly review and
              also suggest for both U.S. and Chinese scholars and policy-makers new avenues
              of research on the role of institutions and policy in motivating innovation and
              technology transfer.

