Title       : The Role of the Nuclear-Encoded Plastid RNA Polymerase in Plastid Function and
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9905043

Award Number: 9905043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pal Maliga maliga@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9905043
PI: Pal Maliga

ABSTRACT

The plastid genes of higher plants
              are transcribed by two RNA polymerases: a multisubunit, E. coli-like enzyme
              encoded by the plastid genome (plastid-encoded plastid RNA polymerase or PEP)
              and a phage-type RNA polymerase related to the mitochondrial RNA polymerase
              (the nuclear-encoded plastid RNA polymerase or NEP). Since the NEP catalytic
              subunit is related to the mitochondrial enzyme, it is assumed that NEP contains
              a catalytic core and a specificity factor. Funds are requested to complete
              characterization of two NEP promoters. The first is a Type I promoter, 
              PatpB-289,  which has a novel, as yet uncharacterized, promoter element (Box
              II). The second is the only known Type II promoter, PclpP-53.  Promoters first
              will be characterized in vitro using extracts from a unique biomaterial,
              tobacco plants lacking PEP due to targeted deletion of the rpoA gene. These
              plants are non-photosynthetic, but can be grown in the greenhouse by grafting
              mutant shoots onto wild-type (photosynthetically competent) rootstocks.
              Conclusions from the in vitro studies will be verified in vivo via transgenic
              approaches. In vivo promoter activity will be followed by accumulation of the
              jellyfish Aequorea victoria green fluorescence protein (GFP).  The project will
              define NEP promoter architecture in higher plants, and determine
              tissue-specific and developmental expression of the two plastid promoters. NEP
              composition will be determined by purifying the complex from transgenic plants
              which carry a gene for a  His-tagged catalytic subunit in their nuclear genome.
              His-affinity resins will be used to facilitate affinity purification of the
              native NEP. Fractions containing NEP holo-enzyme will be identified by specific
              transcription in in vitro transcription assays. NEP proteins will be separated
              by SDS-PAGE, isolated and sequenced. The microsequence data will facilitate the
              design of suitable primers for cloning and will serve in EST database searches
              for expressed cDNAs. The immediate target for cloning will be the NEP
              specificity factor.

This project will further our understanding of the
              nuclear control of plastid gene expression and  facilitate the engineering of
              plastid NEP promoters for biotechnological applications.

