Title       : Collaborative Research: Neuroethology of olfactory Evolution in Moths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9905683

Award Number: 9905683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil J. Vickers vickers@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Effective communication between males and females of the same species
              (conspecifics) is essential for continued success of a species.  In many moth
              species, communication utilizes production and detection of airborne chemical
              signals called pheromones.  In one moth group, the Heliothines, three species
              that are evolutionarily closely related use a pheromone blend that contains the
              same primary component but different secondary components.  The males are only
              attracted by the correct conspecific blend, and repelled by the blends released
              by females of the other species.  Simple mutations in the pathway for synthesis
              of the blend are likely to have produced the different blends in the females,
              but it remains unclear how the male olfactory systems have evolved in response
              to these changes.  This project examines this question by correlating
              behavioral preferences and discrimination abilities of males with their
              underlying olfactory neurobiology.   Anatomical and physiological work will
              show the properties of structures in the olfactory system both in the antenna
              and in the complex structures called glomeruli within the brain.  Behavioral
              tests in a wind tunnel will show how hybrids and back-crosses bred from between
              two species respond, and how their behavioral preferences also correlate with
              their neuronal physiology and anatomy.
   Results will be important for
              vertebrate as well as invertebrate olfactory biology because of known
              anatomically similar structures, for comparative evolutionary biology in
              learning more about how 'receivers' can evolve to match 'senders' of signals,
              and for agriculture because they may suggest strategies for pest control.  This
              project also will provide fine postdoctoral training in a broad range of
              biological techniques.

