Title       : Axnoal Transport and Cytoskeletal Incorporation of Neurofilaments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9905123

Award Number: 9905123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Shea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tom Shea
99-05123


NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
Neurons (the "thinking" cells of
              the brain) interconnect with each other by long extensions ("axons") that, like
              telephone wires, transmit the signals that allow us to think, feel and move. 
              Once neurons have connected in this manner, their overall structure remains
              largely unchanged throughout an entire lifetime.  These axons are, however, as
              alive, must be maintained, and are even more prone to stress than most of our
              cells.  Their shape and ability to remain connected to the next neuron is
              derived from fibrous protein assemblies that are deposited along their length. 
              This array, collectively referred to as the "cytoskeleton", includes
              "neurofilaments" and "microtubules".  A major complicating factor is that the
              axon cannot manufacture any required proteins.  Rather, everything in the axon,
              including the fibers themselves, is first synthesized in the cell body, and
              subsequently passed along the axon by a process referred to as "axonal
              transport."  Certain proteins function as motors and carry other proteins and
              nutrients along the axon using microtubules essentially as "railroad tracks." 
              The motor(s) that mediate axonal transport of neurofilaments are not known. 
              Since neurofilaments are thought to provide structural support to the mature
              axon, elucidation of their transport mechanism is of great interest both for
              understanding neuronal development and for considerations of regeneration. 
              Studies suggest that neurofilaments undergo transport as cargo of the motor
              protein "kinesin", and that they are also transported along microtubule tracks.
               The proposed studies will examine the nature and extent of interaction of
              neurofilaments with this motor protein, including determining which of the
              3-neurofilament subunits, and moreover which region of the subunit(s), mediates
              this interaction.  Once in the axon, neurofilaments undergo a series of
              metabolic modifications ("phosphorylation") which promote
              neurofilament-neurofilament associations, and, in doing so, form the
              latticework of the cytoskeleton. It will also be determined whether or not such
              neurofilament-neurofilament associations compete with neurofilament-motor
              associations.  These analyses will be carried out by expressing foreign genes
              in cultured neurons and in mice that have been genetically engineered to lack
              one or more neurofilament subunits. These latter analyses will also provide
              information as to how precocious neurofilament phosphorylation, by fostering
              prematuredissociation from their transport motor, could contribute to their
              aberrant accumulation in certain motor neuron disorders.

