Title       : Conference on the Role of Speech Perception Phenomena in Phonology, San
               Francisco, August 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9905819

Award Number: 9905819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth V. Hume  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905819
JOHNSON

The articulatory foundations of language sound patterns have
              been explored for centuries and serve as a solid base for concepts in modern
              phonological theory both regarding the representation of phonological units and
              the motivation of phonological processes. An early attempt to rationalize
              phonology in terms of a combined articulatory/auditory model (e.g. Jakobson,
              Fant, & Halle, 1951) was spurred by technological advances in instrumental
              phonetics - particularly the development of the sound spectrograph - but failed
              because the intellectual base needed for the correct evaluation of acoustic
              phonetic cues was not sufficiently well developed. The intervening years have
              seen further advances in technology and a dramatic expansion of the base of
              knowledge regarding processes of speech perception. These developments lead
              naturally to a reappraisal and reconsideration of the role of perceptual
              phenomena in phonology, which is currently flourishing in several research
              centers in the US and abroad.

Concurrent with these developments in speech
              perception research are developments in phonological theory which open the way
              to incorporation of perceptual properties or processes in the formal statement
              of phonology. In particular, the trend to adopt harmonic constraint interaction
              models of phonology, such as optimality theory and correspondence theory, has
              led to a renewed interest in both articulatory processes and perceptual
              processes which underlie violable constraints in these models.

The purpose
              of this grant is to hold a satellite meeting in conjunction with the XIVth
              International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (San Francisco, CA, Aug.1-7, 1999).
              The satellite meeting aims to provide an interface between speech perception
              researchers and phonology researchers, and will consist of invited papers by
              key researchers in each of these fields, in addition to a poster session. The
              specific goals of the meeting are to identify classes of perceptual properties
              which may offer promising insights into phonological structure and classes of
              phonological models which can capture language universal and language specific
              auditory/perceptual generalizations. An edited, peer-reviewed collection of the
              papers will also be produced by the PIs.











