Title       : The Subjective Value of Information in High-Stakes Domains: An Analysis of
               Patient Decisions to Obtain Diagnostic Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9905665

Award Number: 9905665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Kahn kahn@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Frances Luce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The subjective value of information in high-stakes domains:         
An
              analysis of patient decisions to obtain diagnostic testing

In recent years,
              there has been a tremendous proliferation of both at-home and in-hospital
              medical screening tests. Health care trends in the United States are causing
              individuals to be more responsible for making their own decisions regarding
              whether to be tested. The proposed experimental and survey research tests a
              model for describing how patients are likely to make these decisions. Such an
              understanding of patient behavior should have important public policy
              implications; for instance, identification of any biases that could result in
              poorer decision-making should allow for the development of interventions to
              help patients make better decisions.
In many of these testing situations, the
              cost of not discovering the ailment is greater than over-prescribing the
              treatment or further testing; thus the tests are typically designed to err on
              the side of  "false alarms" rather than "false negatives."  This is especially
              true in medical screening tests, where there is a general prevalence of false
              positive results. For instance, breast cancer screening typically results in
              very high false positive rates, particularly for women under 50 who have a low
              base rate for breast cancer. Approximately 15% to 20% of screening mammograms
              are positive results requiring some follow-up, but only a small (2% - 6%)
              percentage of these positive results are true positives reflecting the presence
              of breast cancer. Putting these data into cumulative terms, a recent study
              estimated the cumulative risk of a false positive result after 10 mammograms as
              49.1% with 18.6% of women without breast cancer expected to undergo one
              surgical biopsy for every 10 mammograms.  A major focus of our work is to
              examine how false positive results from past testing may affect patients'
              decisions to be tested in the future. 
Our approach is to combine theory from
              social psychology with formal "value of information" models that consider
              probabilities and utility formulations.  We believe that due to this
              high-stress nature of these types of decisions that patients will
              systematically deviate from normative behavior. Initial results indicate that
              false positive events might increase later test compliance through increased
              perceived vulnerability.  We propose to dig deeper into the causes of this
              result and try to determine the cognitive and emotional processes (i.e.,
              feelings about guilt or blame) that are operating. We are particularly
              interested in identifying factors that are normatively irrelevant to one's
              actual likelihood of getting the disease, but that may influence diagnostic
              testing decisions through perceptions of vulnerability.  

We propose a
              three-pronged research approach. First, we validate our experimental procedures
              on undergraduate student subject populations.  Second, the core of our research
              program asks adult women to respond to experimental tasks in relevant medical
              contexts, such as mammogram waiting rooms or family-planning clinics. Finally,
              we will use survey methodology sent to convenience samples of the appropriate
              population (e.g., women over 40 years of age for mammography-related research)
              to validate our experimental findings. 


	 

