Title       : A General Neural Simulation Systems for Computational Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9905410

Award Number: 9905410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199973             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Bower jbower@bbb.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

The use of computer simulations as a means to examine
              structure/function relationships in neuroscience has grown dramatically in
              recent years.  A growing number of physiologists and even anatomists are
              turning to computer models to help understand the significance of the
              biological data they collect.  This project is intended to support and enhance
              the use of the neuronal simulation system, GENESIS (GEneral NEural SImulation
              System) that has been developed and supported in the P.I.'s laboratory for the
              last 10 years.  GENESIS is now used by more than 400 laboratories around the
              world as a platform on which to construct neurobiological simulations at many
              different levels of scale.  This grant specifically provides resources to
              support this large number of users as well as to improve and expand access to
              system.  With respect to basic user support, funds are provided for further
              expansion of online-help, web-based documentation, the GENESIS users group
              BABEL, and for the continued constructions of educational tutorials.  Support
              is also provided to continue to expand the GENESIS simulation libraries, which
              provide both complete models as well as modeling components for reuse in
              constructing new models.  With respect to expanding access to the system, we
              will redesign the system to support and enhance use over the web, as well as
              use on PCs.  With respect to the web, we will start a major rewrite of the
              GENESIS interface will be maintained, however, browser support and java will
              allow much larger access to the system.  Similarly, we will undertake a major
              port of GENESIS to the Windows platform for PCs.  PCs have become ever more
              prevalent in academic computing, especially in classrooms and laboratories. 
              Because GENESIS has always included a large focus on the use of the system for
              neuroscience education, it is now necessary to complete the PC port.  We will
              of course continue to maintain our UNIX (Linux) support as well.  We anticipate
              that this effort will substantially add to the users of the system and
              specifically increase the use of GENESIS in undergraduate and graduate courses.
               

