Title       : Situated Conceptualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9905024

Award Number: 9905024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Barsalou barsalou@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ability to conceptualize objects, events, and states is central to
              human
cognition.  When people plan and make decisions, they conceptualize
              future
events; when people recall a previous experience, they conceptualize
              past
events; when people understand language, they conceptualize the meaning
              of a
speaker's utterance.  Theories of knowledge often assume that when
              people
conceptualize something, they conceptualization it an isolated
              abstract
manner.  Thus, when people conceptualize a chair, they conceptualize
              it as
an isolated and abstract object; or when people conceptualize a
              purchase, they
conceptualize it as an unsituated abstract event.  The proposed
              research aims
instead to demonstrate that conceptualizations are situated,
              first, in a
physical environment, and second, with respect to the perceiver's
              cognitive
perspective.  Thus, when people conceptualize a chair, they situate
              it in a
particular setting (e.g., a kitchen), and they adopt a cognitive
              perspective
toward it (e.g., standing on it to change a light bulb).  Besides
              including
settings and cognitive perspectives, situated conceptualizations
              represent
focal entities in a context-appropriate manner.  When people
              conceptualize a
chair in a specific situation, they don't represent the chair
              abstractly,
instead they represent a specific type of chair appropriate for
              that situation
(e.g., a kitchen chair in a kitchen).  Three lines of research
              examine whether
conceptualizations are situated.  The first uses the property
              generation and
property verification tasks to establish situational content
              in
conceptualizations.  The second uses the false memory task to demonstrate
              that
learned material is typically situated, and that the situations inferred
              at
encoding later produce reconstructive memory errors at retrieval.  The
              third
assesses the hypothesis that abstract concepts, such as truth and
              freedom,
depend critically on their meanings for situationswithout situations
              these
concepts are difficult to understand.  This research is highly relevant
              to
applications in education and training.  Should it demonstrate
              that
conceptualizations are situated, it would motivate instructional methods
              that
situate learned material.  Rather than trying to instill abstract
              non-situated
concepts in students and trainees, instilling situated
              conceptualizations may
prove much more effective.  The proposed research has
              much potential for
supporting and informing these efforts.



