Title       : Neighborhood Evaluation Using Geographic Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9905349

Award Number: 9905349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily Talen talen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the research is to exploit the analytical potential of
              geographic information systems (GIS) in urban social geographical inquiry
              dealing with neighborhoods. In so doing, the project ties into the need to
              investigate ways in which GIS can be made more accessible to and more
              reflective of residents perceptions, as opposed to current uses of GIS which
              are more 'top-down.' A sample of residents from selected neighborhood groups
              will evaluate their local environment by constructing a GIS of their
              neighborhood that reflects perception of neighborhood boundaries, the elements
              of the local environment that best characterize the neighborhood, and the
              perception of neighborhood problems, assets, direction of change, and desired
              future state.  Improvements in the ability of residents to manipulate existing
              GIS coverages and add their own data, via multimedia linkages, will be
              developed. The results of the resident-constructed GIS coverages will be
              analyzed using both qualitative and quantitative methods. Residents will be
              directly involved in the construction of the GIS menu interface and in the
              assessment of the project's effectiveness.  

A great deal of social science
              inquiry has focused on the importance, meaning, role and viability of
              neighborhoods in urban areas. This project is motivated by the need to improve
              upon current approaches to the evaluation of the importance of neighborhoods in
              peoples' lives. Current approaches consist mainly of written questionnaires in
              which residents are asked to rate their satisfaction with various elements of
              their neighborhood. This project offers a new approach to the articulation of
              neighborhood satisfaction by using geographic information systems (GIS) as an
              evaluation tool. Using GIS, residents will work directly on a computerized map
              consisting of layers of different kinds of neighborhood information. They will
              interactively query these various layers, combining them and adding
              neighborhood information where desired. A sample of residents will be selected
              to participate in the GIS-based evaluation. The project will contribute to a
              more effective understanding of neighborhoods as perceived by residents by
              helping to translate resident perceptions and preferences into a form suitable
              for GIS. The study will also help in the neighborhood planning process by
              developing of new method for exploration of neighborhood strengths and
              weaknesses.  Thus, the project aspires to produce advances in both
              methodological and intellectual domains.

