Title       : Phase Behavior and Properties of ABC Triblock Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9905008

Award Number: 9905008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank S. Bates bates@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9905008
Bates

Linear ABC triblock copolymers are characterized by a complex,
              and relatively poorly defined, spectrum of equilibrium and non-equilibrium
              morphologies.  Phase behavior in this class of macromolecules is governed by
              three segment-segment interaction parameters, two independent composition
              variables, and three sequence possibilities (ABC, ACB, BAC), leading to a
              daunting array of experimental configurations for each specified trio of
              polymers.  This project will address two aspects of ABC block copolymer phase
              behavior: (i) the role of metastability in the vicinity of the order-disorder
              transition, and (ii) the stability range and various physical properties of
              triply periodic and multicontinuous microstructures.  Three model systems will
              be synthesized for these purposes: ISD (and SID), ISO (and SIO), and VPE (and
              PVE) where I, S, D, O, P, V, and E represent poly(isoprene), poly(styrene),
              poly(dimethysiloxane), poly(ethyleneoxide), poly(ethylenepropylene),
              poly(vinylcyclohexane), and poly(ethylene), respectively.  Anionic
              polymerization and composition while yielding sizable (ca 100g) batches of
              material.  Phase behavior will be established through a combination of dynamic
              mechanical spectroscopy, small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), and transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM).  In the first thrust area, initially disordered
              triblocks will be cooled into the ordered regime and the resulting sequences of
              ordered phases will be characterized.  The kinetics of order-order transitions
              will be assessed and correlated with the occurrence of trapped (metastable)
              states.  Guided by preliminary findings with the ISD system, the
              pentacontinuous core-in-shell Gyroid phase will be mapped as a function of
              composition (f1 and fs), and evaluated for universality using SIO and VPE (or
              PVE) triblocks in the second thrust area.  Self-consistent mean-field theory
              calculations will direct the selection of the most promising  molecular
              parameters for material synthesis.  Microdomain continuity will be probed by
              ionic conductivity in salt-doped SIO while mechanical properties will be
              assessed using the saturated hydrocarbon triblocks that contain glassy (V),
              semicrystalline (E), and rubbery (P) blocks.

Block copolymers are a class of
              materials that bring together chemically distinct polymers, and the associated
              properties, in single hybrid macromolecules.  This research project will focus
              on synthesizing new combinations of three chemically distinct polymer blocks,
              known as ABC triblock copolymers, and characterizing the resulting
              microstructures and physical properties.  Targeted applications for these new
              materials include membranes and high strength plastics.

