Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Breakdown of Governing
               Parties in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9905823

Award Number: 9905823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8978               (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Kitschelt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	If parties are composed of rational politicians who seek reelection, why do
              parties sometimes break down?  Recently, many established parties in Latin
              America have experienced breakdown, which is defined here as losses in
              elections and the defection of party leaders and activists.  These losses
              threaten the parties' survival as organizations.  Evidence suggests that
              current theories cannot explain adequately the magnitude or the variance of the
              party breakdown.  This proposal briefly analyzes existing explanations and
              suggests an alternative framework for analyzing party breakdown that focuses on
              the public demand for policy and other government action, the competitive
              environment that the parties face, and the choices of the individual leaders
              and activists inside the party.  Based on this framework, three specific
              explanations are proposed for party breakdown in Latin America:  clientelism,
              ideological intransigence, and decentralized authority.  To test  these
              explanations, the proposal outlines a twelve-month study of five established
              and four new political parties in Chile and Venezuela.  NSF funding enhances
              this project by allowing the investigators to carry out interviews more quickly
              than if they relied on their own resources and by giving them the time and
              means to analyze their data thoroughly while still in South America.   
