Title       : Value-Based Software Engineering for Small Business
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9905789

Award Number: 9905789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aditya P. Mathur   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Raffo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Faulk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathur
EEC-9905789

This project is supported under the initiative on
              "Research Centers - Small Firms Collaborative R&D."  The study concerns joint
              research between the Software Engineering Research Center (SERC), an IUCRC
              headquartered at Purdue University that includes the University of Oregon and
              Portland State University as affiliates, and Timberline Software Corp., a small
              firm located in Beaverton, OR.  The work involves a research component followed
              by a validation and technology transfer component, and is based on the
              Value-Based Software Engineering (VBSE) approach being developed by SERC.  VBSE
              systematically seeks to link critical software architecture design decisions to
              the business goals affected by those decisions; it brings together recent work
              in Customer Value Analysis (CVA), software architecture, and process modeling
              and improvement. The goal of the work is to develop and validate a set of
              lightweight analysis and software development processes that allow
              small-business software developers to move systematically from an understanding
              of strategic business goals to a software architecture that supports those
              goals over the long term.  VBSE seeks to provide a systematic process for
              analyzing customer value, casting the results in terms of architectural quality
              requirements, and then developing architectural structures that satisfy those
              requirements.  New architectural analysis techniques will support verification
              of the match between the resulting design and business goals.  In th ecurrent
              study, the collaborators will develop a process model and methodology for small
              business software development that integrates advanced product-line and
              architecture technologies from software engineering, with the business
              administration discipline of customer value engineering.  Timberline will
              provide realistic problems, validate the methods in a realistic setting, and
              provide feedback to the project on the effectiveness of the approach. Products
              of this effort will include model processes, products, and metrics applicable
              to a broad class of small-business software developers as well as SERC's
              industrial affiliates.  To support Oregon's state initiatives in software
              engineering education, such as the University of Oregon's Master of Software
              Engineering program, the project will also develop educational materials
              describing the process and results.  This project has the potential to serve as
              a national model of excellence in research centers - small firms collaborative
              R&D. 


