Title       : A Spatially-Distributed GIS-Based Analysis of Temperatures in a Stream Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9905313

Award Number: 9905313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Jones jonesj@geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherri L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the accumulation, storage, and transport of heat in a
              stream network by applying geographical techniques and concepts.  In 1998, 1067
              (13,892 river miles) of the 2375 streams and rivers surveyed in Oregon were
              designated as having limited water quality; most of these streams (81%) were
              listed because summer maximum temperatures exceeded the standards set for
              maintaining the historic cold water fisheries.  This project will clarify which
              factors control stream temperature patterns at all locations in a stream
              network.  Four major factors will be considered: (1) shading by vegetation and
              topography, (2) fluxes of sensible heat and subsurface water from adjacent
              landforms or deep groundwater sources, (3) exchange of stream water with the
              hyporheic zone, and (4) inputs from upstream reaches.  Spatially explicit
              hypotheses about factors controlling patterns of stream temperature will be
              developed and tested using existing GIS layers and spatially-distributed field
              measurements of stream, air, and soil temperatures and discharge.  Between 50
              to 100 locations will be studied in a 62 square-kilometer forested basin in the
              western Cascades of Oregon.  Inferences drawn from this analysis will be
              corroborated with selected heat balance calculations and spatial statistical
              analyses to eliminate spurious correlations.  Findings will be summarized in
              schematic diagrams depicting the types, sizes, and spatial arrangements of
              controls on stream temperature. 

 This project will produce a generalized,
              transferable approach to understanding how the spatial arrangements of
              above-ground and below-ground landscape attributes (i.e. vegetation and
              topography versus geomorphic features) control patterns of stream temperatures
              in a drainage network.  Such an approach is relevant to the scientific goal of
              developing process-based conceptual models of the function of networks in
              landscapes, and also to the societal need for approaches to preparing
              federally- and state-mandated water quality management plans to remediate water
              quality violations caused by extreme stream temperatures. Current laws require
              landowners along "temperature-limited" streams to devise plans to reduce stream
              temperatures; uncertainty surrounding the factors causing elevated stream
              temperatures may exacerbate social tensions among landowners.  Using maps and
              field measurements, the results of this study will demonstrate how different
              types of streams in different locations may be more or less susceptible to
              increased temperature from vegetation removal or other landuse changes.  The
              project also is expected to demonstrate how land use modifications may or may
              not help reduce stream temperatures in various locations. 


