Title       : Research Equipment: Pulsed Field Gradient NMR Diffusion Probe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9905569

Award Number: 9905569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette L. Bunge abunge@mines.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven F. Dec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905569
Bunge
This project supports acquisition of a pulsed field gradient
              (PFG) diffusion probe for the state-of-the-art nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              spectrometer at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) NMR Facility.  The
              experimental capabilities provided by this probe will greatly enhance research
              and educational opportunities to CSM's faculty and students.  Six separate
              research programs housed in four different departments will initially use the
              PFG probe to produce significant new scientific and engineering knowledge.  In
              addition, graduate and undergraduate students will be able to learn about and
              use this modern tool for investigating composite media and complex materials
              through measurements of diffusion and boundaries to diffusion.
  
This probe
              will be particularly valuable to the principal investigator's (PI's) studies of
              composite membrane materials, specifically mammalian epidermis (skin). 
              Chemical penetration in composite materials can proceed by one or more
              pathways.  For composite materials, diffusion cell measurements, the
              traditional method of quantifying chemical transport through membranes, provide
              information on overall transport, but no insights into the actual pathways or
              the local diffusion coefficients in those paths.  Using the PFG diffusion
              probe, the PI will measure self-diffusion coefficients of selected chemical
              tracers (those that include 19F) in stratum corneum (SC) excised from human and
              animal subjects.  The SC is the outermost layer of skin and the main barrier to
              passage of most chemicals into and out of the body.  The aim of these diffusion
              probe studies is to understand the mechanisms of epidermal barrier function. 
              This understanding will then be used in developing methods to predict, enhance,
              and control dermal penetration and in developing materials to replace skin
              samples for estimating dermal absorption.  The investigative strategies used to
              study the SC composite membrane will also be useful in the study of other
              complex membranes, either biological or non-biological.
 
In addition to the
              PI's program, five other members of the CSM faculty (auxiliary users) from
              three departments (Chemical Engineering and Petroleum Refining, Engineering,
              and Geophysics) have proposed research investigations utilizing the PFG
              diffusion probe.  The NMR-PFG method has been demonstrated for all of the
              research projects described in this proposal, although the number of
              measurements is extremely small and there is a great opportunity to produce new
              knowledge with this device.  


