Title       : Conference on "Technology and Identity", April, 1999, Ithaca, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9905368

Award Number: 9905368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2873               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Dear prd3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant to the Department of Science & Technology Studies at Cornell
              University for a graduate student conference on Technology & Identity to be
              held April 16-18 at Cornell University. Peers and colleagues from Science &
              Technology Studies, Psychology, Communications, Sociology, Anthropology,
              American Studies, German Studies, History, and Government will participate in
              untangling the term "identity," and how it relates to technology. 12 papers
              have been selected and will be presented at the conference. The speakers will
              be organized in four panels of three speakers each, with 20-30 minute for the
              presentation and a 5 minute follow-up question period for each speaker. The
              three paper presentations for each panel will be followed with a 5-10 minute
              presentation by a commentator (all commentators will be graduate students in
              Cornell's Department of Science & Technology Studies). 45-60 minutes of
              discussion will immediately follow each panel on general themes running through
              all three papers. The panels are titled: Media, Masses, and More: The
              construction of users of technology, Perceptions and interpretations of
              user-internet interactions, Public and Private Identities, and Medicalization
              and Identity. In addition, Kenneth Gergen, who is the Gil and Frank Mustin
              Professor of Psychology in the Department of Psychology at Swarthmore College,
              has agreed to deliver the keynote address. Breakout sessions will be held to
              continue discussions begun earlier in the conference. Each breakout session
              will be 2 hours long, and conference participants will be able to choose among
              the sessions. Session titles will include, but will not be limited to, the
              following: Constructed (and constructing) identities on the internet, Actual
              vs. Virtual users of technology, Advertising and Identity, Interpretations of
              identity, Strategic uses of identity and technology, Disease identity. These
              sessions will address issues raised by speakers on different panels, questions
              left unanswered in general discussions, comments made by the keynote speaker,
              and crosscutting themes that deserve extra time and consideration.
