Title       : Explaining Why Households Do Not Save
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9905453

Award Number: 9905453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Annamaria Lusardi alusardi@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905453
Lusardi

Many households accumulate little wealth for retirement and
              there is concern, in particular among policy-makers, about the financial
              security of many American households. Traditional models of saving behavior,
              such as the life-cycle-permanent income model, have been unable to rationalize
              many of the recent empirical findings concerning savings, and there is much
              debate on the effectiveness of the saving incentives proposed by those models.
              While there have been many theoretical contributions and advances on
              theoretical models of saving, the empirical work on saving has only
              concentrated on some narrow predictions of the theory.  One of the fundamental
              assumptions of the life-cycle-permanent income model is that agents are forward
              looking and plan for far ahead into the future. However, there is little
              evidence that agents have both the financial literacy and the cognitive ability
              to make retirement plans. Many basic models of saving have failed to recognize
              that planning for retirement is a complex task, and that many individuals may
              perform it very imperfectly up to the extreme of postponing the decision until
              it is too late. In addition, there are no correction mechanisms that prevent
              planners from behaving incorrectly. Poor planners are not pushed out of the
              markets, or disciplined in any way, and only at retirement will they discover
              whether they have made mistakes.  This project examines several aspects of
              household saving behavior. Using data from a new survey, the US Health and
              Retirement Study, it documents the facts concerning wealth holdings of
              households whose head is close to retirement, and investigate many of the
              reasons for the lack of saving and wealth accumulation. In addition to the
              traditional economic reasons for the lack of accumulation, it will investigate
              whether agents look into the future and think about retirement.

The richness
              of information in this new data set concerning Social Security and pension
              wealth, past economic circumstances, expectations about the future, and
              individual preferences provides a rather unique opportunity to submit the
              theory to strong empirical tests. It is possible, for example, not only to
              empirically document the weaknesses of the life-cycle model, but also to show
              that the lack of planning is pervasive among American households and a strong
              determinant for why many families accumulate so little wealth.  The project
              explores whether the provision of information and financial advice through
              retirement seminars has any effects on saving. It also explores the importance
              of vicarious experience and the possibility of learning by looking at the
              experience of other individuals, such as older siblings who have already gone
              through retirement. Additionally, it examines new models of saving which
              incorporate concepts from economic psychology, such as models of
              procrastination, pain-avoidance, and lack of self-control.


