Title       : Dissertation Research: Is There An Altithermal? Holocene Climate and Human
               Adaptation of the NW Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a9905628

Award Number: 9905628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9910               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, MS Susan Hughes will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will examine faunal remains recovered from the
              archaeological site of Mummy Cave to address the question of human response to
              climatic change. Mummy Cave is situated in the North Fork River Valley in
              Wyoming and it's 8.5 meters of deposit preserve 38 different occupational
              strata. A large suite of radiocarbon dates indicate that these span a 9,200
              year period, beginning ca. 10,000 years ago. Thus they document human behavior
              over most of the time since the last ice age. Twenty two of these levels
              contain faunal remains which result from purposeful human hunting and
              consumption as well as from natural deaths from rodents and other small animals
              which burrowed into the deposits. This faunal sample provides a valuable data
              source which allows both the reconstruction of human behavior as well as
              environmental change. Many small mammals have specific habitat requirements and
              their presence or absence provides insight into climate and vegetation during
              their lifetime. Carbon, oxygen and nitrogen isotopic ratios in animal bone are
              also influenced by environment and provide information on temperature,
              precipitation and ground cover. Through analysis of a large series of bones MS.
              Hughes will reconstruct these variables. She has employed optimum foraging
              theory to predict how human behavior will change in response to environmental
              variation and she will analyze differences in prey age and species to determine
              how subsistence adaptation varies in relation to climatic
              change.

Archaeological data offer an excellent window into human environment
              relationships because they allow interactions to be traced over long periods of
              time. With faunal remains it is possible to reconstruct aspects of both
              variables and this research will provide increased understanding of how humans
              adapt at a simple level of technology. The Mummy Cave data will be of interest
              to many archaeologists. This project will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.

