Title       : Optimal Model Complexity for Decision Analytic Approaches to Natural Resource
               Management and Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9905197

Award Number: 9905197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Milo D. Adkison ffmda@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1094,1181,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Managers of natural resources are often criticized for approaches that are too
              simplistic.  The lay person often feels they ignore critical components of the
              ecosystem that affect the resource they are managing.  Modelers, on the other
              hand, often feel quite differently about this issue.  In a classic study (1985,
              Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42:1066-1072), fisheries
              modelers Ludwig and Walters demonstrated that management could be more
              effective using a model of the fishery that was too simple than using the
              correct model form.  While considering uncertainty is important, the amount and
              quality of data limits model complexity.

The reason simple models that
              ignore certain biological processes can perform better for guiding management
              decisions is that our knowledge of biological systems is limited.  For typical
              natural resource data sets, the poor quality of the available data means that
              models that are highly parameterized give poor predictions.  For example, we
              may know a predator affects a deer population but not be sure how many deer it
              takes or whether it would switch to hunting another prey if deer became scarce.
               If we tried to incorporate this predation into our management model for deer,
              we might estimate its effect so poorly that we'd generate worse predictions
              than if we'd left out the predator altogether.  The simpler, incorrect model
              might lead to better deer management.

Recent developments may have changed
              the advantage for simpler models in natural resource management.  Decision
              analytic approaches have recently experienced a rapid growth in fisheries,
              forestry, and conservation biology.  Rather than relying on a single, "best"
              model for management, modelers are now considering a wide range of possible
              models and looking for management strategies that are robust to most of the
              possibilities.  If multiple rather than single models are considered, it's no
              longer evident that complicated models will perform poorly for management
              purposes.  Considering more models increases the chance of including some that
              reflect the true state of nature.  It may be optimal, therefore, to admit as
              much uncertainty as possible so that all eventualities are considered.  In
              fact, natural resources modelers are now building models with hundreds of
              parameters.  However, including many models greatly increases the amount of
              computation that is required.  Many biologists and managers will be limited in
              their ability to analyze such complex models and may use simple models because
              of their tractability.

This study will investigate the optimal model
              complexity for decision analytic approaches to conserving and managing natural
              resources.  The approach is to simulate an exploited natural resource, the
              noisy data available to managers, and management based on decision analysis. 
              Management performance will be compared between simulations where the decision
              analysis is based on an overly simple model of the system and simulations where
              the analysis is based on the correct, more complex system model. 

The study
              will determine whether admitting more uncertainty in model parameters is always
              better, whether simple models are preferable in some circumstances, and the
              consequences of using models that are simpler than optimal.  In particular, it
              will investigate how the optimal model complexity is affected by the amount and
              quality of the data available.

