Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Neotectonic Evolution of the Kalabsha and Related
               Faults, Southern Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9905081

Award Number: 9905081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent C. Nielsen knielsen@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed G. Abdelsalam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1304,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9905081
Nielsen

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Drs. Kent Nielsen and Mohamed Abdelsalam, Department of Geosciences,
              University of Texas, Dallas, Texas and Dr. Hassan El-Etr, National Authority
              for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences, Cairo, Egypt.   These scientists plan to
              use remote sensing and geological mapping, in combination with other relevant
              data from their GIS database (most notably seismicity) to study the Kalabsha
              fault in Upper Egypt.  Specifically they plan to: 1. Prepare a 1:50,000
              geologic and structural map of the Kalabsha fault, by integrating satellite
              imagery, earthquake distributions, and geologic field studies. 2. Outline the
              structural evolution of the Kalabsha fault using structural geology and
              tectonic geomorphological techniques. 3. Develop remote sensing and field
              criteria for studying similar faults in the area and for evaluating their
              potential reactivation. 4. Study the causes of the seismicity in the Kalabsha
              fault, with special attention to the possible relationship between the
              seismicity and the water loading resulting from the presence of the Aswan dam. 
                

Scope:  The existence of a fault near the Aswan High Dam raises the
              important scientific question of the relationship of building large dams to
              increases in seismicity in its surrounding areas.  This research may help
              identify previously unrecognized faults, and may improve understanding of the
              regional tectonic setting.  This work would help in quantifying seismic hazard,
              an issue of paramount importance to Egypt, where knowledge of the activity on
              the faults in question is critical for future planning.  The collaborating
              scientists have strong background in remote sensing processing and
              interpretation, and have the equipment necessary for working with the remote
              sensing imagery.  The geologic and structural map to be produced of the
              Kalabsha fault will be a useful product for numerous investigators.  The
              emphasis on new data, such as radar, and relatively new tectonic geomorphology
              techniques, makes this work a novel contribution for this particular area.  The
              project will support a US graduate student who will have an opportunity to gain
              experience through this international collaboration.  This proposal meets the
              INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.
               This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.

