Title       : Collaborative Research: Theory and Evidence on Competition in U.S. Higher
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9905375

Award Number: 9905375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis N. Epple epple@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
SBR-9905375


Theoretical and empirical research on the nature and
              consequences of competition in higher education will be conducted. In the
              proposed theoretical framework, students differ by ability and by the income of
              their households. Within a college, a student's achievement depends on the
              student's own ability, on the inputs per student devoted to instruction, and on
              the ability of the student's peers. Each college seeks to maximize quality as
              reflected by average achievement of its students. Colleges are differentiated
              by endowments, which provide a barrier to entry.
This model will yield
              predictions about the admission and financial aid policies of colleges. The
              model will also yield predictions about the equilibrium allocation of students
              of differing income and ability across colleges, and about tuition net of
              financial aid paid by students of differing income and ability levels.
              Predictions about the differentiation of colleges and universities will also
              emerge. These predictions will relate the ordering of endowments across
              universities to the ordering of average achievement, average student ability,
              average household income, and average instructional expenditures per student.
              Initial theoretical results are summarized in the proposal as well as proposed
              theoretical research to develop additional properties and testable
              predictions.
The predictions of the model will be tested using confidential
              data obtained for this project from the National Postsecondary Financial Aid
              Study (NPSAS) of the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). These
              data provide information for a large sample of students including scores on
              standardized (SAT/ACT) tests, household income, and financial aid received. The
              confidential data base links the students in the sample to the colleges they
              attend, so that data on colleges (e.g., enrollment, endowment, average SAT
              scores) as well as on the sample of students can be combined for the empirical
              testing of the model.
A large portion of top colleges in the U.S. claim to
              practice need-blind admission and need-only pricing, claiming also adherence to
              the definition of need embodied in Federal legislation. Proposed theoretical
              research will investigate conditions under which adherence to such practices
              may be beneficial to colleges. The proposed theoretical research will also
              develop the equilibrium implications of such practices for the allocation of
              students across colleges and universities, for the tuition net of financial aid
              paid by students of differing abilities and households income, and for the
              nature of differentiation of colleges and universities. These predictions will
              also be tested empirically.






