Title       : Dissertation Research: Heightened Competitiveness in a Party System Matter? Its
               Effect on Candidate Quality and Deputy Behavior in Democratizing Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9905560

Award Number: 9905560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Harmel E339RH@polisci.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This dissertation project determines what effects, if any, heightened
              competitiveness in a party system have on candidate quality and deputy behavior
              in Mexico.  It is hypothesized that, as party systems transform from being
              one-party dominant to being two-party or multi-party, there is a corresponding
              improvement in the quality of candidates and a change in deputy behavior in the
              legislature vis-a-vis the executive and/or the formerly dominant party. 
              "Competitiveness" is measured at the level of relative majority districts in
              terms of the number of votes received by each party's candidate from one
              election to the next.  Candidate "quality" is measured by both the degree and
              nature of a candidate's political experience prior to running for a seat in the
              legislature.  Changes in deputy behavior are operationalized as being both a
              change in the amount of constituency service and in the number of substantive
              amendments filed to major executive-sponsored legislation.  How the varying
              degrees of competiitiveness in the party system affect both candidate quality
              and deputy behavior is an important question since it has direct implications
              for legislative autonomy vis-a-vis the executive and the formerly dominant
              party.  In other words, does party system competitiveness matter for enabling
              the legislature to participate more fully in the policymaking process, and
              thereby affect the nature of democracy or the process of democratization?
	To
              answer these questions, party leaders and officeholders are interviewed to
              obtain information on the degree of importance placed on prior political
              experience in selecting candidates and on the importance of constituent
              casework.  These interviews supplement and allow for better interpretation of
              archival research in the library of the Mexican Chamber of Deputies and the
              Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) by determining how much money was spent on
              each district-level campaign, and by ascertaining the number of
              constituent-related amendments filed by deputies to executive-sponsored
              legislation in one session as compared to the previous session.  Data obtained
              from both the interviews and the archival research are coded and compared to
              determine whether differences between the two elections are correlated with
              differences in district-level vote totals for each party.    

