Title       : The Effects of Environmental Contamination on Commercial and Industrial Real
               Estate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9905207

Award Number: 9905207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9972               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred A. Forgey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5106,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The Effects of Environmental Contamination on 
Commercial and
              Industrial Real Estate
by
Thomas O. Jackson
Texas A&M University


This
              study analyzes the effects of environmental contamination on commercial and
              industrial real estate decisions and the value of these properties, and fills
              important gaps in existing scientific research and literature, which has
              primarily focused on residential properties. Two complementary research tasks
              address the effects of contamination on: (1) the risk perceptions of key real
              estate market participants; and (2) the sales price and value of contaminated,
              or previously contaminated, properties.

More specifically, the first
              research task involves surveys of real estate mortgage lenders and equity
              investors with respect to financing and investing in contaminated properties.
              These surveys gauge general lender and investor concerns about contamination
              related issues, as well as specific adjustments to credit underwriting  and
              equity investment criteria corresponding to the perceived risks associated with
              environmental contamination. The second task involves an analysis of the
              effects of contamination on the sales price of commercial and industrial
              properties. In this analysis, sales data is statistically analyzed to discern
              the magnitude of, and conditions for, adverse price impacts due to
              contamination. These tasks consider the clean-up status of the properties,
              general market conditions, and the provision of indemnifications against future
              environmental liabilities.

This research has broad implications for a range
              of private and public economic and financial decision making. Commercial and
              industrial real estate represents significant assets for communities and
              business entities. The effects of contamination on investment and lending
              risks, and real property asset values, impact local government tax bases as
              well as the viability of the businesses and corporations that have an ownership
              interest in these properties.

Further, these issues are of critical
              importance to public policy initiatives attempting to facilitate the
              redevelopment of contaminated sites, or "brownfields." Most of these sites are
              industrial or commercial properties, and these property types have largely been
              ignored by existing scientific research. Without adequate theory and empirical
              research on the risk effects and market perceptions with respect to the effect
              of contamination on these properties, policy initiatives may prove ineffective
              and unnecessarily costly.

