Title       : Upgrade of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer by the Addition of an Automated
               Carbonate Preparation Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9905887

Award Number: 9905887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58630              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Dettman dettman@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Quade  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl W. Flessa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9905887
Dettman

This grant provides partials support for the acquistion of
              an automated carbonate preparation unit to be attached to a gas ratio mass
              spectrometer at the University of Arizona. This instrument will automate the
              stable isotope analysis of small carbonate samples for a large group of
              researchers at the University of Arizona.  The primary users of this instrument
              within the Geosciences Department will be David Dettman, Andrew Cohen, Jay
              Quade and Karl Flessa.  It is expected that researchers from the Tree Ring
              Laboratory, the Renewable Natural Resources Department, and the Ecology and
              Evolutionary Biology Department will make use of this facility. It will also be
              made available to faculty at other institutions; planned cooperative work
              includes researchers from Arizona State University, the California Academy of
              Sciences, and Virginia Tech.
Paleoclimate studies and paleo-ecology are the
              primary focus of the work to which this instrument will be applied. The
              automated carbonate preparation unit is optimized for the processing of large
              numbers of very small samples (on the order of 10 micrograms of CaCO3).  These
              capabilities are needed for a number of lines of research currently underway in
              this department.  An example is the use of seasonal changes in the isotopic
              composition of micro-sampled growth bands in shells to infer changes in
              hydrology and climate. Similar studies are underway utilizing whole shells of
              ostracodes, a micro-crustacean.  In addition to paleoclimate studies using
              these methods, current research in soil geochemistry, paleolimnology, uplift
              histories of the Rockies and the Himalaya, glaciology, and economic geology
              will make use of this instrument. It will greatly improve the output and
              efficiency of all researchers making use of carbonate isotope geochemistry by
              eliminating the labor involved in manually preparing carbonate samples or by
              eliminating long turn-around times when samples are sent to other labs for
              processing. The carbonate unit will be attached to a currently underutilized
              mass spectrometer, greatly increasing the productivity of this valuable
              analytical instrument.  

***

