Title       : A Symposium on Amateur-Professional Partnership in Astronomy Education and
               Research; Toronto, Canada, July 4-7, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9905808

Award Number: 9905808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Havlen rhavlen@stars.sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astronomical Soc of Pac
	      390 Ashton Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941121722    /   -

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1253,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST 99-05808
Havlen

The Astronomical Society of the Pacific, the Royal
              Astronomical Society of
Canada and the American Association of Variable Star
              Observers have jointly 
Organized a symposium to explore the extensive
              opportunities for cooperative programs in astronomy research and education. 
              The symposium will make it possible for professional and amateur astronomers to
              meet and work together. The symposium will take place in Toronto, Canada, on
              July 5-7, 1999.  

This event will bring together representatives from
              amateur and professional groups to consider existing partnerships, highlight
              new areas for collaboration, and devise strategies to develop, expand, and
              enhance specific cooperative programs.  There will be sessions on research
              collaborations that will focus on scientific motivations and how to exploit the
              rapidly evolving technologies available to amateurs.  The education partnership
              sessions will emphasize the need for future actions, analyze successful
              programs, and encourage the development of new ones.  The format of the
              symposium will optimize participant interaction through a combination of
              summary talks, panel discussions, small group discussions, and poster
              presentations.  The major sessions will include: the history of
              amateur-professional partnerships; exemplary partnerships (in such areas of
              research as on variable stars, comets, the Sun, and other topics); research
              partnerships in developing areas (SETI, gamma-ray bursters, supernovae, etc.);
              discussions on how to form, facilitate, and fund partnerships; techniques for
              bringing astronomers into classrooms and participating in informal education
              projects; promoting research experiences for students; and making effective use
              of the media. Support for the participation of amateur astronomers and
              educators to attend the symposium will be provided.

This award is funded by
              support from the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of
              Interdisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.
****

