Title       : Methods for Monitoring of Spatial Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9905900

Award Number: 9905900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93763              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Rogerson rogerson@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Spatial pattern detection is routinely carried out in fields such as criminology
              and epidemiology, where the usual motivation is to find clusters of events. 
              The techniques employed are retrospective, in the sense that a map of previous
              events such as crimes or diseases is examined for evidence of clustering.  This
              project will extend methods of spatial pattern detection by developing
              extensions to the case of monitoring new point events as they are received over
              time.  In particular, current statistical tests for spatial pattern detection
              will be combined with the cumulative sum methods used by industry in quality
              control applications.   The cumulative sum methods employed will include
              multivariate approaches, where regional counts of events may be summarized in a
              multivariate vector.  The effectiveness of alternative methods will be assessed
              using simulated data series for which the true nature of the changes in
              geographic patterns is known. The new methods are designed with the objective
              of quick detection in mind and they will allow point patterns to be monitored
              for changes in real time.

There are many situations where a two-dimensional
              pattern of points gives rise to the question of whether a pattern is present. 
              Criminologists are interested in patterns of crime, epidemiologists are
              interested in patterns of disease, market researchers are interested in the
              locations of their customers, and engineers are interested in the locations of
              defects that occur in the fabrication of integrated circuits.  Methods of
              pattern detection are currently used retrospectively by carrying out a
              statistical test at a single point in time.  However, many applications are
              better suited to repeated tests, so that changes in pattern may be monitored,
              as data on new locations becomes available.  This project will include (a) the
              development of new methods that combine current approaches to pattern detection
              with the monitoring methods used in industrial quality control, and (b)
              application of the new methods to problems in epidemiology and criminology.
 
              

