Title       : U.S. Participation in a Cooperative Cross-National Research Infrastructure
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9905922

Award Number: 9905922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Smeeding TMSMEED@MAXWELL.SYR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905922
Smeeding

Under this project United States researchers in economics,
              sociology and demography would join with European counterparts at the Center
              for the Study of Populations, Poverty, and Policy (CEPS)/ International
              Networks for Studies in Technology, Environment, Alternatives, and Development
              (INSTEAD) in Differdange, Luxembourg from late 1999 through summer 2001.  They
              would access data files (including especially the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)
              and the Luxembourg Employment Study (LES)), and work collaboratively with their
              European peers on projects of a common interest related to topics such as
              income structures and income dynamics; ethnic and social inequality; regional
              development; labor markets and employment; issues related to aging populations;
              structural economic change; and gender and child poverty.  Researchers would
              interact with others sharing similar interests and would also be instructed in
              accessing the multinational cross-sectional and panel datasets available at
              CEPS. Researchers would continue their work once the visit was ended, returning
              to present their papers at subsequent meetings and seminars, and providing
              working papers that will be made available free via the LIS/LES website, as are
              all LIS/LES working papers. The specific program that funding is requested for
              is the International Research Infrastructure in the Socio-economic Sciences
              (IRISS) Program at CEPS which is funded by the European Commission Directorate
              XII's Large Scale Facility program. Through this program European Community
              researchers are subsidized to work together at a common site on common data
              resources to address issues of social problems using household microdata. The
              IRISS programs explicitly limit its support to EC residents but leaves open the
              possibility for other nations' scholars to participate if they can find the
              funds to support their research time at CEPS.   The IRISS will produce a
              stronger research infrastructure in the social and behavioral science as well
              as useful research products


