Title       : Genetic Analysis of Escherichia coli lac Permease Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9905048

Award Number: 9905048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Manoil manoil@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Manoil, Colin
MCB-9905048
Abstract

 - Genetic Analysis of Escherichia coli
              lac permease biogenesis

The project has two general objectives.  The first
              is to develop a procedure for gene discovery in bacteria which is based on
              identifying the subcellular locations or biochemical activities of genetically
              tagged proteins. Exported proteins are selectively tagged with a 63 amino acid
              inserted sequence which permits immunological detection and rapid purification.
               The tags are generated by chromosomal insertion of a newly constructed
              transposon.  Pools of strains are screened for individuals producing tagged
              proteins with a desired property, such as localization to a particular membrane
              or a particular enzymatic activity, followed by sequence identification of
              corresponding tagged genes.  The second general objective of the project is to
              analyze how a number of previously identified mutations inactivate E. coli lac
              permease, and how the cell responds to such mutant proteins.  Specifically, the
              experiments aim, 1, to determine whether several different mutations altering a
              key region of lac permease (cytoplasmic segment C3) inactivate the protein by
              primary effects on membrane insertion, folding, or function, and 2, to
              determine whether several known stress responses, or a new stress response, are
              induced by mutant lac permeases.  

This research will use a functional
              genomics approach to develop strategies for identifying the biological function
              and intracellular localization of bacterial proteins.   Additional experiments
              will examine how an important subclass of bacterial proteins, integral membrane
              proteins, are altered by mutational changes, as well as how such altered
              proteins affect cell physiology.  Both of these approaches will contribute to
              an increased understanding of the integration of cellular processes required
              for microbial life.  

