Title       : Video Compression Algorithms and Related Transport Protocols for Real Time,
               Unicast and Multicast Video over internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9905799

Award Number: 9905799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avideh Zakhor avz@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Supporting low latency video communication over the Internet is an important yet
              challenging task.  A few possible applications include video conferencing,
              tele-medicine, and interactive access to pre-recorded videos stored in remote
              databases.  There are two main requirements for internet video communication:
              (1) bandwidth scalability; (2) error-resilient.  Lack of bandwidth scalability
              results in non-adaptive streams with two sets of disadvantages.  First, it 
              leads to congestion collapse when the aggregate bandwidth
of the video traffic
              exceeds network capacity.  Second, it competes unfairly with other adaptive
              traffic, such as TCP, which reduces transmission rate in face of network
              congestion.  Lack of error resilience results in error propagation, and hence
              widely varying video quality as a function of time.  Current approaches to
              mitigate the effects of error propagation include error control mechanisms at
              the transport level.  This typically takes the form of retransmissions or
              forward error correction (FEC).  Retransmission based error control methods
              often fail to be real-time, particularly when round-trip propagation delay is
              large.
FEC schemes on the other hand, are often ineffective when losses are
              bursty.

The main goal of this proposal is to investigate video compression
              techniques and transport protocols needed for real time delivery of unicast and
              multicast video over best effort networks such as the internet. Our approach
              for the unicast case is to combine a novel compression method that is error
              resilient and bandwidth scalable with a low-delay TCP-friendly transport
              protocol.  Specifically, compressed video is packetized into individually
              decodable packets of equal expected visual importance.  Consequently,
              relatively constant video quality can be achieved at the receiver under lossy
              conditions.  Furthermore, the packets can be truncated to instantaneously meet
              the time varying bandwidth imposed by a TCP-friendly transport protocol.  As a
              result,
adaptive flows that are friendly to other Internet traffic are
              produced.  Actual Internet experiments together with simulations are used to
              evaluate the performance of the compression, transport, and the combined
              schemes.

Our approach to multicast video transmission is to combine
              bandwidth scalable video compression scheme with hierarchical FEC.  By
              hierarchical FEC, we mean the production of embedded FEC or
              redundancy
streams, each of which belongs to a different multicast group. 
              This way, subscribing to more groups corresponds to higher level of protection,
              but larger delays.  There are two advantages to this approach.  First, each
              receiver can independently adjust the desired level of protection based on past
              reception statistics and loss characteristics.  This receiver-driven approach
              to FEC is more flexible than most existing FEC schemes for multicast where the
              source determines a set of redundancy packets which are then multicast to every
              recipient.  Second, each receiver will subscribe to only as many redundancy
              layers as necessary, reducing overall bandwidth utilization.  Furthermore, the
              hierarchical nature of the FEC layers ensures
minimum network utilization
              through sharing of common redundancy streams.  Actual internet experiments will
              be done to examine the effectiveness of our approach.
