Title       : Regulation of Zinc Homeostasis in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9905682

Award Number: 9905682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Helmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,1169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Helmann

        The Bacillus subtilis Zur protein is a zinc activated
              repressor that binds to the promoter regions of operons implicated in zinc
              uptake. The goal of this project is to characterize the Zur protein and its
              interactions with both operator DNA and metal ions. Zur represses two transport
              systems that import zinc. One is YciC, part of a low affinity system, while the
              other is an ABC transporter. This research will define the zinc-regulated
              promoter regions and their interactions with Zur. The interaction of Zur with
              DNA will be studied using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNaseI
              footprinting. Zur can be purified both in an active form and an inactive
              apo-protein form which will allow the effects of metal ions on binding affinity
              and cooperativity to be determined. Amino acids important for metal-sensing
              will be identified by site-directed mutagenesis followed by functional studies.
              Finally, transcriptional profiling, genome searches for other candidate
              Zur-regulated genes, and selection for mutants altered in zinc homeostasis,
              will allow an assessment of the global effects of zinc and Zur on cell
              physiology. In all cases, the results obtained will be compared with analogous
              studies of other metalloregulators to better understand the evolution of this
              family of proteins. 

Metal ions are essential nutrients for all organisms
              and both uptake and efflux are tightly regulated. The regulation of metal ion
              homeostasis is often mediated by metal-sensing regulatory proteins that
              activate or repress transport pathways. Bacillus subtilis provides an
              attractive model system for these studies since it is a genetically
              well-characterized microbe found in soil, an environment with highly variable
              metal ion availability. B. subtilis encodes four distinct metalloregulatory
              proteins that sense metal ion status and regulate gene expression accordingly.
              Three of these proteins are homologs of the ferric uptake repressor (Fur)
              protein of Escherichia coli. One of these proteins, Zur, is a specific sensor
              of zinc that regulates zinc transport. This research investigates the molecular
              basis of zinc-binding and transcriptional control by Zur. 



