Title       : Optimal Mechanisms and Information Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9905564

Award Number: 9905564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Persico persico@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905564
Persico

The goal of this project is to understand social
              arrangements and contracts in environments where agents must be motivated to,
              or discouraged from, acquiring information.  Such environments are ubiquitous,
              since economic agents are often in the position to increase their information. 
              Bidders for an oil tract can invest in seismic and geological information
              before the auction. In courts of law, jurors must learn whether a defendant is
              innocent or guilty before deliberating. Finally, the buyer of a car may want
              more information about its quality. To understand these situations, it is
              important to recog-nize that the agents' information structure is determined
              endogenously, as part of the optimization problem the agents solve. Then,
              different mechanisms will induce different information structures, and the
              mechanism designer will want to adjust the mechanism to influence the
              information structure achieved at equilibrium. For instance, the car buyer will
              invest less in information gathering if the contract includes a warranty.
              Jurors may be more attentive to the evidence if unanimity, rather than simple
              majority, is required to convict. Finally, bidders in an auction may be less
              worried about the profitability of an oil tract if their payment is a share of
              the revenues generated by the tract. It may be misleading to analyze these
              mechanisms fixing the information structure, which is what most of the
              mechanism design literature does. This project studies how mechanism should be
              designed to cope with endogenous information structures. 

In addition, the
              project studies situations where the mechanism designer can manipulate the
              agents' information structure directly, by publicly revealing information,
              e.g., interim evaluations. Examples are promotions in the workplace, and
              midterms for college students. Do employees work harder if they have an idea of
              who among them is more likely to be promoted? Do college students study more
              because of midterms? These are important questions given how common these
              arrangements are. The answer adds to our understanding of how contracts are
              designed to deal with information. 

