Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Thick Filament Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9905687

Award Number: 9905687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Hoppe phoppe@genetics.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The functional unit of all muscles, both vertebrate and invertebrate, is the
              myofibrillar sarcomere, a complex but precisely ordered arrangement of muscle
              proteins.  The major functional protein components of the sarcomere are myosin,
              the molecular motor that powers the contractile movement, and actin, which
              forms the stationary filament (thin filaments) along which myosin moves.  In
              muscle, myosin is itself arranged in filaments (thick filaments); the
              hydrolysis of ATP by the myosin molecules results in the sliding of the myosin
              filaments along the thin filaments, with left-right pairs of thick filaments
              sliding toward each other, thereby resulting in a shortening or contraction of
              the myofibril as a whole.  There are additional molecular components of the
              myofibrils that function in various aspects of the spatio-temporal organization
              and regulation of the contractile apparatus.  However, the molecular details of
              the organization of these components are not yet understood.  Invertebrate
              model systems such as insects (e.g., Drosophila) and nematode worms (e.g.,
              Caenorhabditis elegans) have proven to be very useful in elucidating the
              molecular organization of muscle myofibrils because biochemical studies can
              fruitfully be combined with genetic analyses.  In these invertebrates, a major
              additional component of the thick filaments is a protein called
              paramyosin.

The long-term goal of this project is to understand how the two
              major thick filament proteins of C. elegans muscle, myosin and paramyosin, are
              assembled into a highly ordered structure.  The filament-forming domains of
              myosin heavy chain (myosin) and paramyosin are homologous coiled-coil dimers or
              "rods."  Dr. Hoppe is interested in defining the parameters of coiled-coil
              sequence that contribute to specification of ordered structure.  One goal of
              this project is to test the model that a small C-terminal portion of the coiled
              coil, the 29-residue Assembly Competent Domain (ACD), is a critical region
              required for ordered assembly.  In addition to the intermolecular interactions
              that may be specified by the coiled-coil domains, other proteins are required
              for proper assembly of thick filaments in vivo.  Both myosin and paramyosin
              have small, terminal nonhelical regions that contain phosphorylation sites,
              suggesting that kinases and phosphatases may play important roles in guiding
              filament assembly.  Unlike the C-terminal myosin phosphorylation sites in
              smooth and nonmuscle myosins, a potential phosphorylation site in C. elegans
              myosin lies in a core position in the coiled coil domain.  Preliminary studies
              from Dr. Hoppe's laboratory indicate that deletions that remove some or all of
              the phosphorylation sites in myosin result in assembly defects in vivo.  A
              truncated myosin that lacks all phosphorylation sites acts as a dominant
              disrupter of sarcomere structure in vivo.  A second goal of the project will be
              to define the role of these nonhelical sequences and phosphorylation sites in
              either specification or regulation of myosin and paramyosin assembly.

The
              role of the sequences containing the phosphorylation sites at the C-terminus of
              myosin and the n-terminus of paramyosin will be defined.  While phosphorylation
              in nonhelical regions has been recognized as a regulator of assembly in
              coiled-coil molecules such as myosin, the mechanism by which this occurs is not
              understood.  To test the role of the tailpiece in assembly, truncated forms of
              myosin heavy chain and paramyosin will be examined for assembly defects.  To
              define the mechanism of tailpiece action, the sequence and positional
              dependence of tailpiece function will be examined by exchange of homologous
              sequences between myosin and paramyosin.  In addition, to allow interpretation
              of the dominant defects previously observed in tailpiece deletion constructs,
              and to enable future studies on the mechanism of tailpiece action, the
              phosphorylated serine residues within the paramyosin tailpiece will be
              identified.

An in vivo test of the Assembly Competent Domain will be
              performed.  Two types of mechanisms have been proposed for the specification of
              intermolecular stagger at which myosin and paramyosin assemble into the thick
              filament.  Models based on the remarkable charge distribution and the conserved
              hydrophobicity profile along the length of the rod favor a mechanism in which
              rod-rod interactions along the entire length of the filament-forming domain act
              to specify intermolecular overlap.  However, recent work has proposed that a
              small C-terminal region, the 29-residue ACD, is necessary and sufficient for
              formation of ordered aggregates.  Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to
              test the requirement for the ACD in myosin and paramyosin assembly in muscle
              cells.

This work will contribute not only to an understanding of muscle
              contractile apparatus assembly, but more generally to an understanding of how
              multiple proteins assemble to form orderly protein structures of precise
              distribution, diameter, and length.  As such, the project addresses an
              extremely important problem in modern molecular biology.

