Title       : Estimating the Impact of Districting on Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9905774

Award Number: 9905774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharyn O'Halloran so33@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Epstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Political institutions play a key role in mediating the aggregation of
              individual preferences into public policy.  It  is for exactly this reason that
              political actors pay close attention to the design of institutions, such as
              electoral systems and voting rules with legislatures.  Yet the impact of
              certain types of institutions on outcomes is still poorly understood, including
              the relation between the distribution of voters' preferences across districts
              and the actions taken by their representative.  This research examines in
              detail one particular institution - - the creation of majority-minority voting
              districts - - to determine the influence of these districts, not only on who
              gets elected to office, given different demographic characteristics within the
              constituency, but also on the final policy outcomes produced by the
              legislature.

In this respect, majority-minority voting districts offer
              scholars of institutional analysis both an opportunity and a paradox.  The
              opportunity is that of a natural experiment:  the large number of
              majority-minority districts created since the 1970s allows one to investigate
              the impact of different districting strategies on representation.  The paradox
              is that even as more and more of these districts have been carved out of the
              political landscape, a shift towards minority-preferred policy outcomes has not
              been apparent.  Indeed, with the Republican takeover of Congress following the
              1994 midterm elections, policy gains for minorities at the national level have
              been few and far between.

This combination of evens points in the direction
              of both theory building and empirical analysis.  Theoretically, when should we
              expect the creation of majority-minority districts to be translated into real
              policy progress, and when will these districts over-concentrate minority voters
              to the detriment of overall representation?  Empirically, how are preferences
              now distributed both in the U.S. as a whole and within different regions in
              particular, and what does this imply for alternative districting strategies? 
              Answers to these questions enable a better understanding of the role that
              institutions play in aggregating preferences in a diverse republic.

The
              product of this research includes dissemination of the roll call and electoral
              data to the broader research community through an interactive web-based
              archive.


