Title       : A Role for Declarative and Procedural Memory in Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9905273

Award Number: 9905273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281078             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Ullman michael@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Human language depends upon a dictionary of words (the mental lexicon) and rules
              which specify how those words are put together into larger words, phrases, and
              sentences (the mental grammar).  The computational and brain bases of these two
              fundamental language capacities are still not well understood.  This project
              investigates the novel view that the learning and use of the two language
              capacities depends upon two more general-purpose memory systems whose neural
              foundations are relatively well studied.  Specifically, it is hypothesized that
              the acquisition and use of words depends upon "declarative memory"
              temporal-lobe brain circuits previously shown to underlie the learning and use
              of fact knowledge, such as what a zebra is and where it lives.  It is also
              hypothesized that the acquisition and use of grammatical rules depends upon
              "procedural memory" left frontal/basal-ganglia brain circuits previously shown
              to underlie the learning and expression of motor and cognitive "skills," such
              as riding a bicycle.  On this "declarative/procedural" view of language,
              lexicon and grammar are linked to distinct general-purpose systems, each
              responsible for a particular set of language and non-language functions.  The
              declarative/procedural view contrasts with the two main classes of previously
              proposed theories regarding the computational and neural mechanisms of
              language.  It shares the perspective of traditional "dual-system" theories that
              lexicon and grammar depend upon distinct systems, but it diverges from their
              claim that these systems are responsible for language alone.  Conversely, while
              the declarative/procedural view agrees with "single-system" theories that the
              two language capacities depend upon general-purpose brain circuitry, it
              diverges from their claim that both capacities are linked to a single system
              with a broad distribution in the brain. 

To distinguish the three views, the
              project will focus on a simple distinction in language: between regular and
              irregular transformations in past tense and in other aspects of language.  In
              this distinction lexicon and grammar can be contrasted, while other
              psychologically relevant factors are held constant.  Irregular transformations
              are at least partially arbitrary (e.g., sing-sang, bring-brought), and
              therefore must depend upon memory, whereas regular transformations are
              predictable (e.g., verb + -ed), and so could be computed by a grammatical rule.
               Thus links are predicted among irregulars (lexicon), facts, and temporal-lobe
              circuits, and among regulars (grammar), skills, and frontal/basal-ganglia
              circuits.  Patients with brain damage limited to particular temporal-lobe areas
              (e.g., "posterior aphasics") should have more trouble with irregulars than
              regulars, and with facts than skills.  Patients with damage limited to
              particular left frontal/basal-ganglia structures (e.g., "anterior aphasics")
              should show the opposite pattern.  

If indeed the declarative and procedural
              memory systems play a role in lexicon and grammar, then data from numerous
              investigations of the neural, computational, and developmental underpinnings of
              the two brain memory systems in humans and in animals will contribute to our
              understanding of language.  Conversely, new approaches to the study of the two
              memory systems will become possible on the basis of our knowledge of language
              structure, processing, and acquisition.  Tests of lexicon and grammar, such as
              those used in the proposed project, may become useful probes of the two brain
              systems.  In addition to the advancement of fundamental knowledge in cognitive
              science, the contributions of animal and human studies of the two brain systems
              to our understanding of language should lead to new clinical approaches for the
              diagnosis and treatment of acquired and developmental language disorders. 


