Title       : Dynamic Inconsistency and Self-Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a9905178

Award Number: 9905178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faruk Gul fgul@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How individuals resolve a fixed choice problem often depends on when the
              decision is made. This project studies this phenomenon called dynamic
              inconsistency. The main innovation is the introduction of self-control as a
              distinct feature of preferences. Self-control creates a wedge between choice
              behavior and preferences at the time of consumption. The first step is to
              derive a simple representation of preferences that captures dynamic
              inconsistency. The representation facilitates the quantification of
              self-control as a utility penalty that applies whenever the ultimate choice is
              not optimal for the ex post self.  The model distinguishes between self-control
              which occurs at time of consumption and commitment which takes place earlier. 
              A measure of dynamic inconsistency and a measure of self-control can be
              developed. The current model of dynamic inconsistency will be extended to allow
              for intermediate consumption and temporal resolution of uncertainty. This will
              permit the analysis of the standard models of consumption and saving used in
              macroeconomics and financial economics. By using the tools developed in this
              project, formal analysis of related psychological mechanism, rationalization,
              will be undertaken.




