Title       : The Role of Paraxis in the Regulation of Myogenesis and Skeletogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9905982

Award Number: 9905982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Rawls jrawls@imap4.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In vertebrates, skeletal muscle and the axial skeleton are derived from
              segmental units of paraxial mesoderm called somites.  At the time of formation,
              somites are naive tissue that become specified to distinct cell fates in
              response to instructive signals from the surrounding axial structures.  To
              understand how these signals are interpreted by the somite it will be important
              to elucidate the genetic cascade within somitic cells that directs cell-fate
              decisions.  Paraxis was previously shown to be required for the establishment
              of the epithelial state of the somite.  Since compartmentalization of the
              somite into the sclerotome, myotome, and dermomyotome is intimately related to
              the epithelial state of the cells, we hypothesized that paraxis could be
              important for the specification and migration of the myogenic and chondrogenic
              progenitor cells.  Preliminary analysis of the somites from paraxis-/- and
              paraxis-/-/myf-5-/- embryos indicate that this gene exerts pleiotropic effects.
               In the medial (epaxial) myotome, paraxis is not required to regulate the onset
              of commitment to the myogenic lineage, but is required to establish the
              appropriate pattern of migration.  In contrast, praxis is required for the
              formation of the lateral (hypaxial) myotome from the lateral dermomyotome.  In
              addition, the sclerotome-derived axial skeleton of the paraxis/myf-5 compound
              mutant mice was reduced to unsegmented remnants of the vertebral body and
              neural arches.  These defects were greater than those described for the
              individual mutants, indicating that these genes play a greater role in
              regulating the specification and differentiation of the sclerotome than
              previously hypothesized.  In this application, we propose experiments that
              examine the molecular basis for the role of paraxis in the specification of
              these compartments of the somite.

1. Examine the role of paraxis in the
              development of the myotome and hypaxial musculature.  The role of paraxis in
              regulating the specification, proliferation, and migration of the myogenic
              progenitors located in the dermomyotome will be examined in both the paraxis-/-
              and myf-5-/-/paraxis-/- genetic backgrounds.  The primary focus will be to
              establish the position of paraxis within the signaling pathway that result in
              the genesis of myoblasts in the myotome.  Since the absence of paraxis is
              accompanied by a reduction in tissue mass in these mutants, changes in
              proliferation and apoptosis also will be assessed in the sclerotome,
              dermomyotome, and myotome.

2. Characterize the axial skeleton defects in the
              paraxis/myf-5 null mutant mice.  The nature of the inhibition of chondrogenesis
              will be examined both in vivo and in vitro.  The expression of genes associated
              with commitment and differentiation of chondroblasts in the sclerotome, and
              ossification will be examined to determine the role of paraxis and myf-5 in
              this process.

3. Characterize the migration of premyogeneic and
              prechondrogenic cells from the dermomyotome of the paraxis-null embryos.  The
              paraxis mutant can provide us with important insight into the mechanism(s) by
              which migration from the dermomyotome into the adjacent compartment is
              regulated.  Feasibility studies will be performed for tracing the movement of
              small numbers of cells from the dermomyotome in developing paraxis-/- and wild
              type embryos using the vital dye, DiI.



