Title       : The Leontief-Trefler Hypothesis and the Case of the Missing Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9905177

Award Number: 9905177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaume Ventura jaume@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Inspired by Leontief, Trefler has argued that the observed variation in
              wages and rental rates to capital is due to differences in the quality or
              amount of services that these factors deliver and not to differences in the
              prices of their services. This is the Leontief-Trefler hypothesis. Trefler
              found that there is very little factor content in existing trade flows. This is
              the case of the missing trade. These two findings have very important
              implications for the theories of international trade and economic growth.

  
                The objective of this research is to design and execute an alternative an
              independent test of the Leontief-Trefler hypothesis. The original test of the
              Leontief--Trefler hypothesis has very low power against reasonable
              alternatives. A new test is proposed that exploits the intuitive idea that the
              price of labor-intensive products should be high relative to that of
              capital-intensive prod-ucts if the price of labor services is high relative to
              that of capital services. In fact, the main insight of this method consists of
              using product-price gra-dients, i.e. the slope of the relationship between
              (log) prices and labor shares in costs, to estimate productivity-adjusted
              wage-rental ratios. This insight is quite general, and its implementation does
              not require assumptions on how technology and expenditure patterns vary across
              countries or what are the costs of international trade and factor movements.

