Title       : Mechanisms of Yeast TFIIB Function in RNAPII Transcription Initiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9905418

Award Number: 9905418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred S. Ponticelli asp@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ponticelli   MCB-9905418

The regulation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII)
              transcription plays a critical role in many complex eukaryotic processes.  The
              long-term goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms of
              RNAPII transcription initiation and the role of the general transcription
              factor IIB (TFIIB).  Previous genetic and biochemical studies from this
              laboratory have identified several classes of TFIIB mutants in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae that exhibit altered transcriptional properties in
              vivo and in vitro. In this project, some of these mutants will be utilized in
              combination with biochemical and molecular biological approaches to elucidate
              the mechanisms of TFIIB function in transcription initiation.  In the first
              aim, the role of the TFIIB intramolecular interaction in the regulation of
              TFIIB activity will be determined.  The association of TFIIB with
              promoter-bound TATA-binding protein (TBP) is a critical step in the formation
              of an RNAPII preinitiation complex (PIC).  Previous studies identified a yeast
              TFIIB mutant (R64E) that exhibits increased activity in the formation of
              TBP-TFIIB-DNA (DB) ternary complexes and enhanced interaction between the
              N-terminal region and the C-terminal core domain.  The parallel enhancement in
              DB complex formation and the intramolecular interaction in the R64E mutant
              suggests that the role of the intramolecular interaction in TFIIB is to promote
              the association of TFIIB with promoter-bound TBP.  Gel mobility-shift assays
              and site-specific protein-protein photocrosslinking will be utilized to
              determine the role of the intramolecular interaction in regulating the entry of
              TFIIB into the transcription cycle.  In addition, the solution structure of the
              yeast TFIIB N-terminal domain and/or the R64E protein will be determined in
              order to provide a structural basis to understand the functions of TFIIB in
              transcription initiation.  In the second aim, the role of TFIIB in yeast
              transcription start site selection will be investigated.  In contrast to
              mammalian cells, transcription initiation by S. cerevisiae RNAPII frequently
              occurs at multiple sites within a window of 45-120 base pairs downstream of the
              TATA element. The ability of yeast RNAPII to initiate within a window extending
              as far as 120 base pairs downstream of the TATA element reflects an interesting
              and fundamental difference in the initiation mechanism relative to that in
              mammalian cells.  The basis for this difference is not known.  A panel of yeast
              TFIIB mutants that confer downstream shifts in transcription initiation will be
              utilized in combination with DNase I footprinting, in vitro transcription
              assays with purified factors and site-specific protein-protein
              photocrosslinking to address two alternative hypotheses for the mechanism of
              yeast transcription start site selection and the role of TFIIB in this process,
              namely: 1) start site selection in yeast is directed by positioning of the PIC
              on the promoter and this positioning is determined by interactions involving
              TFIIB; and 2) start site selection in yeast involves a scanning polymerase, the
              properties of which are influenced by specific interactions involving
              TFIIB.

The first step in the expression of genetic information contained in
              DNA involves a process called transcription. The regulation of the
              transcription process plays a crucial role in governing the types of functions
              that a cell performs, the way in which a cell responds to environmental
              stimuli, and when and under what circumstances the cell will grow and divide. 
              During transcription, messenger RNA is synthesized by the combined action of
              the enzyme RNA polymerase and a host of accessory proteins.  An important goal
              towards a better understanding of the transcription process is to understand
              the functions and roles played by each of the accessory proteins.  The work in
              this project is focused on determining the functions of the accessory factor
              TFIIB in transcription initiation.  

