Title       : Biogenesis of Polyhydroxyalkanoate Inclusion Bodies in Bacillus Megaterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a9905419

Award Number: 9905419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maura C. Cannon mcannon@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The storage polymer polyhydroxyalkanoic acid (PHA) accumulates in inclusion
              bodies in most bacteria and archaea.  Given the widespread occurrence and
              influence on the metabolism and physiology of the cell of these inclusion
              bodies, it is surprising that so little is known about their structure and
              biogenesis.  This project will identify the functions of small proteins (pha
              proteins) that co-purify with PHA inclusion bodies.  The focus is on localizing
              these proteins throughout growth, and on determining the precise amino acid
              sequences required for accurate localization to take place, using Bacillus
              megaterium.  Six pha genes at two loci have been identified in B. megaterium. 
              The functions of three of these genes (phaA, B and C) can be predicted based on
              homology to known genes, while those of the remaining three genes (phaP, Q and
              R) are unknown.  Intracellular localization of phaQ and phaR will be examined
              using translational fusions to the green fluorescent protein (GFP).  The
              identity of the amino acid sequences required for localization of phaP and phaC
              (and phaQ and phaR, if appropriate) to the inclusion bodies will be determined.
               The phenotypes of phaP, Q and R deletion mutants will be characterized, and
              the interdependence of these proteins on each other for accurate localization
              will be tested by analyzing subcellular localization of each of the pha
              proteins in various deletion mutants.  The data from these experiments should
              indicate the extent to which phaP, Q and R are involved in the assembly of PHA
              inclusion bodies, and how they interact with each other in that process.

