Title       : Formulated and Specify: Using Visual Programming to Enable Web-based
               Biodiversity Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a9905760

Award Number: 9905760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Leopold   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Beach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen L. Ambler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
Project summary (copy on BIO P: drive)

Biological
              collections document the occurrence and distribution of life on earth. A vast
              amount of taxonomic and ecological information is associated with the estimated
              three billion specimens in museums worldwide.  The informatics challenges the
              biodiversity research community faces with collections data are a consequence
              of numerous autonomous database systems and an absence of software tools to
              track and analyze changes in those databases. Time series and regional analysis
              of biodiversity, based on actual collections data within a distributed
              computing environment on the Internet, represent the grand challenge for the
              biodiversity research community. The distributed computing framework developed
              herein will provide a powerful infrastructure for the integration of data
              sources and for the data analysis objectives of biodiversity research.

This
              project will create tools that assist in research analysis and synthesis, and
              which can, by design, respond to the high levels of data flux within the
              discipline. . To accomplish one requires  (1) support of heterogeneous,
              network-based, distributed  computing environments, (2) the ability to track
              changes at different servers without having to manually issue one time queries
              on a repeated basis, and (3) empowerment of biodiversity researchers to build
              automated retrieval and analysis functions through a network interface without
              any specific knowledge of programming tasks.

From a Computer Science
              perspective, the problem is to provide a facility for biodiversity scientists
              which makes possible meaningful analyses over a network of heterogeneous,
              constantly-updated data sources. This is termed the Biodiversity Community
              Analysis (BCA) problem. The BCA problem differs from the general Universal
              Access problem in two ways. First, the user community is restricted to
              biodiversity researchers. Second, the level of access required goes beyond
              simply accessing data; in addition, users must be able to construct meaningful
              biodiversity analyses using such data, and without becoming trained
              programmers.

An Internet-based system specifically for facilitating the
              development of biodiversity analyses using information obtained from databases
              on the Internet will be developed. The main distinction between this system and
              existing Internet facilities to retrieve information and assimilate it into
              computations is that this approach will provide the necessary facilities to
              develop and maintain dynamic links such that computations and reports
              automatically maintain themselves. A further distinction is that the system
              proposed is specifically designed for users of spreadsheet-level ability,
              rather than professional programmers.

The investigators include leaders from
              the Biodiversity community, including the project managers for the Specify
              collections management project and the joint KU-SDSC KDI project in earth
              system sciences, and from the user interface and public programming language
              community. The proposed system builds directly on years of prior work. It is
              made feasible by systems already in place as a result of this prior work and
              builds on our collateral development activities.

The ability to easily
              formulate temporal ad hoc analyses of biological collections data distributed
              across national and international networks will leverage 300 years of
              biological earth inventory by engaging species information in a national
              analytical and computational infrastructure.




