Title       : Competing for the Community: Collective Identity Formation and Alliance-Building
               Heretical Social Movement Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9905231

Award Number: 9905231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50744              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Hipsher hipshep@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Identity politics"--defining interests and organizing politically on the basis
              of one's membership in an identity community--has become a hallmark of American
              politics in the last quarter of a century. When identity groups become powerful
              and established, their definitions of community interests may come to be seen
              as the only legitimate ones. If established and powerful groups and
              institutions representing an identity community define that community's
              interests in one way, how does an organization within the community with
              opposite views assert itself? This research will study the formation of
              collective identity in "heretical social movement organizations" (HSMO) by
              analyzing how such groups frame their issues in relation to identity community
              antagonists, protagonists, and audience members, and non-identity community
              antagonists, protagonists, and audience members. The content of HSMO
              newsletters, press releases, brochures, speeches, and public statements
              reported in the press will be analyzed, and structured, open-ended interviews
              with 75 leaders and activists of the HSMOs also will be conducted. HSMOs are
              important for the study of social movements and collective identity, as their
              existence or nonexistence points directly to issues of legitimacy of
              representation of movement organizations. They also raise the basic question of
              who can speak on behalf of a given group, and how a group takes a position
              contrary to its presumed interests and values. By addressing these questions,
              this research will serve to refine existing social movement concepts and
              theories by applying them to situations which have not been conceived of in the
              literature. Second, this research will identify the processes by which
              community interests and collective identities may be redefined and transformed.
              Third, the research will generate new knowledge about the alliance structures
              of social movement organizations, including what kinds of alliance structures
              are most conducive to social movvement organizations' success.
