Title       : The Theory of International Economic Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9905460

Award Number: 9905460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Staiger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyle Bagwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        The important role played in the world economy by GATT (and now it
              successor, the WTO) is widely accepted. Since its creation in 1947, GATT has
              grown in membership from an initial set of 23 countries to a roster that now
              exceeds 100 countries. The expanding GATT membership reflects the success that
              this organization has had in facilitating tariff reductions. Through the 8
              rounds of trade-policy negotiations that have been sponsored by GATT, the
              average ad valorem tariff on industrial goods has fallen from over 40% to below
              4%. In light of the significant impact that GATT has had on the world economy,
              an important question for economists is whether a theoretical interpretation of
              GATT and its main features can be provided.

          While the past success
              of GATT justifies in its own right a theoretical investigation of its main
              features, this task is perhaps even more important when the future of this
              multilateral institution is considered. A critical question in the coming years
              is whether the same set of principles on which postwar multilateral
              liberalization has been based can or should be applied to a host of "new" trade
              policy issues. These issues include the spread of preferential trading
              agreements, the harmonization of competition policies, and the protection of
              the environment, intellectual property and human rights. An understanding of
              why GATT's principles have worked well in the more traditional arena of
              multilateral tariff liberalization for industrial goods can lay the foundation
              for answers to this critical question.

          The purpose of our proposed
              research is to develop a theoretical understanding of GATT's essential
              principles, and to use this understanding to investigate the nature of GATT's
              success in traditional areas, to examine the potential for extending the
              essential design features of GATT to new areas, and to begin an exploration of
              the distinctive features of international financial institutions such as the
              IMF in light of what is learned about GATT. We propose to accomplish this by
              building on a general framework for investigating the nature of trade
              agreements that we have already developed. A first goal of our proposed
              research is to show how GATT's central pillars of reciprocity and
              non-discrimination may be interpreted and understood within this framework. A
              second goal of our proposed research is to consider several dimensions
              associated with the issue of enforcement of GATT commitments. A third goal of
              our proposed research is to extend our framework to examine "new" issues that
              GATT now confronts such as labor and environmental standards. And a fourth and
              final goal of our proposed research is to move beyond the study of trade rules
              and institutions to investigate the economics of international financial
              institutions.

