Title       : MARGINS: The Slab Component in Central America: Isotopic Evidence For Both
               Hydrous and Silicic Fluxes in Nicaragua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9905167

Award Number: 9905167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117437             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Carr carr@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Feigenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905167
Carr
The Subduction Factory Initiative of the MARGINS Program strives
              to understand fluxes through volcanic arc systems.  Specific goals include
              uncovering what regulates the production of magma.  Our work will address this
              goal by clarifying the nature of the slab fluxes in Central America.  We
              recently discovered unusual trace element systematics in lavas from Central
              America. The data are best explained by mixing between two end-members, thus
              there are at least two fluxes to identify.  The sediment section, subducting
              beneath Central America, also has two end-members; a lower carbonate ooze and
              an upper hemipelagic mud.  These lithologies have hugely different trace
              element signatures and, in general, the chemical signatures of the sediments
              match up with the two end-members seen in the lavas.  We identify the origin of
              the two geochemical end-members as the subducted sediments, but how do
              sediments become fluxing agents that trigger melting and volcanism?  Do they
              move into the mantle as hydrous fluids or as melts?  Our proposed project can
              answer half of the latter question by employing very precise isotopic
              measurements.  The Sr-Nd isotopic data for Central American lavas define an
              array apparently involving the same end members seen in the trace element data.
               The far more precise isotopic data have the potential to severely restrict
              interpretations once sufficient data are available. The geometry of the
              isotopic mixing lines for Central America is such that a flux from the upper,
              hemipelagic sediments can be a melt but can not be a hydrous fluid. To
              establish this, we plan to expand the data set, which at present is too sparse
              to allow us to state this as a firm conclusion

