Title       : Functional Characterization of the Arabidopsis thaliana ARG1 Gene Involved in
               Gravity Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9905675

Award Number: 9905675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick H. Masson phmasson@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant organs use the gravity vector as an environmental cue to direct their
              growth.  Gravitropism allows roots to grow downward into the soil where they
              take up the water and mineral ions required for plant growth and development. 
              It also forces shoots to grow upward toward light, allowing them to
              photosynthesize.  This important plant growth response to its environment also
              allows plant shoots to resume upward growth after having been prostrated by the
              action of wind and rain, and roots to resume downward growth after having
              overcome an obstacle placed in their growth path.
A change in the orientation
              of a specific plant organ within the gravity field is perceived mainly by the
              sedimentation of dense amyloplasts in the cytoplasm of specialized cells named
              statocytes.  Amyloplast sedimentation activates a signal transduction pathway
              that result in the production of a physiological signal, believed to be an
              auxin and/or apoplastic Ca2+ gradient across the gravistimulated organ.  That
              signal is then transmitted to the site of response where it promotes a
              differential cellular growth responsible for the  development of curvature. In
              roots, gravity sensing is thought to occur in the columella cells of the root
              cap, while the differential growth response occurs in the distal and central
              elongation zones.

Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms
              allowing plant organs to convert the physical information derived from
              amyloplast sedimentation into a physiological signal.  A molecular genetic
              approach using Arabidopsis thaliana now allows investigations that should help
              to better understand that process.  Mutations in the ARG1 gene result in a
              specific defect in root and hypocotyl gravitropism.  Mutant organs show
              wild-type growth rates, growth sensitivities to phytohormones and develop
              wild-type kinetics of phototropic response, strongly suggesting a specific
              defect in the early phases of gravity signal transduction.  ARG1 encodes a
              novel dnaJ-like protein containing a putative coiled coil domain with amino
              acid similarity with coiled coils found in a number of proteins known to
              interact with the cytoskeleton. Interestingly, the cytoskeleton has been
              proposed to be implicated in the sensing phase, but not in the curvature
              response phase, of gravitropism. 

Based on these data, it is hypothesized
              that the ARG1 protein interacts with the cytoskeleton in the statocytes,
              facilitating the transduction of physical forces derived from amyloplast
              sedimentation into a physiological signal.  To test this model the pattern of
              ARG1 expression will be analyzed in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings, minimal
              spatial ARG1 expression requirements will be defined for complete restoration
              of gravitropism in transgenic arg1 plants, and the regions of ARG1 that are
              required for its function in gravitropism will be investigated.  In situ
              immunofluorescence strategies will be used to localize the putative ARG1
              protein within the columella cells of the root cap and in hypocotyl cells, and
              to compare its localization with the distribution of microtubules and
              microfilaments in statocytes. Proteins that interact with the various domains
              of ARG1 will be identified, and the genes encoding them will be cloned and
              characterized. Finally, ARG1 paralogs will be identified and functionally
              characterized.  

This combination of genetic, physiological and
              immunocytological studies will help define the molecular function(s) of ARG1
              and ARG1 paralogs.  Interestingly, a highly conserved ARG1 ortholog was found
              in Coenorhabditis elegans.  This observation suggests an important role for the
              corresponding protein in the regulation of plant and animal growth, development
              and/or responses to the environment.  Thus, it is expected that research will
              provide the foundation for a better understanding of the functions played by
              this novel type of dnaJ-like protein in higher eukaryotes. 

