Title       : Efficient and Equitable Delivery of Education in a District-Based Public School
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9905706

Award Number: 9905706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Nechyba tnechyba@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
SBR-9905706


Public education in most of the United States is
              provided through district-based public school systems in which a household's
              residence determines which public school its child is eligible to attend. This
              differs dramatically from non-district based public school systems observed in
              other countries and often results in a bundling of housing/neighborhood and
              school quality choices for most households. Furthermore, as is well-known,
              dramatic differences in public school qualities across districts often emerge
              in this system even if (as in California) financial resources per pupil have
              been largely equalized. These quality differences are likely to be due to other
              factors such as peer effects which, even in a state financed system, differ
              dramatically across districts.

Aside from the obvious equity concerns often
              raised in courtrooms and policy circles, the nature of district-based school
              systems gives rise to two distinct types of inefficiencies. First, the bundling
              of housing and school service choices entailed in such a system may force
              households whose demands for education are high (low) and whose demands for
              housing are low (high) to over-consume (under-consume) housing or alternatively
              under-consume (over-consume) education services, and some low income households
              may be completely priced out of good school districts. Second, the distribution
              of student types across public and private schools in district-based systems is
              far from uniform and may, depending on how peer effects operate, give rise to
              inefficient mixing of students.

This research program is therefore intended
              to investigate these sources of inefficiencies and inequities inherent in
              district-based public school systems. It merges insights from economic models
              of education into a well-developed local public finance literature to generate
              a comprehensive framework in which parents choose where to live, where to send
              their children to school and how to vote in elections over education issues.
              Furthermore, it allows for a wide variety of housing/neighborhood structures
              and state school finance policies which can be calibrated to readily available
              data. This model will be used both to identify and quantify the inefficiencies
              and inequities in district-based public school systems and to discriminate
              between various policy alternatives. Such alternatives include different types
              of state aid programs, private school vouchers, and more radical policies such
              as a switch to non-district based public school systems.





