Title       : Acquisition of Analytical Ultracentrifuge for the Study of Interaction of
               Surfactants and Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9905217

Award Number: 9905217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9905217
Somasundaran, P.
Columbia University

A large number
              of aqueous and non-aqueous based systems in the nature and commerce contains
              one or more polymer and surfactants in the same solution or suspension.  In
              such systems, interactions between polymers and surfactants, as well as changes
              resultant in properties conferred by any "complex" formed by such interactions,
              can be of considerable importance in biological systems such as membranes and
              carriers (lipid transport), and commercial systems of foods, pharmaceutics,
              cosmetics, detergents and various other chemical systems.  Many commercial
              products containing such mixtures has been widely used in different areas, but
              formulation of these products has mainly depended on trial and error tests. 
              Clearly a full knowledge of the interaction characteristics of relevant
              polymers and surfactants will greatly aid the development of  efficient
              products.  Toward this purpose we propose to acquire an analytical
              ultracentrifuge comprising two optical systems for determining concentration
              distribution.  Two important types of experiments can be performed with the
              analytical ultracentrifuge: in the sedimentation equilibrium experiments,  a
              steady state condition is allowed to develop in which the tendency of a sample
              to sediment in the centrifugal field is counterbalanced by its tendency to
              diffuse against the concentration gradient so established.  In the
              sedimentation velocity experiment, the speed with which a molecule moves toward
              the bottom of the cell is determined.  This yields the sedimentation
              coefficients, and the diffusion coefficient D, which can be related to the
              molecular weight and the frictional coefficient related to the shape of
              macromolecules ranging in size from several thousand to tens of millions of
              dolton.  Studies that can be conducted on the dynamics of interactions of
              polymers and surfactants in solutions using this technique would provide a
              quantum leap in our knowledge of the behavior of surfactants, polymers and
              their mixtures.  We will be able to use analytical ultracentrifuge also in our
              study of surfactant, mixtures to understand the relationship between surfactant
              type, mixing ration and the shape, composition and structure of mixed micelles.
               Another application will be in our work on coating and coagulation of
              nanosized particles for preparation of nanocomposites that could lead to
              significant advance in composite fabrication.  Recently, we have expanded our
              studies of surface adsorption phenomena into the area of polymer
              (protein)-surfactant mixture systems.  The unique capability of the Analytical
              Ultracentrifuge to provide direst information on the molecular weight
              distribution of polymer (protein)-surfactant complexes is invaluable in the
              study of Nan-size polymer-surfactant domains and the solubility of these
              domains.  The acquisition of an Analytical Ultracentrifuge System will thus
              great enhance the capabilities of Columbia University NSF IUCR Center for
              Advanced Studies in Novel Surfactants, and will enable us to explore the
              rapidly expanding frontiers of surfactant and polymer applications. 

