Title       : RUI: Protein-Protein Interactions Mediating Substrate Recognition by the VirB
               Complex of Agrobacterium Tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9905126

Award Number: 9905126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois M. Banta lbanta@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Banta
9905126

1. Technical 
    	Agrobacterium tumefaciens causes crown
              gall tumors to form on susceptible plants by stably transforming the host
              organism with a 20-kb fragment of single-stranded DNA (the T-DNA) encoding
              plant growth hormone biosynthetic enzymes.  The VirB proteins mediate export of
              this oncogenic DNA from the bacterium.  The focus of this study is the
              protein-protein interactions mediating recognition by the transport machinery
              of the various substrates that utilize the VirB pore.  These substrates include
              not only the T-DNA, but also a single-stranded DNA-binding protein (VirE2)
              involved in targeting the T-DNA to the nucleus of the host cell, and a
              DNA-protein complex derived from the mobilizable plasmid RSF1010, which appears
              to compete for access to the transport apparatus, inhibiting delivery of the
              other substrates. A novel chromosomally-encoded, 40 kD membrane protein, which
              the PI discovered earlier, interacts with VirE2. This protein will be purified,
              taking advantage of its affinity for VirE2, and its partial amino acid sequence
              determined. Degenerate primers will be designed accordingly and used to isolate
              a genomic clone for quantitative production and further characterization of
              this protein. Generation of alkaline phosphatase fusions and antisera will
              facilitate studies on the membrane topology and probing potential interactions
              with other components of the VirB transport machinery.  Gene disruption will be
              used to assess directly the role of the 40 kD protein in virulence,
              specifically in the delivery of VirE2 to host plant cells.  Strikingly, this
              protein appears to be destabilized in cells carrying RSF1010 or by
              over-production of one component of the VirB pore, VirB10; both of these
              conditions also result in an inhibition of VirE2 export.  To pursue these
              observations, turnover of the 40 kD protein in response to production of an
              RSF1010-derived transfer intermediate will be measured.  In a second set of
              experiments, a mutant screen will be initiated in the hopes of identifying one
              or more VirB proteins responsible for activating release of a substrate through
              the VirB pore in response to host-cell contact. Screening for plant
              cell-independent secretion of VirE2 will identify such mutants.  Together,
              these studies should provide some insight into the process by which DNA and/or
              associated proteins are recognized and transported across the two apolar
              membranes that enclose the Agrobacterium cell.  Molecular dissection of the
              mechanism mediating export of these virulence determinants will, in turn,
              enhance our understanding of pathogenesis in other organisms, including
              Bordetella pertussis, Helicobacter pylori, and Legionella pneumophila, that
              utilize homologous transport systems to deliver their pathogenic
              substrates.

2. Non-technical 
	The bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens
              causes a disease in which tumors form on certain plants.  The symptoms result
              from the transfer of a piece of DNA from the bacterium to the susceptible plant
              cell.  Movement of a protein, VirE2, is also required for efficient tumor
              formation. The goal of this study is to elucidate the mechanism by which the
              disease-causing DNA and VirE2 are recognized and delivered through the membrane
              surrounding the bacterium into the host plant cell.  The VirB proteins are
              known to mediate this transport; we have identified an additional novel,
              non-VirB, component that appears to interact with VirE2.  The hypothesis to be
              tested is that this protein may allow the VirB transport apparatus to engage
              with VirE2, since the protein is no longer detectable under conditions that are
              known to block VirE2 movement from the bacterium. The gene encoding this
              protein will be cloned to generate this protein in quantity so that if and how
              the protein interacts with the VirB proteins can be determined.  A  second line
              of experimentation will also be initiated to investigate how contact with the
              plant cell triggers transport of the VirE2 from the bacterium.  This will be
              done by searching for mutants that release VirE2 even in the absence of a host
              plant cell.





