Title       : Genetic and Molecular Studies of Segregation Distortion in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9905974

Award Number: 9905974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Ganetzky ganetzky@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rayla G. Temin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Segregation Distorter (SD) is a naturally occurring meiotic drive system on the
              second chromosome of Drosophila melanogaster with the property that
              heterozygous SD/SD+ males transmit the SD chromosome to their offspring in vast
              excess over the normal homolog. The basis of this distorted transmission is the
              dysfunction of spermatids that receive the SD+ chromosome. Dysfunction of these
              spermatids is associated with a failure of chromatin condensation. The SD
              system comprises a collection of genetic elements that act in concert to cause
              distortion. These loci include: Sd, E(SD), M(SD), St(SD) and Rsp.Sd is the gene
              primarily responsible for distortion; E(SD), M(SD) and St(SD) are strong
              upwards modifiers of distortion; and Rsp is the target site at which Sd and the
              modifiers act. SD chromosomes carry an insensitiveRsp allele whereas SD+
              homologs whose transmission is affected carry a sensitive Rsp. The sd locus has
              been demonstrated to encode a truncated version of the nuclear transport
              protein, RanGAP.  However, the mechanism by which this altered protein causes
              selective sperm dysfunction is unknown. It is hypothesized that the mutant
              protein has an aberrant location inside the nucleus rather than outside which
              could disrupt nuclear import and export leading ultimately to failure of
              chromatin condensation and sperm dysfunction. To explore this model the
              developmental changes that occur in nuclear morphology during spermatogenesis
              in normal and distorting males will be determined, the subcellular distribution
              and localization of wildtype and mutant RanGAP during spermatogenesis in
              distorting and non-distorting backgrounds will be characterized and the nuclear
              vs cytoplasmic distribution of GFP reporter constructs containing nuclear
              import and export signals will be observed in order to test the hypothesis that
              nuclear transport is defective. M(SD) and Su(SD) will be studied.
              Identification of the proteins encoded by these genes and a determination of
              their cytological location will be the initial steps in an attempt to
              understand their suppressor effects. Identification of the Sd gene product as a
              mutant RanGAP raises questions about the role in distortion of other components
              of the Ran system and thus, the consequences on distortion of overexpressing
              wildtype or dominant negative forms of Ran and RanGEF in the male germline will
              be explored.  

Analysis of SD is significant because it represents a
              striking exception to the fundamental principles of genetic transmission and
              population genetics and may therefore provide insights into the mechanisms that
              normally ensure the fidelity of these processes, the perturbations that can
              affect these mechanisms, and the consequence of such perturbations.
              Furthermore, SD appears to involve disruption of basic biological processes
              such as spermatogenesis and the regulation of chromatin structure and function
              and can thus be informative about their genetic control.

