Title       : Collaborative Research: The Aftermath of a Snowball Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9905478

Award Number: 9905478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Bowring sbowring@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              

An investigation of the unique set of environmental conditions attending the
              aftermath of a Neoproterozoic "snowball" Earth will be undertaken.  It is
              hypothesized that a series of glaciations occurred 750-570 million years ago
              that were so severe that the oceans froze over to the equator. These
              glaciations ended violently under ultra-greenhouse conditions (required to
              overcome the high ice albedo), brought about by the slow buildup of CO2 by
              subaerial volcanic outgassing in the absence of sinks for C. Intense silicate
              weathering must have followed deglaciation, driven by high surface
              temperatures, carbonic acid rain, and frost-shattered bedrock including
              unaltered volcanic material accumulated during the prolonged snowball period.
              The weathering reactions would have taken up the excess CO2 and delivered
              cations and bicarbonate to the oceans, driving massive and rapid precipitation
              of "cap" dolomites and limestones, which are widely observed overlying
              Neoproterozoic glacial deposits.  The following studies of selected cap
              dolomites and limestones in Namibia, Mauritania, Australia and China will be
              carried out: (1) Radiogenic Sr isotopic anomalies will be sought which would
              record the input of riverine Sr to the surface ocean at a time when ocean
              mixing would have been impeded by high surface temperatures and low density
              glacial meltwater, (2) U-Pb dating of cap dolomites will be attempted, given
              evidence that the dolomites are primary and result from high Mg/Ca riverine
              input due to rapid weathering of mafic volcanic material; (3) Subsidence
              histories of cap carbonate sequences will be studied as a means of estimating
              the duration of snowball periods; (4) Collections of cap carbonates and
              associated terrigenous sediments will be made for the purpose of investigating
              the turnover of acritarch assemblages coincident with snowball events.  These
              studies will be used to test the validity and our understanding of the snowball
              Earth hypothesis, which if true connotes the most extreme climates and climate
              changes in Earth history. 


