Title       : Biotechnology or Agroecology: In the Light of Competing Moral and Social Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9905945

Award Number: 9905945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh M. Lacey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This investigation will clarify the conceptualization of agroecology, as
              practiced in Latin America, as an alternative approach to biotechnology in the
              development of agricultural knowledge.   It also will review the literatures on
              ethics and biotechnology, and on its political and sociological aspects, in
              order to inform an analysis of ethical issues associated with scientific
              choices for agricultural development.   The longer term project has as its goal
              a book on competing moral and social values in the adoption of biotechnology or
              agroecology as a development strategy.  The project will explore the strategies
              of the research programs of biotechnology and agroecology and their
              interactions respectively with the values of mainstream development programs
              and policies and with those of movements aiming for grassroots empowerment.  By
              discussing some perplexing ethical problems that have arisen in connection with
              recent biotechnological applications, the analysis will underline the
              importance of appraising the prospects for more widespread adoption in
              agriculture of alternatives such as agroecology, and question the view that
              advances in biotechnology uniquely provide the key to feeding the world's
              rapidly expanding population. It will examine the merits of competing
              conceptions of "development" and the values implicit in them (with a focus on
              Latin American discussions), and  investigate which approaches to scientific
              inquiry best serve the development of the impoverished majorities of "third
              world" countries. The value of agroecology and its associated approaches to
              scientific inquiry (provided that their sound empirical credentials can be
              confirmed) will be defended.
