Title       : High Resolution Time-Series of California Climate Over the Last 12,000 Years:
               Testing the North Atlantic and North Pacific Linkage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9905350

Award Number: 9905350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen M. MacDonald macdonal@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Numerous episodes of severe annual and multi-annual drought have been recorded
              in instrumental climate data and historical records from California.  Such
              records extend back only 200 years or less. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions
              of prehistoric climate indicate that even more severe and longer multi-decadal
              droughts have occurred in the prehistoric period. Unfortunately, these paleo
              records are often fragmentary and are not sufficient to provide a clear and
              continuous record of drought intensity, duration and frequency over the past
              12,000 years. Using a calibration-set approach, the proposed research will
              statistically assess how current differences in air temperature and
              precipitation, lake water temperature, salinity, and depth are reflected in the
              contemporary elemental chemistry and carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of
              lake waters, and the chironomids (midge fly larva), cladocera (crustacean),
              diatoms (unicellular algae), pollen and stomates found in lake sediments.
              Surficial sediment and water samples from at least 50 small lakes in the Sierra
              Nevada will be collected and analyzed. The lakes will be chosen to provide a
              network of sites at different elevations displaying differences in air and
              water temperatures, depth, salinity and evaporative balance.  If statistically
              significant relationships are found between climate and lake conditions and the
              geochemical and biological proxies, the relations will be quantified in the
              form of  mathematical transfer functions.  The newly developed transfer
              functions will then be available for application to geochemical records and
              fossil biological assemblages contained within the sediments of lake cores that
              span the last 12,000 years.  The changes in climate, lake temperature, depth
              and salinity from such lake  cores can provide long and continuous records of
              major droughts in this sensitive region. 

Due to its large population,
              massive agricultural base and generally semi-arid climate with strongly
              seasonal precipitation,  California is extremely sensitive to the impact of
              droughts. Although annual and multi-year droughts of the 20th Century have
              caused significant economic problems, the more severe multi-decadal droughts
              evident in some fossil records from the past 2000 years would have a
              catastrophic impact upon natural ecosystems, agriculture and society in the
              state. Appropriate continuous records of past climate do not yet exist to
              appraise the absolute magnitude, exact duration and potential frequency of such
              droughts over long time scales. Without such information it is difficult to
              determine the causes of such large scale episodes of aridity and assess the
              probability of such an event in the future. The proposed research will assess
              if the geochemistry, microscopic flora and microscopic fauna of small lakes in
              the Sierra Nevada are sensitive to differences in temperature, salinity and
              lake depth, and if the geochemical content and remains of such organisms from
              lake sediments can be used to reconstruct long histories of climate and drought
              in California. The results of the proposed research will be of importance to
              climatologists, hydrologists, paleontologists, biologists, biogeographers and
              water resource managers.

