Title       : The Influence of Founder's Race in the Start-Up Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9905255

Award Number: 9905255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Greene greenep@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy M. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard E. Aldrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Stearns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Influence of Founder's Race in the Start-Up Process

Abstract
	This
              project identifies and analyzes those factors that affect the participation of
              racial or ethnic minorities in the entrepreneurial process and their success in
              creating new firms.  Findings from earlier U.S. studies provide preliminary
              evidence that African-American and Hispanic individuals experience greater
              rates of erosion between the conception stage of the entrepreneurial process
              and fledgling new firm status.  In addition, the businesses that are started
              remain smaller in regards to both size of revenues and number of employees.  In
              this project we examine whether barriers exist during the entrepreneurial
              start-up process that cause some African-American or Hispanic individuals to
              give up their efforts and disengage, or whether those barriers generate
              limitations impacting business growth and success opportunities.  The project
              is organized around a model representing individual assets, access to
              opportunity, social networks, and fledgling firms.  This model allows us to
              explain how organizations actually emerge and develop explanations for why this
              process and the outcomes may be different for minorities and non-minorities. 
              Research on these issues is limited and virtually none addresses the actual
              creation process for the business.  A longitudinal design is adopted to follow
              nascent entrepreneurs across 24 months to determine the extent to which these
              factors explain differences in the experiences of African-American, Hispanic,
              and non-minorities as they move their businesses from the conception stage to
              that of fledgling new firm status.  A random sample of U. S. households is
              screened to identify individuals at the initiation stage of new firm formation
              (nascent entrepreneurs) and a comparison group of randomly selected adults. 
              Comparisons are made between the experiences of the groups starting businesses
              and their cohorts in the adult population.  The project has strong potential
              for impacting public policy.  If the attrition rate for bringing a new firm to
              fruition is higher for minorities than nonminorities and the proposed research
              can identify specific points of attrition and pinpoint probable causes,
              recommendations regarding appropriate assistance programs can be formulated. 
              The development and delivery of training, information or resource assistance
              could be targeted more specifically to the critical stages of the gestation
              process where they could make the most difference. 


