Title       : Using Virtual Interviewers to Explore Race of Interviewer Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9905278

Award Number: 9905278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91434              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mick P. Couper mcouper@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Krysan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Several studies have found race of interviewer effects in surveys to be
              pervasive and powerful, especially when the survey concerns racially loaded
              issues. For a variety of reasons, however, race of interviewer effects are
              particularly difficult to measure. This project develops and tests a new method
              for studying such effects under controlled conditions. A computer assisted
              self-interviewing (CASI) system will have a videotaped interviewer reading
              survey questions. In this way, the interviewer's race can be systematically
              varied while other interviewer attributes are held constant. The PIs have
              prototyped video-CASI systems using existing software. This approach offers
              important benefits for exploring whether respondents react in the same way to a
              virtual interviewer as they would to a live interviewer, and for understanding
              interviewer effects (live or virtual) on the answers respondents give to survey
              questions about socially sensitive issues. The research involves a laboratory
              experiment including samples of both white and black subjects. Experimental
              conditions permit an examination of live interviewers as opposed virtual
              interviewers of the same race and of opposite race. In addition, a text-CASI
              self-administered interview group will serve as a control. The results of this
              work will have relevance on several fronts. First, it evaluates a potentially
              powerful new tool for studying race of interviewer effects. Second, the
              implications of the findings go beyond race, and allow the exploration of how
              attitudes and opinions are shaped by the social context in which they are
              articulated. Third, the project will explore the extent to which the "virtual
              social presence" of a computer may resemble that of a live person.
