Title       : Mobile Genetic Elements in Sexual and Ancient Asexual Taxa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a9905998

Award Number: 9905998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Meselson msm@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	The goal of this research is to determine the generality and
              significance of the finding that rotifers of the Class Bdelloidea, in striking
              contrast to other classes of the Phylum Rotifera and all other eukaryotes that
              have been examined, appear not to contain retrotransposons.  Confirmation of
              the absence of retrotransposons and, possibly, of DNA transposons as well,
              would represent an extraordinary departure from the universal occurrence of
              such elements in all other eukaryotes and would therefore have the potential of
              providing new insights into the evolution, maintenance, and role of mobile
              genetic elements.  Moreover, such a finding would be of fundamental interest
              because of another highly unusual and possibly related attribute of bdelloid
              rotifers, their apparent asexuality. Two complementary experimental approaches
              will be followed in the proposed research.  The first utilizes polymerase chain
              reaction (PCR) with nested sets of degenerate primers designed to amplify
              specific conserved domains that are diagnostic for each of the major classes of
              RNA and DNA transposons.  Resulting amplicons of the expected size will be
              cloned and sequenced to test their identity.  Such screening will include
              diverse species of bdelloid rotifers and, as controls, diverse monogonont
              rotifers and certain other animal phyla not previously examined for such
              elements.  In the second approach to be followed, approximately one megabase of
              bdelloid DNA from cosmid libraries will be sequenced in order to identify
              mobile elements for which no effective PCR primers can be designed, including
              ancient inactive elements that may have diverged beyond the detection
              capability of PCR and other solution hybridization methods.

	Contrary to the
              generalization that the loss of sexual reproduction is a dead end in evolution,
              the entire Class Bdelloidea appears to have evolved for tens of millions of
              years without males, meiosis, or any form of sexual reproduction.  A finding
              that bdelloids lack RNA and/or DNA transposons would therefore suggest that
              such elements are not retained in asexual lines over evolutionary time periods
              and/or that their loss or inactivation was a pre-condition for the success of
              bdelloids in avoiding extinction and undergoing extensive evolution without
              sexual reproduction.  Thus, investigation of the status of mobile elements in
              this novel system may also reveal fundamental relationships between the
              presence of such elements and the evolution and maintenance of sexual
              reproduction.

	

