Title       : Cultural and Immigration-Related Variables in Family Violence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9905253

Award Number: 9905253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merry Morash morashm@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research is designed to increase understanding of forms of wife abuse among
              Vietnamese Americans, describe differences in the situations and
              characteristics of abused women who are and are not in contact with victim
              services, and contribute to the development of theory explaining how culture-
              and immigration-related variation affect behavior. Dimensions of wife abuse
              will be measured and described for 50 Vietnamese-American wives in contact with
              the Task Force and known to be abused, and 70 Vietnamese-American wives who are
              not in contact. It is estimated that this last group will include 20 women
              subject to, and 50 women not subject to, abuse.  Independent variables include:
              values/norms promoting husband's domination, conflict over expectations about
              gender roles and other aspects of family life, immigration (reasons for
              immigration, sequencing of husband's and wife's move, each person's legal
              status), and circumstances related to immigration (discrimination, employment
              and occupational status, proximity of extended family, wife's support network).
              Qualitative data on the pattern, nature, and context of the abuse will also be
              used to provide description of why the abuse occurred, and to support findings
              from the quantitative analysis and/or better specify the causative
              model.

	The study also will test and develop theory to explain wife's
              desired resolution (e.g., obtaining help, influencing the husband to stop,
              divorce) and events leading to alternative resolutions (including continued
              abuse) after one year. Influences hypothesized to be related to desired and
              actual resolutions include:

1. wife's perceptions of immigration law and the
              outcome of criminal justice involvement;
2. wife's perception of the
              consequences of divorce;
3. need for and effects of wife moving from the
              ethnic community to the mainstream to       escape abuse;
4. wife's economic
              power;
5. wife's experience in seeking help. 

