Title       : Functional Convergence and Constraints in Regulation of Transpiration and Carbon
               Assimilation in Tropical Forest Canopy Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9905012

Award Number: 9905012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick C. Meinzer rick.meinzer@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo H. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lowland tropical forests are notable for their high plant species diversity,
              particularly tree species.  This project is based on the premise that despite
              the bewildering diversity of tree species in tropical forests, similar adaptive
              responses occur across a wide range of species. Constraints on the possible
              combinations of adaptive responses should lead to convergence among basic plant
              traits related to regulation of carbon assimilation and transpiration, two
              fundamental processes.  Consistent with this, the PIs  prior use of the
              Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) canopy crane in Panama to make
              concurrent measurements of water use at multiple scales from single leaf to
              whole tree, has revealed a surprising degree of functional convergence in
              regulation of transpiration among diverse tree species.

In the current
              project, the PIs are building upon the PIs previous observations to determine
              the extent to which leaf level regulation of transpiration and carbon
              assimilation are governed by tree architecture and size.  The problem of
              characterizing plant behavior over an adequate range of scale has been
              particularly acute with large forest canopy trees. The advent of canopy cranes
              has revolutionized access to all parts of forest canopy trees from their
              trunks, to intermediate branches, to leaves in the upper crown.  The PIs are
              therefore taking advantage of the unique opportunity provided by the STRI
              canopy cranes to study large trees as whole organisms.  One of our key
              objectives is to identify appropriate numerical scaling factors that relate
              tree physiological behavior to tree architectural features such as the ratio of
              leaf area to sapwood area. These scaling factors will detect functional
              convergence in regulation of carbon uptake, and the uptake, transport and loss
              of water among diverse tree species.  Development of scaling factors that
              reveal areas of functional convergence will provide new insights that will
              greatly simplify interpretation and modeling of tree, stand and ecosystem level
              responses in these complex, species-rich forests.  Furthermore, demonstration
              that similar functional constraints apply across a wide range of species
              leading to trade-offs among basic plant traits related to structure and
              function may serve to move the science of ecology towards new paradigms
              concerning the nature of differences and similarities among plant species.  The
              PIs expect  approaches, results and general conclusions to be applicable to a
              wide range of natural and managed forests, not just tropical forests.  The PIs
              also expect the results of this research to contribute to the ability to
              predict the consequences of different management practices for forest
              productivity and utilization of water resources. 

