Title       : RUI: X-Chromosome Meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9905049

Award Number: 9905049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Meneely pmeneely@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Meiosis is the process by which eukaryotic organisms reduce their chromosome
              number in half during gamete formation. Early in meiosis, homologous
              chromosomes pair, synapse, and exchange although the exact order in which these
              events occur may not be the same in all organisms. These events are highly
              regulated in a poorly understood process called crossover control. Failure to
              carry out these early events leads to chromosome non-disjunction and loss.
              Mutations that cause non-disjunction are known in many organisms, including
              Caenorhabditis elegans. Mutations in C. elegans that result in X chromosome
              non-disjunction or loss in either meiotic division in either germline in the XX
              hermaphrodite are evidenced by a high incidence of XO male self-progeny, and
              such Him mutations are easy to recognize.  Among the genes with a Him mutant
              phenotype, two autosomal genes, him-5 and him-8, are the focus of this
              research.  Recessive mutations in either gene change both the number and the
              distribution of exchanges on the X chromosome, and cause very high rates of X
              chromosome non-disjunction. Both genes have been cloned. The him-8 gene appears
              to correspond to one transcript from a locus with a complex transcription
              pattern, whereas the him-5 locus appears to be much simpler. This will be
              confirmed in each case further molecular analysis and sequencing known mutant
              alleles. Significantly, each gene product is predicted to be a small, highly
              basic protein that would be expected to be involved in some aspect of
              chromosome structure The expression pattern of each gene will be examined by
              RT-PCR at different developmental stages, in both sexes, and in various mutant
              strains affecting meiosis and germ-line development. In addition, by
              immunofluoresence studies, the location of each protein within the gonad will
              be determined, which allows strong inferences about the roles of these genes in
              early meiosis. If possible, the nuclear and chromosomal location of these
              proteins will also be determined.  One model has postulated that changes in
              meiotic chromosome structure are integral to crossover control. The effect of
              these genes on X-chromosome recombination and their predicted protein products
              fit this model. Further investigation on crossover control will be carried out,
              both for the X chromosome and for one autosome. One particular autosomal region
              with an unusual high rate of crossing over will be investigated in more detail.
              The effect of these him genes on crossover control will be assessed by doing
              these experiments in both wild-type and him mutant backgrounds.
	
All of
              these experiments will be carried out by undergraduate students under the
              direction of the principal investigator. Because meiosis is a fundamental
              process whose main characteristics have been known for decades, most students
              are familiar in its basic properties. However, the molecular aspects of meiosis
              are not well-understood, and the genetic and molecular basis for crossover
              control is obscure. The experiments will help to address that. Therefore, the
              students will be carrying out significant and current research on a fundamental
              and familiar process.

