Title       : Temporal Anaphora in Dynamic CrossLinguistic Semantics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9905600

Award Number: 9905600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Bittner mbittner@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905600
Bittner

The anaphoric nature of tense in English has been recognized
              since the classic studies by Reichenbach (1947) and Partee (1973). Tenses, like
              pronouns, must be linked to suitable antecedents-time intervals, for
              tenses-that are salient in the context. With the advent of compositional
              theories of dynamic context change (Groenendijk & Stokhof 1990, Kamp & Reyle
              1993, Chierchia 1995, van Eijck & Kamp 1997, etc), the theory of temporal
              anaphora in English has reached an impressive level of explicitness and
              generality. These results are rapidly being generalized to tensed languages of
              less familiar types by recent developments in dynamic CrossLinguistic Semantics
              (developed by the PI)-a universal type-driven system for translation into
              dynamic update logic. The problem is that the theory that is emerging is unduly
              centered on tense. It therefore fails to extend to languages like Eskimo, which
              are tenseless but still convey temporal information as briefly and precisely as
              English. Even for tensed languages, undue theoretical bias in the direction of
              tense is liable to impede further progress on temporal anaphora because it may
              obscure or distort significant parallels with non-temporal domains.
This
              three-year project is designed to generalize the current theory so that the
              temporal facts of tensed languages (like English) and tenseless languages (like
              Eskimo) are correctly predicted by a universal set of compositional principles
              applied to independently motivated syntactic structures. Towards this goal, the
              research plan includes a detailed empirical investigation of temporal anaphora
              in Eskimo, a typologically unusual language whose temporal interpretation has
              never been studied. This fieldwork is to be carried out by the PI, who has
              already done the requisite syntactic research (in a prior NSF funded project)
              and has extensive fieldwork experience. To avoid undue Eskimo-centering, the PI
              will also investigate, with the help of native speaker GAs, the temporal facts
              of three other unfamiliar languages-including Chinese, which likewise has been
              reported as tenseless. Finally, an obviously relevant phenomenon is
              presupposition. Recently there has been a flood of new advances, including much
              work that is still unpublished. A one-week course on this topic to be taught at
              Rutgers in the first year of the project by a leading authority, Hans Kamp
              (Stuttgart University), is therefore also an integral part of the research
              plan.
The theoretical issues to be investigated in this project range from
              natural language metaphysics (e.g., the conception of time that underlies the
              use of temporal expressions) through all the details of compositional semantic
              interpretation. The results of this project should therefore be of interest to
              researchers in a correspondingly wide range of fields-not only formal
              semantics, but also computational linguistics, formal syntax and philosophy of
              language and mind.

