Title       : Chemoarchitectonic Indicators of Functional Asymmetries in Human Brain Language
               Area Homologs.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9905402

Award Number: 9905402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Gannon patrick.gannon@mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1392,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This new approach will characterize the evolutionary substrate of human brain
              language area homologues in primates. The prevailing current paradigm is based
              on the premise that these left-hemisphere-lateralized areas of the cerebral
              cortex are unique to humans and are not functionally active in non-human
              primate communication. This governing principle is based largely on a strict
              concept of the singular nature of human cognition and communication.  However,
              compelling anatomic and brain-chemistry-based evidence has supported an
              alternate hypothesis: that these lateralized regions, in  at least anthropoid
              primates, manifest a long-lived functional identity. The validity of this novel
              premise will be tested by rigorous quantitative analysis of hemispheric
              asymmetries in selected modulatory chemical systems via use of cutting-edge
              immunocytochemistry and stereology techniques. It is proposed that
              interhemispheric asymmetries, demonstrated within these neurochemical systems,
              will serve as powerful indicators of lateralized 
communication-related
              functions in primate brain language areas. Although non-human primates such as
              Old World monkeys share some anatomic components of human brain language areas
              it is unclear to what functional level and how far the evolutionary history of
              these features extends. These compelling questions are to be considered within
              a multidisciplinary framework of neurobiology and anthropology with integration
              of conjoint functional imaging and molecular biology projects in humans, great
              apes and Old World monkeys. Development of a profound non-human primate model
              of volitional communication/language is a key long-term goal.



