Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Design Techniques for Next Generation
               Mobile/Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9905088

Award Number: 9905088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed I. El Naggar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : Y851      STATE-OES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5944,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9905088
El-Naggar

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Mohamed I. El-Naggar, Department of Electrical Engineering, Ohio
              State University, Columbus, Ohio and Dr. Mohamed S. El-Sherif, Head of the
              Computer Systems Department, the Electronics Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt.
              They plan to explore innovative techniques in the design components of a mobile
              communication device using very large scale integration (VLSI) technologies. 
              They seek to achieve higher levels of integration in complemetary metal oxide
              semiconductors (CMOS) technology, develop multi-standard operation coupled with
              a wider domain of services, and low voltage, low power designs. 

Scope: The
              US team, which is led by Dr. El-Naggar, is an expert analog and radio frequency
              (RF) team.  They have experience in RF design, especially for low-voltage
              low-power applications such as mobile communications.  The team led by Dr.
              El-Sherif has the system know-how in designing components for communications
              systems.  The proposed activities could lead to development of low-cost
              long-life components for mobile communications equipment.  Mobile
              communications are gaining wide acceptance in many developing countries where
              fixed equipment for conventional wire communications is deficient.  The project
              is of great potential to Egypt and is also of benefit to the United States
              because of its large communications equipment manufacturing industry.  A
              graduate student at Ohio State University will participate in the research,
              gaining experience in an international  science activity.  This proposal meets
              the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
              interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
              Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
              carry out these cooperative activities. 

