Title       : Multi-frequency Radio Astronomy as a Tool to Study Active Galaxies and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9905652

Award Number: 9905652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erick J. Guerra guerra@scherzo.rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1217,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Guerra   
AST 99-05625

Multi-frequency radio observations and
              theoretical studies of active galaxies will be carried out.  The analysis of
              the data obtained will be used to address issues concerning the physics of
              active galaxies and the Big Bang cosmology. Telescopes operating at radio
              wavelengths at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) will be
              utilized, including the NRAO 140-foot telescope in Green Bank, West Virginia
              and the NRAO Very Large Array (VLA) in New Mexico. The results obtained will be
              used to launch more ambitious radio observing campaigns to further the same
              goals. This research is comprised of two components. In the first component,
              radio-loud active galaxies which have "inverted spectra" (i.e., are brighter at
              higher radio frequency than lower radio frequency) have been selected from the
              VLA Faint Images of the Radio Sky at Twenty-centimeters (FIRST) survey and the
              Green Bank six centimeter (GB6) radio catalogs. These inverted-spectrum radio
              sources may be a small part of a class of radio sources that have been
              difficult to detect up to this date. Existing radio source catalogs are biased
              against the detection of inverted spectrum radio sources since they are
              faintest at the radio frequencies used for observations to compile existing
              catalogs (4.8 GHz in frequency and lower). However, models of radio-loud active
              galaxies predict inverted-spectrum radio sources as the precursors to other
              classes of radio sources (e.g., flat-spectrum radio sources). Inverted-spectrum
              radio sources can be brightest at frequencies well above 4.8 GHz, even above 20
              GHz. A class of extra-galactic radio sources that is brightest above 20 GHz
              would be a significant foreground contamination to cosmic microwave background
              (CMB) anisotropy measurements such as will be made by NASA's Microwave
              Anisotropy Probe (MAP), which is scheduled to be launched in 2001.

The data
              obtained at the NRAO 140-foot telescope and other facilities will be used to
              place upper limits on foreground contamination of the CMB anisotropy and to
              study the evolution of inverted-spectrum radio sources into other classes of
              radio-loud active galaxies. Ultimately, these data will be used to devise
              optimal strategies for radio surveys of the sky in the frequency range from 15
              GHz to 43 GHz. Surveys of the radio "sky" at these frequencies are the best
              method for obtaining data for detecting inverted-spectrum radio sources.

The
              second component of this research project is a study of the gaseous
              environments of powerful extended radio sources.  The environments of powerful
              extended radio sources appear to be gas-rich clusters of galaxies. These radio
              sources are detected farther, both in space and time, than galaxy clusters that
              are detected in the visible light or X-ray wavelengths. Thus, environments
              surrounding powerful extended radio sources can be used to probe cluster
              evolution father back in time than clusters detected by other methods.

A
              method to measure the properties of the gas in a cluster utilizes the
              Sunyaev-Zel'dovich (S-Z) effect. Radio sources with a predicted S-Z signal from
              their environments greater than the radio emission from the active galaxy
              itself will be selected from the Third Cambridge Revised Catalog (3CR) sample
              of powerful extended radio sources. Radio maps at frequencies up to 43 GHz will
              be collected and used to compute the radio signal above 100 GHz from the active
              galaxy. These radio maps will be obtained from the VLA archives and the
              remainder will be obtained by observations at the VLA. The S-Z signal will be
              computed on the basis of the interaction of the radio source with the
              surrounding gas. A target list for observations of the S-Z effect will be
              determined from these data.


