Title       : Interregional Exchange and Early State Formation: Settlement Survey in the
               Ichupalla Valley, Southern Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9905138

Award Number: 9905138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58573              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish stanish@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Charles Stanish will conduct one
              field season of archaeological research in the Titicaca Basin region of
              highland Bolivia. In this high inhospitable portion of the Andes several
              prehistoric societies reached state levels of social complexity and
              incorporated large numbers of individuals over broad regions into centralized
              political units. Dr. Stanish, along with many archaeologists, is interested in
              the causal processes. Between 200 CB and AD 400 the site of Pucara emerged as a
              principal center in the Titicaca Basin and for ca. 400 years dominated a large
              portion of this region. During the summer of 1998 Dr. Stanish and his
              colleagues conducted a survey and located a second large Pucara settlement,
              Hu-14, in a area which controls one of the few passes from the Andean highlands
              down into the tropical lowlands to the East. It has been suggested that in many
              regions of the world control over trade permits groups to obtain significant
              economic and political reward and this in turn leads to state development. Dr.
              Stanish postulates that such may be the case for Pucara.  He will now survey
              the valleys near Hu-14 to determine if a significant Pucara presence is
              indicated there as well. These valleys contain the last rich agricultural lands
              before one descends eastwards from the Andes and it is important to know if
              Pucara peoples controlled this region and provisioned from it. 

Dr. Stanish
              and colleagues will conduct a regional settlement survey, locate sites and make
              surface collections. Crews of three-four trained archaeologists will walk 10 -
              25 meters apart over the landscape. All sites will be located on topographic
              maps and  air photographs; GPS coordinates will be taken. Detailed data will be
              recorded on a standardized field form. Particular emphasis will be placed on
              the collection and analysis of ceramics since these provide indication of
              period of occupation. On this basis it will be possible to reconstruct the
              settlement system and determine both the extent and nature of Pucara
              occupation.

This research is important because it will provide data on a
              relatively unknown archaeological region. It will shed new light on the
              question of how complex societies arose. It will also assist in training of
              graduate students.

