Title       : Regulators of Muscle Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a9905105

Award Number: 9905105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanh T. Nguyen hnguyen@aecom.yu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva University
	      500 West 185th Street
	      New York, NY  100333201    212/960-5400

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The MEF2 gene family comprises of evolutionarily-conserved MADS box-containing
              transcription factors that are key regulators of muscle differentiation. 
              Genetic analysis of the Drosophila mef2 gene has established that mef2 function
              is essential for terminal differentiation of body wall muscles, gut and heart
              musculatures in the Drosophila embryo.  The pivotal role of mef2 in myogenesis
              is consistent with its stringently-regulated expression during embryogenesis. 
              Promoter/enhancer analysis has indicated that mef2 expression is controlled by
              an array of cisacting regulatory elements that are modulated by inductive and
              mesoderm-specific genetic cues.  Initial mef2 expression in the developing
              mesoderm is activated by Twist while subsequent maintenance of mef2 expression
              in the dorsal mesoderm is mediated through dpp/BMP signaling.  At later stages,
              mef2 expression in muscle progenitors and mature musculatures is controlled by
              separable enhancer elements, which are subject to differential, yet unknown
              genetic inputs.

     The goal of the proposed research is to analyze
              upstream regulators that control mef2 expression in somatic (skeletal)
              myoblasts.  Transgenic approaches will be pursued to characterize in detail an
              enhancer element that mediates regulated mef2 expression in pre-fusion
              myoblasts.  Efforts will also be devoted towards characterizing a new
              Drosophila mutation that causes a dramatic reduction of mef2 expression
              specifically in skeletal muscle but not in visceral and cardiac muscle
              lineages.  Preliminary studies suggest that this mutation disrupts a gene
              encoding an important regulator of skeletal muscle development, which mediates
              its function partly through mef2 activation via the myoblast enhancer under
              study.  A combination of molecular and genetic approaches will be employed to
              clone the gene disrupted in the new mutation and to characterize the mode of
              action of the encoded gene product during myogenesis.  It is anticipated that
              some of the conclusions derived from these proposed studies will also provide
              new insights into the regulatory processes operating during early muscle
              development in vertebrates.

