Title       : Perceptual Learning in Motion Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9905194

Award Number: 9905194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeo Watanabe takeo@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Visual perception is thought of as a passive and simple event. This view may
              stand on the assumption that visual information goes from the retina to
              higher-level areas in the brain only in a one-way direction. Processing that
              flows in this direction is called  "bottom-up processing." However, recent
              anatomical and physiological findings indicate that there are massive feedback
              pathways in the brain along which information is carried from these
              higher-level brain areas back to low-level areas, including those involved in
              processing visual information. Processing that occurs along these pathways is
              called  "top-down processing." Unfortunately, it is poorly known what role
              top-down processing play in visual information processing in the brain. In the
              meantime, recent physiological studies have pointed out that even the parts of
              the adult brain which process primitive visual information have much higher
              plasticity than had been previously thought. The behavioral manifestation of
              this plasticity is that very primitive visual functions such as discrimination
              of motion direction and orientation of lines can be improved as a result of
              repetitive trials. Thus, an interesting question arises. Does top-down
              processing influence perceptual learning in the early stages of motion
              processing? If so, what is the role of top-down processing? The proposed study
              will examine the nature and role of top-down processing and its interaction
              with bottom-up processing during perceptual learning.  
	A series of
              experiments will be conducted using several human subjects. They will watch a
              stimulus called random-dot cinematogram which consists of small dots moving
              randomly within a certain range of directions. In each stimulus, a global flow
              is perceived to move in one direction just like a flow of a river. This
              indicates that there are at least two stages in early motion processing; the
              first, local motion stage and the second, global motion stages. We will first
              examine the extent to which top-down signals from the stage of global motion
              processing affect lower stages. The results of preliminary experiments suggest
              that during the learning of global motion lower stages may be strongly affected
              by top-down signals. We will conduct experiments to examine this more
              systematically. Second, we will examine the role of the interaction between
              top-down and bottom-up processing in perceptual learning. Essential to our
              experiments is a "bottom-up-absent" random-dot cinematogram which does not
              include any dots moving in directions close to the global motion direction such
              that activation of the intended global motion direction can not be attributed
              to bottom-up signals. Using this bottom-up-absent stimulus, we will examine
              location specificity as well as the stages involved in learning and compare the
              results with those using the conventional "bottom-up-present" stimulus. A
              difference in results between the two types of stimuli would suggest roles for
              bottom-up activation and the interaction between bottom-up and top-down
              processing.

