Title       : Collaborative Research: Biochemical Transformations of Manganese and Toxic
               Metals in a Changing Riparian System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9905654

Award Number: 9905654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Conklin martha@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program
              supports collaborative research by Martha Conklin, University of Arizona,
              Bradley Tebo, University of California at San Diego (Scripps Institute), and
              Christopher Fuller and Judson Harvey of the U. S. Geological Survey.  The award
              is jointly made by the Divisions of Chemistry, Earth Sciences, and Ocean
              Sciences, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.  The team will
              study the movement of manganese and other toxic metals (Zn, Ni, Co, and Cu) in
              a riparian system that contains a stream that receives contaminated ground
              water.  Of particular concern are the biogeochemical constraints on the
              attenuation of Mn(II), the role of Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria, and the effect of
              remediation methods on these processes.  Both laboratory and field studies will
              be carried out and the system will be modeled.  The field site is Pinal Creek,
              Arizona.  Streamwater (hyporheic zone) recharges shallow groundwater flow paths
              with dissolved oxygen, metals, nutrients, and biologically active sediment
              coatings.  The goal of this research is to understand the process of bacterial
              Mn(II) oxidation and precipitation along with co-precipitation of other metals
              under these conditions.  Remediation activities may change local environments
              and cause long-term release of metals already deposited in the system.  The
              results of the study will indicate how removal of other metals is coupled to
              removal of Mn, identify differences between optimal zones for Mn removal and
              sorption/coprecipitation of other trace metals, and determine the stability of
              other metals in the Mn-oxides.  In addition, the study will identify the
              diverse Mn-oxidizing bacteria present, the relationships among different
              strains, and the underlying mechanisms involved in microbial utilization of
              manganese.

This is a collaborative effort involving faculty, scientists,
              research specialists, and graduate and undergraduate students in four
              disciplines:  water chemistry, hydrology, geochemistry, and microbiology.  The
              reseach will elucidate the role of manganese in the biogeochemical cycling of
              metals in a manganese-dominated environmental system.  
