Title       : Acquisition of an Electric Pulse Rock Sample Disaggregator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9905530

Award Number: 9905530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink behrenbrink@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905530
Peucker-Ehrenbrink

This grant provide matching support of the costs
              of purchasing and testing a rock sample disaggregation system relying on
              electric pulse technology.  Electric pulse disaggregation (EPD) systems are
              currently in use by mining companies and at three academic institutions
              worldwide (including the University of Minnesota).  The EPD systems at academic
              institutions were all custom built by a small company in St. Petersburg Russia.
               EPD systems explode lithified samples along grain boundaries; the rapid
              discharge of voltage causes sublimation of weaker cements surrounding mineral
              grains or microfossils leading to rapid expansion of the gases along these
              capillary thin channels.  Relative to traditional crushing methods, EPD systems
              have the potential for rapid extraction of delicate microfossils and
              preservation of soft mineral phases with minimal damage and could therefore
              prove invaluable for micropaleontological, geochemical, and geochronological
              studies.

The instrument to be acquired is manufactured by Maxwell Physics
              International (MPI; formerly PRIMEX Physics International).  The MPI design
              offers multiple advantages over the less costly Russian design, including: 1) 
              completely enclosed high voltage elements, 2)  removable and completely sealed
              sample chamber,  3) low noise operations and, 4) rapidly adjustable input
              voltage.  Perhaps foremost, the MPI design is considered a major safety
              improvement, Russian EPD systems currently in use require operation in separate
              and remote laboratory facilities to ensure complete containment of exploding
              samples and for hearing safety. This EPD system will be made available to
              non-WHOI geoscientists for mineral separation for subsequent geochronological
              and trace element geochemical studies and for separating delicate microfossils.
              

***

