Title       : Mechanism of Chaperone-Dependent Protein Translocation Into the Endoplasmic
               Reticulum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9905988

Award Number: 9905988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Chirico wchirico@netmail.hscbklyn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Molecular chaperones are proteins, often ATPases, that influence the folding and
              conformation of proteins.  Chaperones have been implicated in the process
              whereby proteins are translocated across membranes.  The long term goals of Dr.
              Chirico's laboratory are to understand how chaperones work and how they promote
              the post-translational translocation of precursor proteins from the cytosol
              into organelles.  Attention is being focused on the cytosolic 70 kDa heat shock
              protein (Hsp70) molecular chaperones, because they play a central role in
              protein folding and translocation.  Hsp70s are ATPases that participate in a
              variety of cellular pathways involving protein-protein interactions.  They use
              the energy of binding and hydrolysis of ATP to regulate their oligomeric
              structure and their interactions with polypeptide substrates.  Protein
              modulators, such as DnaJ homologs, regulate Hsp70 activity.  In the eukaryotic
              cytosol an Hsp70 and a compatible DnaJ homolog are sufficient to refold
              denatured proteins.

Most proteins exported from eukaryotic cells pass
              through the secretory pathway.  The first step in this pathway is the
              translocation of a precursor protein from the cytosol into the endoplasmic
              reticulum.  Although presecretory proteins are usually translocated into
              endoplasmic reticulum co-translationally, in the model yeast, Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae, some presecretory proteins, for example prepro-alpha-factor (ppaf),
              are translocated post-translationally.  Post-translational translocation of
              presecretory proteins is mediated by cytosolic, membrane-bound, and lumenal
              proteins.  In S. cerevisiae the cytosolic components include the Hsp70 Ssa1p
              and the DnaJ homolog Ydj1p.  The membrane-bound components include a
              translocation apparatus composed of the heterotrimeric Sec61p complex and four
              other proteins.  One of the lumenal components is the Hsp70 homolog
              Kar2p.

Although results from in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that Ssa1p
              and Ydj1p play important and interacting roles in protein translocation, the
              mechanism of action remains largely unknown.  We hypothesize that Ssa1p and
              Ydj1p maintain the translocation competence of ppaf and deliver it to at least
              one component of the membrane-bound translocation apparatus for subsequent
              translocation.  The goal of this project is to elucidate the mechanism by which
              Ssa1p and Ydj1p cooperate in the post-translational translocation of ppaf into
              the endoplasmic reticulum of yeast.  These experiments will shed new light on
              Hsp70/DnaJ homolog interactions and, therefore, will also interest those
              studying chaperone-dependent protein folding and precursor protein import into
              mitochondria.  The specific aims are to determine the roles of Ssa1p and Ydj1p
              in post-translational translocation, characterize the interactions involving
              Ssa1p, Ydj1p, and ppaf, determine the sequence of chaperone interactions, and
              determine the topography of chaperone-dependent post-translational
              translocation.  The work will be done using biochemical approaches, including
              in vitro reconstitution of translocation into microsomes.  


