Title       : Applications of an Automated C-Axis Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9905738

Award Number: 9905738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry A. Wilen wilen@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

This proposal requests support for applications of an automated
              system for ice fabric analysis. The system combines state-of-the-art digital
              imaging with computer-controlled polarizers to allow the orientation of all the
              grains on an ice thin section to be determined quickly and  reliably. The
              method relies on a principle similar to computer aided tomography (CAT) used
              frequently for medical imaging. A plane containing the c-axis is determined for
              each of several orientations of the ice sample. A straightforward algorithm is
              used to find the unique direction of the c-axis which is consistent with the
              set of measured planes. The system will be integrated with the current
              capability at the National Ice Core Laboratory (NICL) for imaging and sizing
              ice grains to provide a facility which can completely characterize the fabric
              of ice thin sections. This facility will be available to anyone in the ice
              physics community who would like to analyze ice fabrics.

The proponents will
              apply this instrument to specific issues relating ice flow and fabric. The
              project will take advantage of the vast store of samples from GISP2 which have
              been prepared but not analyzed due to time constraints. From this data set, the
              relationships between ice flow and softness indices determined from fabric will
              be investigated, and new analysis techniques to discern active process (e.g.
              grain formation) in the ice will be utilized. The presence of these processes
              has important implications for flow law exponents and the susceptibility of ice
              to deformation instabilities. These studies should point the way toward more
              accurate ice flow models, and also better diagnostics for analyzing ice core
              climate data.


