Title       : Semiparametric Limited Dependent Variable Estimators, with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9905010

Award Number: 9905010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Lewbel arthur.lewbel@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is to construct and empirically apply new semiparametric
              and nonparametric estimators for limited dependent variable models, especially
              binary choice, censored, and truncated regression models. The project employs
              the new estimators in empirical appli-cations having important policy
              implications. The willingness-to pay models are designed to estimate means,
              medians, and other features of the conditional distribution of a population's
              willingness to pay for public goods. The censored regression estimators will be
              used to assess the effects of tax and income policies on the demand for
              durables and other consumption categories in which many "zeros" are observed.
              The binary choice estimator will be applied to model female labor supply
              decisions, allowing for badly measured covariates such as household asset
              income.

More specifically, the project develops a root n consistent,
              asymptotically normal binary choice model estimator that permits some general
              forms of unknown heteroscedasticity, along with extensions to ordered choice,
              multinomial choice, and censored re-gression models.  The binary choice
              estimator is particularly well suited for studying the "Willingness-To-Pay"
              models that arise in valuing public goods. The investigator continues his work
              on this class of applications, along with variants of the estimator that use a
              data sorting method to eliminate the need for a first stage kernel density
              estimator.

A panel data extension of the estimator is also developed. This
              extension permits estimation of coefficients in a binary choice panel data
              model with fixed effects, weakly exogenous regressors, and unknown error
              distribution.  Extensions of the estimator to handle endogenous or mismeasured
              regres-sors will also be investigated. These and the panel data extension will
              be applied to an empirical study of labor supply decisions.  Separate from the
              above, a new set of nonparametric estimators for censored and truncated
              regression models are proposed. In these models, both the la-tent regression
              function and the distribution of the errors are nonparametrically identified
              and estimated.


