Title       : Waterbone Self-Assembled Monolayer Films for Stiction Reduction in Silicon Based
               Micro-Electromechanical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9905957

Award Number: 9905957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srini Raghavan srini@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre A. Deymier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905957
Raghavan
The objective of the proposed research is to develop
              chemistry and techniques for the application of hydrophobic coatings onto
              polysilicon based MEMS structures from aqueous media. The chemical system would
              consist of two micelle-forming components, a water-soluble silane and a
              surfactant, dissolved in an aqueous solution. By using pH as a master variable,
              the attachment of silane micelles as a monolayer would be effected. Using Monte
              Carlo simulations, the effect of the chemical structure of the surfactant and
              silane on the attachment will be analyzed and optimal conditions for attachment
              will be explored. The applied coatings will be tested for various
              characteristics such as hydrophobicity, orientation, and stability. The metric
              for the success of the proposed research program is the identification of
              conditions required for the formation of thermally stable, highly hydrophobic
              (water contact angles of greater than 120) coatings which, when applied to
              polysilicon surfaces, are capable of preventing drying and in-use
              stiction.

The Sensor Products Division of Motorola located in Phoenix is the
              industrial (GOALI) partner in this research program. Motorola will facilitate
              testing of the developed coatings in micromachined structures such as
              cantilever beam arrays and in products such as accelerometers. The industrial
              partner will assess the compatibility of the chemicals used and processes
              developed in the research program with commercial fabrication
              environments.

It is anticipated that the proposed research program with
              Motorola as the industrial partner, will provide an excellent opportunity for
              the principal investigator, his students and collaborators to contribute to
              scientific knowledge and solutions to a problem of great importance to
              industries involved in the manufacture of MEMS structures. The students
              involved in the project will gain knowledge in the area of applied surface
              chemistry, coatings and Monte Carlo simulations and will be able to apply this
              knowledge to an important industrial problem. Additionally, the interaction
              with the industry will present the students a very valuable opportunity to
              learn about the different facets of an industrial process.
***

