Title       : Collaborative Research on Lobbying
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9905195

Award Number: 9905195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80569              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Baumgartner frankb@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research project involves hundreds of interviews with
              Washington policy advocates in order to investigate how groups compete for
              political influence through the arguments, evidence, and issue definitions they
              offer to shape the policymaking process.  An initial sample of approximately
              100 lobbyists is selected based on the frequency of their involvement in
              government lobbying.  Each of these individuals is interviewed in-person and
              asked to describe their advocacy efforts on the most recent policy matter of
              interest to their groups.  Additional interviews with an average of five
              leading policy makers per issue will then be conducted.  The purpose of these
              interviews is to learn about the strategies and arguments used by the different
              coalitions on each of the 100 issues.  Additional data about each issue is
              collected from secondary sources.  Since some of the issues to be chosen are
              likely to be small and relatively unknown to the public, interviews may be the
              only way to learn about the policy development process.  Other issues in the
              sample are likely to involve extensive public debate, large-scale media
              attention, and a wealth of publicly available information.   The result will be
              approximately 100 carefully collected issue-modules representing a sample of
              issues attracting the attention of lobbyists.   The goal is to collect as much
              information as possible about the public and private efforts at
              issue-definition, arm-twisting, public relations, and scientific arguing
              occurring in a random sample of policy debates.  In this way, the project is
              distinct from prior work in that the investigators have avoided focusing only
              on PAC contributions, media campaigns, or any other single tactic of
              lobbying.

A team of scholars working with graduate students conducts the
              multi-year data collection.  The resulting databases not only fuel their
              research but by making each of the case studies as well as a summary set of
              statistical indicators available over the Web, they generate more interest in
              the study of lobbying behavior.  The comparable and detailed case studies allow
              scholars to make their own comparisons of various group lobbying activities,
              hopefully providing the empirical back-bone on which much further research can
              be based.


