Title       : Tissue Response to Fibro-Porous Biomaterials: Mechanical Studies Versus Surface
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9905913

Award Number: 9905913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Sanders jsanders@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Olerud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5345,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9905913
Sanders
Virtually all current implantable medical devices suffer from
              an important limitation.  Within approximately a month after implantation, the
              body makes and surrounds them with a capsule of fibrous soft tissue.  Formation
              of the fibrous capsule is a natural defense against a foreign intruder.  The
              capsule is problematic for biomechanical devices such as artificial ligaments,
              tendons, and heart valves because it prevents the implant from attaching
              effectively to the natural tissue structures.  The implant is thus mechanically
              unstable with its surrounding environment.  Further, biochemical communication
              such as needed for an implant intended to release a prescribed amount of a drug
              over time is hampered by the capsule.  The capsule prevents effective
              diffusion.  Ideally, biomaterial designs would be changed so that implants
              appear natural to the body, not foreign, so that the fibrous capsule does not
              form in the first place.

Preliminary research from our laboratory indicates
              that if polymer fibers that make up implants are very small, on the order of
              natural collagen fiber dimensions in soft tissues (0.5 to 3.0 mm), then the
              fibrous capsule does not form.  Possibly the body is convinced the polymer is a
              natural structure thus does not reject it.  Potentially, if validated in a
              systematic scientific manner, fiber dimensions (diameter and spacing) could be
              utilized in biomaterial design to create more effective implants.

The
              purpose of this research is to systematically evaluate the influence of fiber
              diameter and fiber spacing on the body's response to fibro-porous materials. 
              So that a comparison of the influence of these architectural features with
              chemical features more traditionally used in biomaterial design can be
              assessed, tissue response to the new implants is compared with that for
              materials with different surface chemistries.

No traditional biomaterials
              fabrication method exists for making materials with very small diameter fibers.
               Thus a technology used mainly in non-biomedical industries called
              electrospinning is pursued and applied here.  Once fabricated, the new
              materials will be evaluated in a skin model so as to allow inflammatory
              response and fibrous capsule thickness to be assessed.

The significance of
              this research is to apply an innovative material and fabrication method to
              create new candidate biomaterial implants.  Potentially, through a systematic
              analysis, designs that eliminate the fibrous capsule will be created.  The
              approach could lead to a new biomaterials fabrication technology.  The project
              also serves as a model for multi-disciplinary research, incorporating
              mechanical engineering, polymer chemistry, and cell biology into an innovative
              design approach.  The project also includes an important undergraduate research
              educational effort.  Research opportunities for a number of undergraduates are
              provided.  Further, creation and dissemination of material to faculty on
              effective approaches to advising of undergraduates in research is included
              within this grant application.


