Title       : Propagation of Uncertainty in the Field Extrapolation of Laboratory Experiments:
               Application to Dioxin Contaminated Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9905454

Award Number: 9905454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Goovaerts goovaert@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Adriaens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,9198,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9905454

The investigators develop a Monte-Carlo based approach to account for
              major sources of uncertainty that affect the extrapolation ("scaling up") of
              laboratory results to the field.  These include the uncertainty attached to the
              parameters of laboratory-based predictive models, and the uncertainty about the
              spatial distribution of environmental factors that are inputs to these
              numerical models.  The methodology is applied to the simulation and mapping of
              dioxin degradation (dechlorination) in general, and 2,3,7,8-TCDD fluxes in
              particular, in estuarine sediments.  The project involves the development of
              models relating the dioxin dechlorination rate to various input variables
              (salinity and respiratory conditions, dioxin concentrations, methane
              production, sulfate reduction), the geostatistical modeling of uncertainty
              about the spatial distribution of input variables through multivariate
              nonparametric stochastic simulation, and the analysis of uncertainty
              propagation through Latin hypercube sampling of the probability distributions
              of model parameters and input variables.  These risk assessments are accounted
              for in decision-making processes, such as identification of locations of
              largest uncertainty where additional samples should be collected, and in the
              long-term prediction of temporal trends in dioxin
              concentrations.

Dioxin-contaminated sediments pose serious threats for the
              environment and can entail costly clean-up to maintain the nation's waterways. 
              To avoid unnecessarily stringent remediation efforts, it is critical to map
              these contaminated sediments and to predict the current concentrations and how
              they could evolve in the near future.  Much research has been devoted so far to
              laboratory experimentation, which allowed a better understanding of the
              mechanisms governing the degradation of these contaminants under relevant
              ambient conditions as a function of sediment biogeochemistry.  Extrapolation of
              these results to the field is not straightforward because of the spatial
              variability of the contaminant concentrations and of the environmental factors
              (e.g. salinity, respiratory conditions) controlling their degradation.  This
              research develops a methodology to simulate the spatial distribution of dioxin
              concentrations and their degradation in time.  Multiple equally-likely
              scenarios are generated to assess the uncertainty arising from our imperfect
              knowledge of degradation mechanisms and of the spatial distribution of
              contaminants, in particular when sampling is sparse.  The approach is
              illustrated for the Lower Passaic River/Newark Bay estuary because there is an
              extensive temporal and spatial data base for this estuary.  Success of this
              research will help scientists and engineers to meet the increasing challenge to
              combine various sources of information acquired at field and laboratory scales
              with different levels of uncertainty (measurement and prediction errors).  It
              may prove useful in determining long-term risks posed by dioxin-contaminated
              sediments, and aid in the development of risk-based sediment management
              strategies.


