Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Framing Processes and Response Repertoires in
               Multiethnic States: Explaining Levels of Contentious Peace in Kyrgyzstan,
               Kazakhstan, and Latvia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9905512

Award Number: 9905512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8001               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Callaghy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The project studies the evolving relationship between the Russian minority and
              the national majority (or titular) communities of three Soviet successor
              states:  Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Latvia.  Based on four months of field
              work in each state, the project's primary objective is to provide plausible
              answers to the following research questions.  First, what explains the
              surprisingly peaceful character of the Russian-titular relationship in each of
              these states?  Second, what explains the variation in the degree to which
              Russians in each state support attempts by titular elites to create their own
              newly independent state?  Specifically, why are Russian-Latvian relations
              slightly more than contentioius than Russian-Kazakh relations, and why are both
              of these relationships far more contentious than Russian-Kyrgyz relations? 
              Field research explores the hypothesis that how titular elites materially and
              symbolically portary their desires for national self-assertion, and the
              appropriate role of the Russian minority in this context, shapes the collective
              Russian response to attempts by titular elites to build their own newly
              independent state.
	Three research methods are applied in each state.  First,
              policy initiatives and rhetoric of the titular elite are analyzed in order to
              explore how this elite communicates with the Russian minority and how it
              institutionalizes the status of this group.  Second, data on the behavior of
              the Russian minority, both cooperative and antagonistic, are analyzed to
              explore the Russian community's response to the titular community, its
              policies, and its rhetoric.  Third, the Russian viewpoint, in terms of the
              choices which the Russian community defines as realistic in reaction to
              decisions made by titular elites, is analyzed.  Interviews with key
              representatives of the Russian community provide data on the Russian viewpoint.
               This Russian perception sheds light on how titular policies and rhetoric
              affect the behavior of the Russian minority.
	Because the project is based on
              cross-regional work in post-communist Europe (Latvia) and Eurasia (Kyrgyzstan,
              Kazahkstan), it explores post-communist development in general.  Specifically,
              the project addresses the broad and theoretically challenging question of the
              conditions under  which multiethnic states in any region of the world can
              weaken the potential for, or avert, violent ethnic conflict.  In addition,
              because it examines the development of ethnic relations in Soviet successor
              states, the project provides insight into the degree of political stability
              characterizing each state, which is increasingly relevent in potentially
              divisive multiethnic states of the post-Cold War era.   

