Title       : Protein Mimetics Based on Beta Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9905566

Award Number: 9905566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488026             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. DeGrado wdegrado@mail.med.upenn  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Scialdone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The foci of this research are threefold. First, methods will be devised for the
              practical, asymmetric synthesis of beta-amino acids.  Second, the
              thermodynamics of L+2 helix formation in aqueous solution will be determined. 
              Third, beta-peptides that fold into well-defined tertiary and quaternary
              structures in aqueous solution will be constructed.  These studies will
              represent a significant step towards design of a variety of advanced polymers
              with predetermined shapes and functional properties. 

With this Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              of the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Directorate are supporting the
              research of Dr. William F. DeGrado of the Department of Biochemistry and
              Biophysics at the University of Pennsylvania and Dr. Mark A. Scialdone of the
              Biochemical Sciences and Engineering DuPont Life Sciences Enterprise.   The
              goal of the research is to design and study non-biological polymers that fold
              into unique three-dimensional structures. Specifically, chains of beta-amino
              acids will be designed that fold, in water, to give not only predetermined
              secondary structures, but also tertiary and quaternary structures.   The work
              has broad implications for the preparation of new materials of interest to
              materials science and to the pharmaceutical industry.  Further, the research 
              provides an exciting training opportunity for postdoctoral researchers since
              the participants will gain both academic and industrial experience.

