Title       : Concrete Filled Tube Braced Frame Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9905797

Award Number: 9905797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Roeder croeder@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. MacRae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Concrete filled tubes (CFT) have been used as columns for seismic resistant
              construction, since they offer significant advantages over either steel or
              reinforced concrete.  The concrete fill provides compressive strength and
              stiffness to the steel, and it reduces the potential for local buckling.  The
              steel tube provides formwork to minimize the cost of the concrete placement and
              reinforces the concrete for axial tension, bending and shear as well as
              enhancing its ductility.  CFT columns are particularly well suited for braced
              frames, since the large axial strength and stiffness are needed, and braced
              frames constitute the majority of the buildings constructed with CFT
              columns.

While CFT columns are desirable for braced frames all research to
              date has focused on moment frame connections, combined loading of CFT members
              and bond stress in CFT elements.  Braced frame-CFT column connections are
              fundamentally different than moment frame connections, since they transfer
              relatively large axial forces to the column, which must be distributed between
              the steel and concrete.  The ductility demands are different in braced frames
              because dissipation is achieved through brace buckling rather than flexural
              yielding of the beams.  

This study will focus on the design of
              brace-beam-CFT column connections.  Several prototype connections, which offer
              economic and performance advantages, will be identified, and detailed
              nonlinear; computer analyses of the connections will be performed.  These
              analyses will evaluate expected ductility and fracture potential, identify
              critical locations, and identify concerns with each prototype connection.  The
              most promising connection alternatives will be selected for experimental
              evaluation.  Design methods will be developed for these selected connections,
              and an experimental study will be used to evaluate the design proposals and
              verify ductility and seismic performance.  Three brace-beam-column connection
              subassemblages will be tested under inelastic cyclic loading.  The specimens
              will be of moderately large scale so that they provide full scale simulation of
              connection in buildings of 3 to 6 stories and moderately large scale models of
              connections for tall buildings.

