Title       : Cross-Commodity Equilibrium Pricing: Theoretical Implications and Empirical
               Tests of Forward and Option Prices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9905543

Award Number: 9905543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chester S. Spatt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Duane Seppi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan Routledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cross-Commodity Equilibrium Pricing: Theoretical Implications and Empirical
              Tests of Forward and Option Prices

Project Abstract

In this project we
              are developing an equilibrium model of cross-commodity pricing in a setting in
              which one or more input commodities can be transformed (converted) into one or
              more output commodities.  This allows us to analyze the operational and
              physical options that emerge as a consequence of the ability to transform
              commodity products and determine their effect on equilibrium price processes. 
              Our framework extends single commodity models of the storage option and
              convenience yield to a general multicommodity framework that incorporates
              conversion as well as storage options.  The project offers contributions along
              several dimensions.  We show the existence and uniqueness of a "well-behaved"
              equilibrium with K commodities with costly storage and costly conversion in a
              flexible specification that includes as special cases (1) the use of
              alternative fuels to produce electricity (many inputs, one output), (2) the
              refinement of crude oil into alternative refined products such as jet fuel,
              gasoline or heating oil (one input, many outputs) and (3) the movement of a
              commodity over a geographic network.  The comparative statics properties of the
              model are analyzed.  The model delivers results that are consistent with the
              stylized facts in the market for electricity, including the behavior of the
              'spark' spread between electricity and a storable potential fuel.  We will
              apply the model to additional substantive contexts and calibrate and test the
              model empirically to explore the ability of our cross-commodity restrictions
              and the conversion options to explain the dynamic features of pricing and
              hedging across commodities as well as the exercise of the associated physical
              options to store, refine and distribute commodities.


