Title       : New Chemistry of Phosphatrane Bases and of Disilanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9905354

Award Number: 9905354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Verkade jverdake@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor John Verkade, Chemistry Department, Iowa State University is supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry
              Division for investigations into free radical silicon chemistry and secondary
              studies of the phosphatrane reactivity. Thermally formed silane free-radicals
              will be reagents for the formation of aromatic molecules by alkyne
              cyclotrimerization. A range of alkynes will be investigated to define the range
              in substituent size and electronic properties that the cyclotrimerization
              process can tolerate. The possibility of incorporating two different alkynes
              into the aromatic product and of using various disilanes and other group 14
              cogners will be evaluated. A series of disilicon ring systems will be formed by
              reactions of disilanes with stoichiometric amounts of alkynes and will be used
              to produce oxygen bridged disilcyclohexandiene polymers. A minor portion of the
              investigation will target the synthesis of chiral and novel phosphatrane
              "superbases." 

Alkyne trimerization is an extremely useful transformation
              that converts acetylenes into aromatic molecules. The simplest example is the
              cyclization of acetylene to benzene. Since complex aromatic molecules are found
              throughout nature and are encountered in many, e.g., pharmaceuticals, new
              methods for preparing them are very significant. This study will target a class
              of silicon compounds that can facilitate the trimerization. A set of cyclic
              molecules that contain two silicon atoms will also be prepared. These will be
              used as precursors to form new polymers that will be more robust than the
              silicone polymers, which they resemble.

