Title       : Control Design with Real-Time Implementation for Rapid Thermal Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9905729

Award Number: 9905729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Nazli Gundes gundes@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M G. Kabuli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The long term goal of this project is to establish a multi-disciplinary
              research program on control theory, design, and real-time implementation for
              Rapid Thermal Process chambers.  In the initial two years of the project, the
              focus will be on preliminary modeling, control design, and real-time
              implementation issues.
Rapid Thermal Processes demand fast tracking control
              laws that achieve near uniform spatial temperature distributions across a
              semiconductor wafer during both transient and quasi steady-state phases of the
              process.  Due to the radiative effects in a relatively small chamber volume and
              limitations in remote measurement techniques, achieving the stringent
              performance specifications for Rapid Thermal Process chambers becomes a very
              challenging model-based nonlinear design problem.  To meet future technical
              challenges in microelectronics manufacturing, it is essential to develop modern
              control and optimization techniques with strong emphasis on real-time
              implementation.
The ultimate goal of this effort is to pose and solve control
              design problems so that the control laws, when implemented on the on-site
              testbed (Rapid Thermal Chemical Vapor Deposition Epitaxial Reactor), result in
              real-time performance improvement and run-to-run repeatability.  In order to
              pose the problem in a control setting, the most important step is to develop
              mathematical models of the process with varying levels of complexity: from
              complex validation models to simpler models suitable for control design.  This
              step is closely linked to the real-time implementation setup since it involves
              chamber-specific actuator and sensor interfacing.  Moreover, analytical model
              derivation based on first-principles is completely dependent on
              chamber-specific properties (such as material, geometry, actuation,
              measurements) and the desired reaction recipes.  Therefore, this stage of the
              project involves direct interaction and non-trivial hardware/software
              interfacing issues specific to the on-site testbed.  Since these research
              results can be immediately tested on the on-site testbed, the effort will start
              with control techniques based on simple analytical models, assess achievable
              performance limitations by implementing the designs, and then increase model
              and control design complexity to meet the desired process performance. 
              Although modeling, control design and real-time implementation objectives must
              be carried out simultaneously to assess performance, the main effort in the
              initial two years will be allocated to modeling and real-time interfacing
              problems.
The unique advantage available to the project is the on-site Rapid
              Thermal Process reactor, which will be used as the project testbed in
              collaboration with the Microelectronics Group in the Electrical and Computer
              Engineering Department at the University of California, Davis.  The proposed
              research will complement the ongoing work of the Microelectronics Group by
              providing crucial systematic modeling approaches and controller design methods
              for real-time implementation.  The beginning stages of this research will
              initiate interaction between the two research groups and will enhance the
              research and educational experience of graduate students in the inherently
              different areas of control systems and microelectronics.  Through this
              multi-disciplinary teamwork, graduate students involved in this research will
              obtain valuable practical training that will prepare them for engineering
              challenges in future industry and research positions.  It is also expected that
              this research will lead in the 
future to experimental set-tips that can be
              used as design exercises for graduate and undergraduate control courses.



