Title       : Dissertation Research: A Dynamic View of Paleoindian Assemblages at the Hell Gap
               Site, Wyoming: Reconstructing Lithic Technological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1993   
File        : a9317353

Award Number: 9317353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11102              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317353  Meltzer    Under the direction of Dr. David Meltzer, Mr. Frederick
              Sellet will  collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze lithic
               material collected from the site of Hell Gap Wyoming. Discovered  over 30
              years ago this site is crucial for understanding the early  prehistory of the
              Western United States because it contains well  preserved faunal and lithic
              remains which span approximately half  the recorded length of known human
              occupation in the New World. The  site has provided an important input into the
              definition of  cultures and lithic types. Because Hell Gap is located in close 
              proximity to stone source areas, the assemblage is particularly  rich in stone
              tools and manufacturing byproducts. Unfortunately  because of the untimely
              deaths of the two main excavators the  materials have not been properly
              analyzed and published. Mr. Sellet  will help to remedy this problem through
              his work on one important  class of data: the lithic materials. He will study
              both the raw  materials themselves in an attempt to determine stone utilization
               and examine how tools were manufactured. Taken together, these data  will
              provide insight into Paleoindian mobility and subsistence  strategies and how
              these changed over time.    Stone tools serve as cultural markers and can often
              differentiate  one group or time period from another. Traditionally
              archaeologists  have examined lithic materials with such goals in mind. In
              recent  years however it has been recognized that additional information  such
              as how people move over the landscape, how they schedule their  activities and
              whether they curate materials or practice an  expedient technology could also
              be addressed. Taken together such  information provides insight into cultural
              adaptation. While  techniques to address such goals are now well developed in
              Europe,  they have been little applied in the United States. Mr. Sellet's 
              research will both provide information about the Hell Gap site and  potentially
              serve as a methodological g uide for New World  archaeologists.    The project
              is also important because it will provide valuable data  of interest to many
              archaeologists and increase understanding of  U.S. prehistory. It will assist
              in the training of a promising  young scientist.  ***
