Title       : Age-related Variation in Metabolism and Temperature Sensitivity in Muscle:
               Mechanisms and Evolutionary Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1995   
File        : a9317969

Award Number: 9317969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Marden jhm10@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317969  Marden    Physiological processes in animal tissues are strongly 
              affected by temperature, with resultant effects on whole-  organism performance
              and fitness. The precise manner in  which tissue and organismal performance are
              affected by  temperature is called "thermal sensitivity". Studies of  lower
              vertebrates have led to an understanding of some of  the molecular and cellular
              mechanisms that determine thermal  sensitivity, and to an appreciation of how
              variation in  thermal sensitivity among species affects their geographic 
              distribution and ecology. However, current evolutionary  models lack consensus
              regarding fitness of variation in  thermal sensitivity, with competing models
              concentrating on  how thermal sensitivity affects niche breadth, aerobic 
              performance capacity, high-temperature tolerance during peak  activity, and
              compromises between high- and low- temperature  performance capacity. Ability
              to distinguish among these  competing hypotheses is hampered by the scarcity of
              species  in which there is both i) variation in thermal sensitivity  among
              individuals, and ii) ability to observe and measure  fitness variation among
              animals possessing different thermal  sensitivities. This project takes
              advantage of the presence  of large-scale variation in thermal sensitivity
              among  different-aged individuals in a dragonfly, and the ability  to
              manipulate and observe these abundant and highly active  animals in a field
              setting. Results of these experiments  will allow critical tests of the
              competing models for the  evolution of thermal sensitivity.       This project
              will also make a detailed examination of       the  cellular and molecular
              mechanisms that affect variation in  thermal sensitivity of muscle performance.
              Preliminary data  indicate that a switch from anaerobic to aerobic metabolism 
              accompanies the age-related change in thermal sensitivity,  and that variation
              in expression of a calcium regulatory  protein, troponin-t, may be particularly
              important in  determining  how mu scle functions in changing thermal and pH 
              conditions. An opportunity to enhance our understanding of  the basic
              physiology of troponin-t is particularly  significant, since presence of this
              molecule in the blood  stream has recently become the most sensitive clinical 
              indicator of severe myocardial infraction in humans(i.e.  heart attack).      
              In summary, this project will examine physiology and  ecology of a model
              organism in order to provide new data and  perspectives that will influence our
              understanding of both  basic evolutionary processes and muscle physiology.  ***
