Title       : The Contribution of New Mutations to Genotype-Environment Interaction for
               Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9317754

Award Number: 9317754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trudy F C. Mackay trudy_mackay@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Fry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317754  Mackay   Natural populations of animals and plants typically harbor
              considerable genetically-based variation in ability to survive and reproduce in
              particular habitats or environments.  A common observation is that the fitness
              of a genotype in one environment is only weakly predictive of its fitness in
              others.  This situation, termed genotype-environment interaction, is often
              interpreted to mean that there is a "trade-off", so that the natural selection
              cannot produce a genotype with high fitness in each set of environments.  An
              alternative hypothesis that has received little attention is that individuals
              carry deleterious mutations that vary in the strength of their effects in
              different environments.  The latter hypothesis has very different implications
              from the trade-off hypothesis for such issues as why ecological specialization
              evolves, the factors maintaining genetic variations in populations, and how new
              species form.  The mutation hypothesis will be investigated using the fruit fly
              Drosophila melangaster.   Genotype-environment interaction is important in
              animal and plant breeding, because it means that lines that perform well under
              one set of conditions will not necessarily perform well under other conditions:
              for example, a cattle breed that does well in Texas climate may not do so well
              in Minnesota.  The full practical implications of genotype-environment
              interaction, however, depend on which of the above two hypotheses better
              accounts for it.  Under the trade-off hypothesis, large improvements in
              performance in any one environment should be possible, but only at the expense
              of performance of others .  Under the mutation hypothesis, in contrast, it
              should be possible to create lines that perform relatively well in a range of
              environments.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    v       ~                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       !         !         !              F  
                                                                                        (   
              Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                   .             "           
               h     Mc eMc e      4                 7        Crystal Blackshear Crystal
              Blackshear                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
