Title       : Structure/Function of PKR and eIF-2a using vaccinia virus K3L Gene Product
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9317264

Award Number: 9317264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary Jagus jagus@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Jagus  9305314  The objective of this proposal is to elucidate the mechanism of 
              action the dsRNA-dependent elF-2cx specific protein kinase, PKR, at  the
              molecular structural level, utilizing a vaccinia virus gene  product, pK3, that
              functions as a pseudosubstrate.  PKR, a potent  inhibitor of protein synthesis,
              is an enzyme that serves a  regulatory role in host defense against viral
              infection, cell  proliferation, cell differentiation, and the inflammatory
              response.   The specific aims are 1) to identify the substrate binding 
              domain(s) of PKR using pK3, the vaccinia virus homologue of elF-2cx  that binds
              stably to PKR; 2) to confirm the results of the invitro  studies in vivo, using
              wild-type and variant forms of PKR  transiently expressed in COS-1 cells, and
              3) to extrapolate the  conclusions of elF-2cx itself.  The methods to be
              employed are recombinant DNA techniques,  polymerase chain reaction,
              site-specific mutagenesis,  deoxynucleotide sequencing, in vitro transcription
              and translation,  protein kinase assays, gel electrophoresis, immunoblotting, 
              immunoprecipitation, and expression of recombinant proteins in  bacteria and
              mammalian cells.  PKR plays a key role in the inhibition of viral growth by 
              interferon, in the maintenance of low proliferation rates, the  initiation of
              differentiation, and the production of cytokines and  cellular adhesion
              molecules.  Despite the importance of this  enzymes and wealth of information
              recently uncovered on its  regulatory domains, little is currently known about
              how it  interacts with its only known cellular substrate, elF02cx.  This 
              proposal represents a strategy to identify substrate binding  domains in PKR
              using a vaccinia virus homologue to elF-cx that  binds stably to PKR.  The
              ability of pK3 to form tight associations  with PKR, as well as its homology to
              elF-2cx, forms the basis of a  simple binding assay to investigate functional
              domains of PKR and  pK3, and by extrapolation of elF-2cx.  %%%  The synthesis
              of proteins is accomplished by a c omplex machinery  involving hundreds of
              proteins and is regulated by the protein  synthesis factor, elF-2.  elF-2
              exists in two forms, an active and  an inactive form.  The change from an
              active to an inactive form of  elF-2 is accomplished by a modifying protein
              called PKR.  To  increase our understanding of the mechanism of action of PKR
              at a  molecular level, we will identify the site within the molecule that 
              interacts with elF-2.  The gene for PKR will be mutated and the  variant PKR's
              will be expressed in bacteria and purified.  The  activities of the variant
              PKR's will be compared for their ability  to bind to a competitor for elF-2,
              pK3, a protein produced in  vaccinia virus infected cells.  The results from
              these studies  using isolated components will be confirmed by expressing the 
              mutant PKR's in a model cell system and monitoring their ability to  modify
              elF-2.  PKR plays a key role in many cellular processes such as the  inhibition
              of viral growth by interferon, the initiation of cell  differentiation, and the
              production of molecules that promote cell-  cell interaction.  In addition, PKR
              seems to function as a tumor  suppressor gene.  ***
