Title       : Problems in Evolutionary Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9317683

Award Number: 9317683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Charlesworth debchar@pondside.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Charlesworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9317683 Charlesworth          Mutation of genes to alleles with deleterious
              effects on survival or fertility occurs in the populations of all living
              organisms, and the net rate of mutation summed up over all the loci in the
              genome of any organism is now thought to be very high.  Severely deleterious
              mutations are the cause of many diseases in human populations, and mutations
              with lesser effects are probably most important in human disease, though little
              is known about these as they are difficult to study.          In a preliminary
              study, the investigators found that the occurrence of deleterious mutations in
              a region of the genome affects the evolution of DNA sequences in the same
              region.  They have found that genetic variability at nucleotide sites that
              themselves do not affect fitness can be greatly reduced in such a region.  The
              investigators will quantify this effect in relation to distances between the
              genes on the genetic map, and will extend studies to sequence differences that
              do have slight fitness effects.  It is important in interpreting such data to
              include such biologically important phenomena as deleterious mutations of loci
              nearby in the genetic map to those under study.  This has not previously been
              done in theoretical studies.   %%%          Results will have implications for
              the interpretation of data on variability within populations and on
              evolutionary divergence between populations.  Such divergence in DNA sequences
              has b een used as a "molecular clock" to date the times of origin of species,
              and has also been used to infer that natural selection caused the observed
              differences.  When other loci in the genetic background are included in the
              models, in addition to the loci under study, the inference of natural selection
              may become less certain, and that the rate of the molecular clock may prove to
              be influenced by the locations of genes in the genetic map, and by the level of
              inbreeding populations.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
