Title       : An Imaging Polarimeter for the Study of Biological Principles of Polarized-Light
               Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1995     
File        : a9317927

Award Number: 9317927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Cronin 3014553449  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317927  Cronin  Light in nature frequently becomes linearly polarized due to 
              its interactions with  scattering particles in the atmosphere and under water,
              and  to its reflection from biological and nonliving dielectric  surfaces.
              Under some circumstances, these events can produce  light that is almost
              completely polarized, and partially  linearly polarized light is widely present
              in nature.  Because the interactions of light that produce partial  linear
              polarization are complex, the actual pattern of  polarization in any visual
              field is similarly complicated.  Animals have exploited the polarization of
              natural light for  a variety of functions, including navigation, orientation, 
              location of water surfaces, and enhancement of visual  contrast. In fact, it
              now seems that the great majority of  animal species have visual
              specializations for the detection  and analysis of partially linearly polarized
              light, and it  is probable that for many of these species polarization  vision
              plays a similarly significant role as color vision  plays for species like
              ourselves. However, the study of  polarization vision has been limited by our
              inability to  visualize or analyze natural fields of polarization. In this 
              proposal, we describe a design for a new, imaging  polarimeter that will be
              capable of providing complete  descriptions of the distribution of polarized
              light  (e-vector orientation, percent polarization, and intensity)  at
              single-pixel resolution throughout an extended  visual field. The instrument
              will be completely portable,  and usable both in terrestrial and aquatic
              environments. It  will obtain polarization images rapidly and will present the 
              data on line, using false-color displays to convey the  polarization
              information in a form intuitively interpretable  by a human observer. All data
              will be stored in numerical  form for appropriate mathematical analysis, making
              possible  transformations into the visual systems of animals. We  believe that
              such an instrument will open new windows into   the sensory worlds of other
              species, and will have broad  application for studies of biology, perception,
              and machine  vision.
