Title       : Acquisition of Cryoinstrumentation for Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9317797

Award Number: 9317797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Roberson robby2@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Chandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. McGaughey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Kenneth Hoober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317797  Roberson  Cryotechniques for fixation and preparation of biological
              specimens for electron microscopy result in superior preservation of
              biochemical composition, physiological condition and ultrastructural detail of
              the cell's living state.  Funds are requested to purchase two items of
              equipment representing the state-of-the-art in cryotechnology.  The HPF 010
              Bal-Tec High Pressure Freezing Machine provides the only means for cryofixing
              tissue samples up to 0.6 mm in thickness with a total volume of 1mm3 without
              the formation of damaging ice crystals that occur when samples are frozen at
              ambient pressure.  The FSU 010 Bal-Tec Freeze Substitution Unit furnishes an
              automated system for freeze substitution of cryofixed samples increasing the
              quality and reproducibility of the freeze substitution process, allowing low
              temperature infiltration and polymerization of resins, and reducing the chances
              of secondary ice crystal formation.  These instruments do not exist at Arizona
              State University.  The equipment will be housed in a multi-user electron
              microscopy facility where they will be primarily available for use by the
              principle investigators of this proposal, as well as by other faculty and
              students from three departments (botany, microbiology, and zoology).  Because a
              high pressure freezing machine is not available anywhere in the southwestern
              United States, usage by investigators from other regional institutions will be
              accommodated to the best of our ability. Such equipment will support the
              ongoing research at Arizona State University and augment our existing
              instrumentation.  The proposed equipment is essentia l to address timely
              questions in cell biology such as:  1) mechanisms controlling fungal growth and
              development (Roberson), 2) signal transduction during embryogenesis (Capco), 3)
              structural organization of extracellular matrix during fertilization and
              development (Chandler), 4) interactions of anti-HIV drugs (McGaughey), and 5)
              membrane biogenesis during photosynthesis (Hoober).  Arizona State University
              will match 40.3% of the total cost for this equipment.  of biological specimens
              for electron microscopy result in superio                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        !         !              F                             ?            
              ?                                 (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial      
                                    ~   "             h      "   :   :        '   >         5
                     Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
