Title       : A Fast-Cycling Magnet, 3He Cryostat Instrument for Spin- Polarized EXAFS and
               X-Ray MCD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9317942

Award Number: 9317942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Cramer spcramer@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9164,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop a new instrument for both x-ray  magnetic circular
              dichroism (XMCD) and hard x-ray spin-  polarized EXAFS (SPEXAFS) experiments.
              In 1992, our group  was the first to demonstrate soft x-ray MCD on a dilute, 
              paramagnetic bioinorganic sample, using the Fe center in the  proteinPyrococcus
              furiosus rubredoxin. Temperatures below 4K  and fields near 6 Tesla were used
              to fully magnetize the  sample. Although this experiment was a successful proof
              of  principal, better instrumentation is needed to fully exploit  the
              tremendous potential of this technique.    In the XMCD experiment, the
              absorption of left- and right-  circularly polarized x-rays by a magnetized
              sample is  compared. The resulting difference spectrum can reveal the 
              orientation of the magnetic moment of the x-rav absorbing  element. Comparison
              with the field direction then reveals  whether this species is
              ferromagnetically or  antiferromagnetically coupled with respect to the bulk 
              magnetization. In the related SPEXAFS experiment, changes in  the EXAFS with
              photon helicity are used to distinguish the  spin-orientation of neighboring
              atoms. The combination of  the two techniques thus reveals a great deal about
              the local  magnetic structure.    The goal for the new instrument is to achieve
              one to two  orders of magnitude greater sensitivity for the XMCD and  SPEXAFS
              of dilute bioinorganic samples. We hope to  accomplish this primarily by
              canceling monochromator and  beam instabilities with a rapidly switching
              magnetic field.  We also hope to increase the efficiency of fluorescence 
              photon detection by capturing a larger solid angle with a  much faster
              detector. In consultation with commercial  vendors, a design with a 1 Tesla
              superconducting magnet and  a ~0.4 K 3He cryostat has been developed that can
              accomplish  this goal.    To conduct these experiments, we will initially
              employ  circularity-polarized x-rays from bend magnet beamlines at  the
              National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), the  Stanford  Synchrotron Radia tion
              Lab (SSRL), and the Advanced Light  Source (ALS)  in Berkeley. Following these
              initial studies  we will use a more powerful elliptical wiggler source 
              currently under development at the ALS.    Better XMCD and SPEXAFS
              instrumentation will allow  characterization of paramagnetic metal clusters in
              many  bioinorganic systems. Mixed-metal and/or mixed-valence  clusters
              appropriate for study include nitrogenase P-  clusters and Fe- Mo cofactor,
              Ni-Fe centers in hydrogenase  and CO dehydrogenase, and the photosystem II Mn
              cluster. The  methods developed for these problems will be generally 
              applicable to nearly all paramagnetic transition metal  complexes.
