Title       : Studies of Elongation Arrest and Transcript Hydrolysis by RNA Polymerase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9317613

Award Number: 9317613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane K. Hawley dhawley@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317613  Hawley       This project will be a biochemical analysis of the
              proteins  and DNA sequences that determine the in vitro elongation behavior  of
              human RNA polymerase II.  The major goals of these experiments  are to answer
              questions in three general areas.  First, why and  how does pol II become
              transcriptionally blocked at arrest sites  and what does the behavior of pol II
              at such sites reveal about  the function and structure of elongation complexes?
               Initial  studies addressing these questions have focused on the mechanism  of
              transcription arrest in vitro at the adenovirus major late  arrest site.  The
              DNA sequence elements contributing to arrest at  this site are being defined
              and characterized.  These studies  will be extended to several additional sites
              at which arrest  and/or termination is observed, with a particular emphasis on 
              understanding what features of the site specify transcript  release.  The
              second set of questions addresses the roles of two  elongation factors, SII and
              TFIIF.  SII has been shown to promote  readthrough of arrest sites and to
              stimulate a 3' --> 5'  exonucleolytic activity of pol II, whereas TFIIF has
              been shown  to enhance the overall rate of elongation.  The biochemical 
              characterization of these activities will continue, focusing on  several
              specific questions that address possible physiological  roles for the
              exonuclease activity and the possibility that TFIIF  activity is important for
              moderating that activity to promote  efficient elongation.  Finally, the
              ability of pol II elongation  complexes to translocate backwards on the
              template will be used  to pose and answer questions about the structure of the 
              elongation complex, focusing particularly on the possibility that  RNA
              secondary structures can inhibit the backing up reaction by  inhibiting
              reformation of the DNA:RNA hybrid and that pol II may  respond to termination
              sites encountered while backing up.  %%%  One of the most important and
              fundamental questions in biology is  how genetically i dentical cells
              differentially use the genetic  information to become specialized for different
              functional and  structural roles in the organism.  The specific morphology and 
              function of a cell are determined by what proteins that cell is  making; the
              information specifying production of all the possible  proteins the cell could
              make is encoded in the genes.  Thus, in  each cell type, some genes must remain
              "off" (not expressed),  while others are turned on (expressed).  The first step
              in gene  expression is the synthesis of a copy of the gene.  This copying 
              process, called transcription, produces an RNA molecule that is  then used by
              the cell's machinery to direct production of the  protein encoded by that gene.
               Transcription is performed by an  enzyme called RNA polymerase, which must not
              only select the  genes that are to be expressed in a certain cell but then must
               make a complete copy of that gene.  Both the initiation and the  completion of
              transcription are regulated, and this regulation is  an important part of the
              mechanism by which different cells make  different sets of proteins.  This
              research will focus on  understanding how transcription is regulated at the
              level of  continuation and completion of the copying process.   Specifically,
              there are signals within some genes that cause  transcription to stop, and
              there are proteins that have been  identified that alter the ability of the RNA
              polymerase to  respond to or ignore these signals.  This project is a 
              biochemical analysis of the interaction of the RNA polymerase  with these
              signals and proteins and is directed at understanding  the molecular details of
              these interactions and their importance  to the regulation of gene expression. 
              ***
