Title       : Laser-Induced Explosive Vaporization of Liquids in Contact with a Solid Surface:
               Fundamental Studies and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9317708

Award Number: 9317708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT -- CTS-9317708  Grigoropoulos     This proposal is concerned with
              novel science and important technological applications of the phenomenon of
              rapid nucleation and explosive vaporization of a liquid film in contact with a
              pulsed laser-heated surface. The science of the metastability behavior of
              superheated liquids is well established only in the near-steady-state regime at
              the millisecond time scale.  In the much faster regime with a nanosecond time
              scale, superheated liquids may have different behavior, with regard to the
              possible superheating, bubble nucleation and growth kinetics, and the
              inhomogeneous nucleation process at a surface. Such behaviors in the fast
              regime have not been investigated until one recent study because traditional
              experimental techniques lack the speed and sensitivity. A recent study by the
              PI provides preliminary results on the nucleation and growth of bubbles in
              various liquids in contact with a pulse-laser-heated solid surface using a new
              simultaneous reflectance/scattering monitoring approach. Further quantitative
              experimentation and modeling are necessary for understanding the phase change
              phenomena involved.     Significant applications of these pulse liquid film
              explosive vaporization phenomena in industry are possible.  Practical
              implementation will be pursued with the goal of demonstrating manufacturing
              yield and productivity in a high-technology production environment.  The first
              application is in the area of "laser cleaning" to remove micron and sub-micron
              particles from critical parts of modern electronic and data-storage devices. 
              Other applications to be investigated include photo-acoustic pulse generation
              for nondestructive evaluation, enhanced laser-micromachining, and novel
              patterned-doping of surfaces.
