Title       : Retinoids and Homeobox Genes in Pattern Formation: A Feather Morphogenesis Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9317397

Award Number: 9317397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng-Ming Chuong chuong@pathfinder.hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317397  Chuong    Pattern formation is a crucial event in embryonic 
              development. Identification of molecules and mechanisms  involved in pattern
              formation have been the central interest  of developmental biologists. Dr.
              Chuong is using feather  morphogenesis as a model to study pattern formation
              and has  focused on adhesion molecules and homeobox (Hox) genes. Dr.  Chuong
              has shown that there are two kinds of Hox gradients  in the integument: a
              "macro gradient" across the feather  tract and a "micro gradient" across a
              single feather bud.  The asynchronous alignment of different Hox macro gradient
               leads to a unique repertoire of position specific Hox  expression patterns
              named Hox codes of skin appendages,  which he hypothesizes determine the
              phenotype of skin  appendages. Retinoic acid (RA) can transform feather 
              phenotypes and alter the anterior-posterior axis of skin  appendages, with
              concomitant changes in Hox expression.  Epithelial-mesenchymal  recombination
              revealed that the Hox  micro gradient may be regulated by a signal from the 
              epithelium. By the use of  RA responsive element-LacZ-  containing F9 cells it
              has been shown that a wave of  endogenous RA activity propagates bilaterally
              from the  midline. Dr. Chuong now suggests that 1) Hox codes of skin 
              appendages determine the phenotype of skin appendages while  the micro gradient
              determines the A-P axis of skin  appendages, 2) The two gradients are regulated
               independently: the macro gradient may originate from the  mesoderm, but the
              micro gradient is determined later and may  be determined by the epithelium,
              and 3) RA is an endogenous  morphogen in skin morphogenesis, with a dynamic
              distribution  pattern during feather development similar to that of 
              morphogenetic furrow in Drosophila eye development. To test  these hypotheses,
              Dr. Chuong will ectopically express Hox  genes on skin appendages in ovo using
              retroviral gene  delivery. The ontogeny of Hox codes will be traced back to 
              dermatome stage using DiI tracing and somite transpos ition.  To search for the
              signals that regulate Hox gene expression,  a model using
              epithelial-mesenchymal rotation/recombination  of skin explants was developed
              in which the inducing signal  can be analyzed. To test whether endogenous RA is
              involved  in pattern formation, RARE-LacZ containing cell monolayers  will be
              used to detect the dynamic RA distribution in  developing skin. Aided by the
              distinct morphology of  feathers, these novel approaches will add new
              dimensions to  our understanding of pattern formation.  ***
