Title       : Structure and Dynamics of Holliday Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9317369

Award Number: 9317369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Chazin   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Millar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317369  Chazin  The principal goals of this research are to determine the
              three-  dimensional structure of Holliday junctions, to understand how  the
              sequence at the junction influences structure, and to  determine why the
              cellular recombination machinery is influenced  by these differences.  As a
              starting point, the determination of  the three-dimensional structures and
              examination of the internal  dynamics of small (32 base-pair) models of
              Holliday junctions is  proposed using time-resolved fluorescence and nuclear
              magnetic  resonance (NMR) spectroscopies.  The selected sequences are  designed
              to inhibit migration of the crossover junction to  facilitate analysis by
              biophysical methods, and the results are  then analyzed with the assistance of
              computational and molecular  graphics approaches.  Our objectives are
              formulated on the basis  of critical observations indicating that the
              resolution of HJs in  the cell and in vitro appears to be dependent on the
              sequence at  the site of strand crossover, and that the spatial arrangement of 
              the branches of Holliday junction is dependent on sequence.   Thus, our
              objective extends beyond the determination of the  structure of a single HJ at
              atomic resolution, to analysis of a  series of related HJs having identical
              branches but different  permutations of the bases at the  junction.  Selection
              of  specific HJs for in-depth structural analysis is based on  screening using
              gel mobility, thermal denaturation, and  fluorescence assays.  %%%  Genetic
              recombination is a fundamental process of biology leading  the variation and
              diversity that is essential to life.  Most  mechanisms proposed for
              recombination involve a four-arm branched  DNA intermediate termed the Holliday
              junction (HJ), which is  cleaved by enzymes to generate either parental or
              recombinant  products.  A significant body of evidence has accumulated 
              indicating that the structure of the HJ has a central role in  determining the
              outcome of the recombination event.  Thus, we  seek an understandi ng of the
              molecular basis of genetic  recombination from detailed knowledge of the
              structure of the HJ,  and ultimately, of the nature of the interactions with
              enzymes  critical to HJ recognition and processing.  ***
