Title       : UMEB: Scientific Research Experiences for Minority Undergraduates in the
               Sevilleta LTER Program: Career Enhancement and Training in Environmental
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9317454

Award Number: 9317454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Parmenter parmentr@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1135,9178,
Abstract    :
              

9317454 Parmenter  

The University of New Mexico Department of Biology
              will establish a Career Development Program in Environmental Biology for
              minority undergraduates that will bring students into an extended one on one
              relationship with research ecologists from UNM, Sandia National laboratory, the
              US Fish and Wildlife Service, and the New Mexico Museum of Natural History. 
              Ten UNM Biology Department faculty members, along with scientists from
              collaborating organizations, have pledged their time and expertise to the
              proposed program.  Students will be recruited in their sophomore year, and will
              participate in the program through graduation.  As each cohort graduates, they
              will be replaced by a new group of sophomores.  Each student will select one or
              more faculty members as research mentors during their program.  The program
              will include academic and career counseling, and a structured educational
              component in addition to standard coursework.  This enhanced curriculum will
              encompass practical and theoretical aspects of the scientific method,
              hypothesis development and testing, experimental design and statistical
              analysis, implementation of independent research projects, computerized data
              management, and the preparation of project results for oral presentation and a
              written journal.  Students will gain personal experience in the area of their
              specialized interests as well as in other ongoing ecological research at UNM.

