Title       : Systematics and Biogeography of the Pempherididae (Pisces: Perciformes), and
               Relationships of the Ocean Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1998   
File        : a9317695

Award Number: 9317695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Mooi mooi@mpm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee Public Museum
	      800 West Wells Street
	      Milwaukee, WI  53233    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9317695  MOOI  The fish family Pempherididae, known as sweepers or bullseyes,
              are a common element of coral and rocky reef fish  communities of the Indian
              and Pacific Oceans, as well as in the Caribbean.  There are about 40 named
              species, although the validity of some of these is questionable, and there are
              records of what appear to be undescribed species.  Many members of the family
              are known to possess light organs, but despite this feature and their wide
              distribution they have received little attention.  The goals of the present
              research are: (1) to determine the number of valid species within the family
              and the distribution of each of these species; (2) to discover the historical
              relationships among these species; and (3) to apply the results of goals 1-2 to
              the broader question of how common distributional areas within the ocean basisn
              are related to one another.  This will be done by examining the external and
              internal anatomy of existing species of sweepers found in museums of the United
              States and around the world, as well as from specimens sampled from selected
              field localities including Thailand and Australia.  Such museum and field work
              should  result in the discovery of a number of new species, as well as accurate
              maps of ranges of known species.  Data gathered from the museum and field
              specimens will be utilized to hypothesize a family tree of sweepers from which
              relationships can be inferred.  Combining the distributional data with the
              family tree will provide an initial picture of historical relationships among
              various ocean basins of the Indian, Pacific, and Atlantic Oceans.  Comparison
              of this initial picture with similar information from previous studies on
              fishes and other organisms will be used to produce a comprehensive review of
              the history of ocean basins.  %%%  The results of the study will contribute to
              our understanding of the processes that increase species diversity and how
              species have come to be distributed as they are today.  Such information will
              help to explain p atterns of biodiversity and how they have arisen, perhaps
              influencing approaches to conservation.  It will also have potential
              applications for fisheries management in terms of identifying populations with
              restricted distributions among fish stocks otherwise considered wide ranging. 
              Geological studies of ocean basins might also be influenced by the conclusions
              of this work.  ***
