Title       : Genetic Studies on Eukaryotic Transcriptional Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9317243

Award Number: 9317243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley L. Berger berger@wistar.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317243  Berger       Adaptors are transcription factors that strengthen the 
              action of transactivators by physically bridging or guiding  protein
              interactions with the basal transcription apparatus.  The  proposed research
              will focus on the mechanism of action of  adaptors, to determine their physical
              role in the transcription  complex and how they contribute to gene regulation. 
              Specific  experimental objectives are to dissect the domain structure of  ADAs
              using in vivo and in vitro analyses, to determine whether  ADA2 physically
              interacts with the acidic activation domain of  the herpes virus transactivator
              VP16, and to identify specific  amino acid contacts between ADA2 and VP16 using
              classic genetic  suppression of substitution mutations in VP16.  %%%  A crucial
              cellular regulatory step is the decision to turn  specific genes on and off.  I
              am interested in the basic  principles that underlie this regulation of gene
              expression, and  the general mechanisms that may be common to all genes.  We
              are  using a simple model system for studying gene expression, namely 
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or baker's yeast.  Yeast is an  increasingly powerful
              research tool for the study of basic  cellular processes, because of its unique
              experimental  accessibility and because the function of many regulatory 
              proteins is highly conserved in evolution, even between yeast and  humans. 
              Several separate classes of factors are required for  genes to be expressed. 
              These factors must physically interact  and these contacts have been the focus
              of intense interest, since  identification of the precise factors and how they
              interact will  help to explain the mechanics of the process.  We have
              previously  established that a novel class of factors, termed adaptors, are 
              important for these physical interactions.  We devised a method  in yeast to
              isolate the genes for adaptors and have cloned and  characterized two
              components of an adaptor.  Future objectives  are to dissect the structure of
              the adaptor, and to analyze it s  physical and functional role in the gene
              expression process.   These particular adaptors may be representative of a
              large class  of factors, and thus, as a class, may be fundamentally important 
              to gene regulation.  ***
