Title       : Promoter-enhancer interactions in two adjoining drosophila genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9317701

Award Number: 9317701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald K. Blackman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317701  Blackman  Our experiments will explore two modes of gene regulation
              involving  promoter-enhancer interactions.  In the first, we will look at the 
              intragenic regulation of the Drosophila decapentaplegic (dpp) gene,  as we try
              to explain how its complex network of imaginal disk-  specific enhancers search
              out their correct promoters.  These  experiments will test our view that this
              occurs through a mechanism  of promoter competition.  Our second line of
              experimentation will  investigate the nature of the regulatory autonomy of
              adjacent  genes.  Even though the dpp enhancers can activate their own 
              promoters up to 60 kb away, they are indifferent to the promoter of  the
              adjacent tnd (transcript near dpp) gene which is located just  a few kb away. 
              Two models, one involving chromatin domains and the  other promoter
              specificity, are commonly invoked to describe how  genes can remain autonomous
              and we are in an excellent position to  decide which of these, if either, is at
              work in the dpp/tnd system.   Through our proposed experiments:  1) we will
              examine the promoter  preferences of different disk-specific enhancers and
              determine  whether these choices are established through a mechanism of 
              promoter competition.  Much of this work will involve transfection  assays in
              tissue culture cells but these results will also be  confirmed by in vivo and
              analysis.  2) we will characterize the  regulatory sequences required for tnd
              transcription.  We will use  reporter gene constructs and interspecies sequence
              comparisons to  identify the functionally important elements comprising the 
              promoter and enhancer regions of tnd.  3) we will establish the  mechanism by
              which tnd and dpp remain autonomous.  We will use  "promoter swap" experiments
              to decide whether the regulatory  independence is mediated via chromatin
              domains or promoter  specificity.  For these experiments, we will use in vivo
              site-  directed mutagenesis to completely replace the tnd promoter with 
              another.  4) we will determine precisely w hich chromosomal  sequences are
              responsible for this regulatory isolation.  We will  use molecular, molecular
              genetic, and biochemical techniques to  identify the elements involved.  %%% 
              How genes are regulated in eukaryotic systems is not yet clearly  understood.
              Sequences known as enhancers interact with specific  promoter sequences to
              induce the expression of the gene controlled  by the promoter but since the
              enhancer can be at a distance and in  either orientation, how the specific
              sequences interact is not yet  understood. Because of the novel features of
              this system, coupled  with the powerful molecular genetic techniques available
              for  Drosophila, the results of this work should provide one of the  clearest
              understandings of how enhancers discriminate between  alternative promoters. 
              ***
