Title       : Acquisition of an Ultracentrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1994     
File        : a9317962

Award Number: 9317962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Teintze UCHM@oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Dratz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317962  Teintze  The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry needs a new
              preparative ultracentrifuge which would be located in Gaines Hall. There is at
              present only one functional ultracentrifuge in the Department, a 19 year old L3
              50 instrument belonging to Dr. Dratz, which is incapable of meeting the
              Department's present and future needs. This obsolete machine has been derated
              by the manufacturer (Beckman Instruments) and can no longer be used with many
              rotors, such as the SW60 Ti rotor, which Dr.Teintze brought with him and needs
              for his work. Furthermore, one ultracentrifuge cannot handle the increased use
              resulting from Dr. Teintze's arrival in the Department in the fall of 1992 and
              that of Dr. Dooley in June of 1993. Two additional investigators in the
              Department, Drs. Hapner and Jackson, also need ultracentrifuges for their
              research.    The Department also lacks a large capacity fixed angle rotor. The
              Type 30 rotor that it owns has been derated to a maximum of 10,000rpm because
              of its age (21 years) and amount of use, which makes it useless for the
              required applications. We are therefore applying for matching funds to purchase
              a new ultracentrifuge and funds for a preparative rotor.    Ultracentrifuges
              are essential equipment for all researchers in biochemistry and molecular
              biology. The new ultracentrifuge will be used primarily by the labs of Drs.
              Teintze, Dratz and Dooley, so the proposal contains descriptions of their
              projects that require its use. These projects are all funded by ongoing NIH or
              NSF research grants. The instrument will be used for density gradient analysis
              of proteoliposomes, membrane puri fication, cell fractionation, and DNA
              purification.    Project 1, entitled "The Mechanism of Protein Insertion into
              Lipid Bilayers", requires the most centrifugation time. It involves isolating
              the DNA coding for a bacterial membrane protein, making site specific mutations
              in the gene, and determining the effect of the resulting amino acid changes on
              the ability of the protein to insert into a membrane, both in the bacterium and
              in vitro using purified protein and phospholipid vesicles. The membrane protein
              and DNA purifications use ultracentrifugation, and the analysis for insertion
              in to lipid vesicles requires it also. This is done using density gradients
              that take 18 hours using the SW60 Ti rotor, but require centrifugation for 2 or
              3 days using the rotors that can be used in the old L3 50 centrifuge. These
              long runs tie up the centrifuge for long periods of time, interfering with
              their use for preparative work for this and other projects.    Project 2, which
              involves purification of the human membrane CFTR and its insertion into
              phospholipid vesicles for the purpose of developing a therapy for cystic
              fibrosis, also utilizes similar techniques requiring the new ultracentrifuge.  
               Drs. Dratz and Dooley (Projects 3 and 4, respectively) would also be primary
              users of the requested instrument for membrane and protein purification.
              Project 3 involves isolation of rod outer segment membranes and rhodopsin;
              project 4 requires the isolation and purification of a number of bacterial
              membrane enzymes. All of these procedures would require ultracentrifugation
              using a preparative rotor such as the Type 45Ti we are requesting funds to
              purchase.      r                       r       *                 -             
                 2   J           9       :   J   ;   O   ;       G   j                   X   
                 Z   G           _       `       k          _     u        WV F    ^     F ;F
              t      +  F  ~  u    j    V   W v j j j j j9317962  Teintze  The Department of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry needs a new preparative ultra centrifuge which would
              be located in            r                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               <   >   #   % 
                               p   r                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    !         !         !         !         !         !      
                     F                                           "                           
                 r         r     3    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial  1 Courier          
                                    "             h     0  E0  E                        =   
              abstract    Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
