Title       : Cloning and Characterization of Two Disease Lesion Mimic Genes in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9317052

Award Number: 9317052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gurmukh S. Johal agrogj@showme.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. G. Neuffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Johal  Abstract  9317052  The objective of this proposal is to tag and clone a
              disease lesion  mimic (DLM), gene lethal leaf spot-1 (lls1), mutations of which
              are  recessive.  Major emphasis will be placed of cloning and  characterizing
              the lls1 gene as well as defining various  physiological and biochemical
              conditions that affect the expression  of the lls1 mutation.  We will continue
              to genetically characterize  Les* -2552, a DLM dominant mutant and to advance
              them further for  co-segregation analyses; co-segregation analysis on some
              mutants to  identify Mu-elements that may have caused these mutations will also
               be attempted.  The action of lls1 appear to be cell autonomous  (confined to
              cells where it is expressed); on a number of plants,  somatic clonal sectors
              with sharp boundaries were observed either  as forward mutations or reversion
              events.  A new cloning strategy,  "somatic tagging", based on the use of these
              somatic sectors, is  being investigated.  Briefly, the Mu-hybridizing pattern
              of DNA  from adjacent mutant and wild type sectors is compared for 
              polymorphism.  Any extra band in the mutant DNA may harbor the Mu  element
              responsible for the mutation in question.  Using this  strategy a 6.5 kb Mu-1
              hybridizing fragment has been identified  from one of the lls1 mutants and
              preliminary results from a co-  segregation analysis have indicated that this
              band is tightly  linked with the mutant allele.  We will also investigate the
              effect  of various physiological factors on the expression of lls1.  Our 
              preliminary studies have indicated that the expression of lls1 is  completely
              dependent on light.  Both the initiation and enlargement  of lls1 lesions are
              inhibited when the leaves are protected from  light.  However, lls1 mutants
              kept in the dark for about 48 hours  completely wilt and die within 10-12 hours
              upon return to light.   Normal siblings show no such damage.  On the other
              hand, continuous  bright light delays the onset and spread of lls1 lesions. 
              Another  physiological facto r, wounding, caused either by pin pricks or by 
              pathogen infections, induces lls1 lesions prematurely.  On leaves  which are
              not yet competent to express lls1 lesions, almost all  wounding or infection
              sites transform into lls1 lesions when the  potential to express lls1 somehow
              develops in these leaves.   Additionally, the expression of lls1 lesions is
              enhanced by  temperatures below 24 C and is very sensitive to the genetic 
              background of the plant.  From these observations, it seems likely  that lls1
              may encode a factor that prevents maize cells from  cellular damage, possibly
              caused by free radical toxicity.  Similar  genes have recently been cloned from
              a number of animals, including  nematodes and humans.  %%%  A number of disease
              lesion mimic (DLM) mutations exist in maize  that promote the production of
              disease like symptoms in the absence  of any pathogen.  At present, nothing is
              known about the  biochemical nature of these mutations, or the function of the
              wild-  type alleles at these loci.  Since they are considered to 
              physiologically mimic the lesions caused during pathogen attack, it  has been
              suggested that some lesion mimic phenotypes may result  from mutations of
              disease development.  One feature that is common  to all lesion mimics is their
              association with cell death.   Accordingly, DLM mutations may represent
              excellent tools for  studying the genetic and cellular mechanisms controlling
              cell death  in plants.  ***
