Title       : Transport Physiology of Molecular Biology of the Invertebrate Electrogenic 2
               Na/1 H Antiporter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9317230

Award Number: 9317230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Ahearn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz G. de Couet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317230  Ahearn    This investigation is a request for funds to study ion 
              transport processes of the crustacean gastrointestinal tract  and compare them
              to those of the more thoroughly  investigated mammals.  In previous studies, we
              have  identified an apparently unique invertebrate electrogenic  cation
              exchanger on the brush border membrane of gut and  kidney epithelial cells
              which is involved in sodium and  calcium balance and differs in physiological
              properties from  analogous transport proteins from vertebrates.  The present 
              project will extend these early studies using the  combination of membrane
              vesicle techniques and molecular  biology procedures to characterize the
              functional role of  this unique invertebrate protein in important biological 
              activities of crustaceans such as ion homeostasis and  moltin.  To accomplish
              these objectives, purified membrane  vesicles of brush border and basolateral
              plasma membranes  and membranes derived from specific intracellular vacuoles 
              that are associated with digestive and calcium regulatory  activities will be
              prepared from lobster (Homarus  americanus) hepatopancreas (paired diverticulum
              of the  posterior stomach) using standard centrifugation techniques.  Transport
              properties of these vesicles will be investigated  using a combination of
              radioisotopic and spectrophotometric  techniques.  The gene nucleotide sequence
              of the lobster  electrogenic cation exchanger will be determined using our 
              previously developed monoclonal antibody as a probe of the  genome.  From these
              physiological and molecular studies we  should be able to clarify the
              functional role(s) of this  apparently unique invertebrate transporter and
              compare its  gene sequence with those of analogous, but physiolgically 
              distinct, mammalian Na+/H+ antiporter isoforms.  ***
