Title       : Acquisition of an Electrospray Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9317870

Award Number: 9317870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert O. Reich reich@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Gerig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley M. Parsons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   We propose to purchase an electrospray HPLC mass  spectrometer (single 
              quadrupole) to carry out four diverse  structure-function studies, to provide
              training in  an  emerging analytical method for graduate students and post 
              doctoral fellows, and  to provide other researchers within  the Chemistry
              Department and UCSB campus  access to a  contemporary molecular mass
              determination method, a  technique  presently unavailable on the campus.    The
              first major project focuses on both bacterial and  mammalian DNA
              methyltransferases. The target bacterial  enzyme is the EcoRI DNA 
              methyltransferase. Ongoing work on  this NSF supported project has used various
               LC-MS methods,  and the proposed work extends this effort. Characterization 
              of  critical histidines within the enzyme is proposed; a  novel electrospray
              LC-MS  method is under development and  application to the methyltransferase
              should  identify the  essential histidine(s). The proposed LC-MS method is a 
              significant  improvement over presently used  spectrophotometric methods and
              may be  generally applicable.  An LC-MS based strategy is proposed to determine
              which  elements of the mammalian cytosine DNA methyltransferase are  in contact
              with its  substrate. A related strategy is  proposed to identify portions of
              the DNA substrate  contacted by the enzyme. The extent and site of post- 
              translational modification of the mammalian enzyme are also  proposed to be
              investigated by LC-MS methods.  The  characterization of the mammalian enzyme
              is important for  understanding what  role this protein plays in gene 
              regulation, cancer, and genetic imprinting.    The second major project focuses
              on the acetylcholine  transporter of synaptic   vesicles. Identification of the
               acetylcholine binding site within the protein is proposed  using radiolabeled
              photoaffinity analogs and LC-MS methods.  Characterization of various site
              directed mutants of the  transporter is proposed, including the extent to which
              these  mutants are modified in their post-trans lational  modification. A
              related proposed set of experiments is  designed to assess how  different
              growth conditions impact  on the post-translational processing of the 
              transporter.  The proposed structure-function analysis of the transporter 
              should help elucidate how the neurotransmitter acetylcholine  functions.    The
              third project proposes to use LC-MS methods to elucidate  metal ion binding
              selectivities of siderophores produced by  open ocean marine bacteria. The
              metal  binding affinity and  selectivity of the recently identified siderophore
               Alterobactin A,  the first structurally characterized  siderophore from an
              open ocean organism, will be  determined. Thus the speciation of the
              siderophore in  seawater can be determined. A novel LC-MS method is proposed 
              to screen a large number of potential metals; application to  other marine
              siderophores is proposed.    The fourth project focuses on the use of high
              field N.M.R.  to investigate protein-  nucleic acid and protein-protein
              interactions. LC-MS is  proposed as an additional  means of characterizing the 
              target biomolecules.    The purchase of the proposed LC-MS instrument would
              enable  the training of numerous graduate students and research  fellows
              involved in these projects, as well  as  undergraduates and other individuals
              associated with  intended minor users. This  proposed training targets the 
              increasing need in the biotechnology industry for protein  chemists trained in
              contemporary analytical methods.
