Title       : Natural and Experimental Weathering of Pyroxenes and Pyroxenoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9317082

Award Number: 9317082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317082  Banfield       The research in this proposal aims to bridge the gap
              between  natural and experimental mineral weathering studies by combining 
              high-resolution electron microscopic characterization of both sets  of
              reactions with dissolution kinetic data.  Research involves  chain silicate
              minerals.  Chain silicates have been selected  because of their geochemical
              importance and because their  structures are sufficiently similar to those of
              clay products to  allow us to predict that transformations might, under some 
              conditions, involve some structural inheritance.  Furthermore,  through
              collaborative arrangements, a suitable selection of  experimentally reacted
              materials and dissolution rate data are  available.        We have tested the
              proposed approach by comparing naturally  and experimentally weathered
              pyroxenoid minerals.  Results reveal  sub-nanometer-scale details of both
              experimentally and naturally  reacted surfaces and provide insights into
              reaction mechanisms.   Initial results show Si-rich leached layers on
              experimentally  reacted pyroxenoids.  Thus, models to explain measured
              congruent  dissolution rates must account for the fact that Si entering 
              solution may be largely derived from the leached-layer-solution  interface.  We
              find preliminary evidence for recrystallization of  the gel layer.  Thus, rates
              may also be limited by transport  properties, solubility, and crystallinity of
              the gel.  Initial data  for natural weathering reactions are consistent with at
              least  partial inheritance of polymerized units by smectite reaction  products.
               Thus, we hypothesize that rates for pyroxenes may  reflect incomplete
              depolymerization of the silicate chains under  both laboratory and natural
              conditions.       The proposed work has two major goals.  First, we will 
              characterize the compositional, volumetric, mineralogical, and  structural
              aspects of natural pyroxene reactions and examine the  influence of
              microstructures (e.g., exsolution lamellae, grain  boundaries, antiphase bounda
              ries, chain width defects, dilocations)  on relative reaction rates.  Second,
              we will characterize  experimentally reacted pyroxenes and pyroxenoids and
              combine these  data with rate measurements to clarify details of possible 
              dissolution kinetic models.  Through this approach we hope to  enhance current
              understanding of the mechanisms and products of  weathering reactions and the
              conditions under, and extent to which,  experimentally measured rates apply to
              natural processes.
