Title       : Body Compositional Analysis Equipment for Study of the Physiological Ecology of
               Arctic Endotherms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1994    
File        : a9317916

Award Number: 9317916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69172              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Roby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Sedinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Deviche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317916  Roby   This Equipment Proposal requests funds to purchase (1) total
              body electrical conductivity (TOBEC) body composition analyzers, (2) a Soxhlet
              lipid extraction apparatus, (3) a thin-layer chromatography/flame ionization
              detector (TLC./FID) system, (4) an automated adiabatic bomb calorimeter and (5)
              support equipment for proximate body tissue analysis (saws, balance, freeze
              dryer, ovens). This equipment will be used to measure the body composition and
              energy content  of arctic animals, as part of several related research projects
              on the hysiological ecology of high latitude endotherms (songbirds, microtines,
              geese, seabirds, ground squirrels, and ruminants).  All projects seek to
              understand the regulatory role of nutrient and energy reserves for either
              migration, reproduction, or  survival.    The TOBEC body composition analyzer
              is a new instrument for noninvasive  measurement of body composition in live
              subjects and provides an opportunity to examine temporal variation in an
              individual's fat and protein reserves. The Soxhlet apparatus would be used to
              calibrate the TOBEC technique and extract stored lipids for further analyses. 
              Separation and quantitation of lipid classes would be accomplished with the
              TLC/FID system, and the energy content of storage compounds will be measured
              with the isoperibol oxygen bomb  calorimeter.     Determination of body
              composition is a fundamental method for evaluating physical condition and
              nutritional status of animals. Lipid and lean mass are measures of energy and
              protein reserves and, presumably, of fitness during periods of food shortage,
              dormancy, or negative energy ba lance.  Scientists at the Institute of Arctic
              Biology are engaged in several research projects that test the adaptive
              significance of fat reserves for endotherms living in high latitude
              environments.  Procurement of the above pieces of equipment will greatly
              enhance existing research projects at the Institute that are described in this
              proposal, and will provide many opportunities for new projects.  In addition,
              the new instrumentation will significantly improve instruction and research of
              undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students at the University of Alaska
              Fairbanks.                 9         9     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  &
              Arial                                 "             h            E             
                        =    abstract    Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR               X1
                    ~CRD3E17TMP            X1       ~CAL1E3FTMP           l:L      
              ~CRD1809TMP           p:L       9317916  Roby   This Equipment Proposal
              requests funds to purchase (1) total body electrical conductivity (TOBEC) body
              compositi    9                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   d                         
               9                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    !         !       (#       !         !         !         
                  F                                                             9         9  
                (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                                 "    
                      h            E                        =    abstract    Deseree King,
              BIR Deseree King, BIR                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
