Title       : Methodist NSFNET
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1994  
File        : a9317894

Award Number: 9317894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie E. Mathers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Newbould  (Principal Investigator former)
              David E. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Royden R. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Riney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Methodist Med Center of IL
	      221 N E Glen Oak Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616360001    309/672-4826

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9317894  Newbould  Methodist Medical Center of Illinois (Methodist), a 420 bed 
              teaching medical center affiliated with the University of Illinois  at Chicago,
              proposes to connect the campus-wide ethernet Local Area  Network to the NFSNET.
               This will be done by consultation with and  assistance from netIllinois, an
              affiliate of CICNet, a regional  NFSNET network.  Methodist's ongoing
              development and full  implementation of an Integrated Advanced Information
              Management  System (IAIMS) requires a data repository that reaches external 
              databases and information exchanges.  The absence of this  capability can be
              solved by means of Internet access.  Methodist will provide Internet access to
              a variety of professional  staff and adequately equip the users through
              education and support  services.  Further, this project will examine medical
              center  professionals' use of resources available through the Internet and  the
              impact of subsequent use.  Three groups of 12 will be formed, each group
              representing a  different category of professional staff: clinical/research, 
              ancillary and administrative.  Participants will be trained in  proper uses of
              the Internet.  During participation they will keep  a structured journal of
              Internet usage.  The Methodist Research  Section will conduct periodic
              structured interviews of the  participants.  Bimonthly, the journal entries
              will be copied for  review and analysis.  Also, electronic records will be kept
              on  usage.  At the beginning of the second year another cohort of  groups will
              repeat the process.  Content analysis and descriptive  statistics will be
              performed on the journal, interview, electronic  record and support services
              call data.
