Title       : The Biology of Heat Shock Proteins and Molecular Chaperones Conference, May 4-8,
               1994, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9317819

Award Number: 9317819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Horowitz                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317819  Grodzicker  There has been a significant amount of new information on
              the role  of heat shock proteins and molecular chaperons in the process of 
              protein transport and protein folding since the 1991 Cold Spring  Harbor
              meeting on Stress Proteins.  Due to their newly discovered  fundamental roles
              in essential processes involving protein   biogenesis, heat shock proteins and
              molecular chaperons have drawn  interest from a number of traditional
              scientific disciplines in the  basic sciences as well as numerous medical
              specialties including  infectious diseases, cancer and heart disease. 
              Therefore, this  meeting, in the tradition of Cold Spring Harbor meetings will 
              emphasize many of these new  discoveries.  The organizers for the  1994 meeting
              are Richard I. Morimoto, Susan Lindquist and Costa  Georgopoulos all of whom
              have been previous organizers of this and  other international meetings on the
              heat shock response.  The  meeting will have eight lecture and two poster
              sessions.  The  working outline for the sessions includes: I-The Regulation of
              Heat  Shock Gene Expression, II-Molecular Chaperons - Structure and 
              Biochemical Properties III-Molecular Chaperons - Protein Folding  and
              Intracellular Transport, IV-Other Functions for Molecular  Chaperons,
              V-Recognition Properties of Molecular Chaperones, VI-  Proteins Modification
              and Proteolysis, VII-Protection from Stress -  From Cells to Organisms, and
              VIII-Immunobiology, Infectious  Diseases and Pathophysiology.  Each session
              will be chaired by an  invited speaker and be comprised of eight to nine talks,
               corresponding to four to five invited speakers with the remaining  speakers
              for each session selected from submitted abstracts.   Particular attention will
              be paid to encourage participation in the  lecture or poster sessions by
              graduate students and postdoctoral  fellows in addition to attendance and
              presentations by senior  investigators.%%%  What have been called heat shock
              proteins or stress response  proteins are essential for the no rmal life of
              cells as well as  protecting them under many types of adverse conditions.  Some
              of  these proteins are involved in guiding other important cellular  proteins
              to their proper location in the cell.  Their protective  role in helping cells
              to adapt to rapid changes in the environment  has also been of interest to
              those studying abnormal or diseased  states of the organism.  Much progress has
              been made in the study  of heat shock proteins.  The purpose of the 1994 Cold
              Spring Harbor  Conference on Heat Shock Proteins and Molecular Chaperone is to 
              bring together scientists to discuss the latest results of their  research. 
              The meeting has a format to encourage younger scientists  graduate students,
              postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty, as  well as senior investigators to
              present their latest work.  Each  session will be chaired by an invited speaker
              and be comprised of   eight to nine talks, corresponding to four to five
              invited speakers  with the remaining speakers for each session selected from 
              submitted abstracts.  Particular attention will be paid to  encourage
              participation in the lecture of poster sessions by  graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows in addition attendance  and presentations by senior
              investigators.  ***
