Title       : Structure and Function of Vitamin B6 Containing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9317373

Award Number: 9317373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dagmar Ringe ringe@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Petsko  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317373  Ringe  The overall aim of this project is to use protein
              crystallography  and site-directed mutagenesis to understand how the structural
               features of an enzyme active site can control the chemistry of a  bound
              cofactor.  Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) requiring enzymes are  numerous and
              important in biochemistry, and catalyze a multitude  of different chemical
              reactions, including racemizations,  transaminations, beta-eliminations, and
              decarboxylations.  In  each case, the same cofactor is used, and the initial
              step in the  reaction is the same:  formation of an imine adduct between an 
              amino group of the substrate and the aldehydic carbon atom of  PLP.  When this
              adduct forms in free solution, many different  reactions can occur
              simultaneously, leading to a mixture of  products.  When the adduct forms on
              the enzyme, a unique product  is produced depending on the specific enzyme. 
              The enzyme  modulates and directs the chemistry of the cofactor.  To 
              understand how this happens five different PLP-dependent enzymes  have been
              selected for study, catalyzing different reactions.   The overall objectives
              for each are to crystallize the enzyme and  determine the three-dimensional
              structures of the enzyme itself  and complexed with inhibitors in order to
              suggest specific roles  for active site residues in controlling cofactor
              chemistry.   These hypotheses will be tested by site-directed mutagenesis and 
              crystal structures of the mutant proteins.  %%%  Many enzymes use organic
              cofactors as partners to assist in the  catalysis of chemical reactions. 
              Although enzymes-bound  cofactors still carry out the same transformations as
              when they  are in solution, the specificity of the reaction is much greater  on
              the protein surface.  An understanding of how environment  controls chemistry
              is the central aim in all studies of  homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis. 
              Enzymes requiring  cofactors offer the ideal system for the unraveling of these
               principles.  The enzymes chosen for this study catalyze diffe rent  and
              increasingly complex reactions, although they can all use  similar amino acids.
               Therefore, comparison of the data from this  series of enzymes will provide a
              wealth of information about the  effect of protein environment on cofactor
              chemistry.  ***
