Title       : Cis-acting Sequences and Initiation of Mammalian DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9317011

Award Number: 9317011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Burhans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roswell Pk Cancer Inst
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  142630001    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317011  Burhans       Cis-acting sequences that promote initiation of DNA
              replicaton  reside within a 14 kb fragment of DNA derived from a broad region 
              where multiple initiation events occur downstream of the hamster  dihydrofolate
              reductase gene locus.  The specific aim of this  project is to determine the
              precise sequence requirements for  initiation in this locus by analyzing the
              ability of various  permutations of cloned sequences from this fragment to
              promote  initiation of DNA replication after the cloned sequences have been 
              integrated into the hamster genome.  To analyze these sequences  independently
              of position effects, they will be targed to a single  locus of the hamster
              genome by the bacteriophage P1 Cre  recombination system.  Origin activity will
              be measured by  application of several newly developed techniques that are
              capable  of detecting origin function in chromosomes containing single  copies
              of origin sequences.  Information provided by this study  should further our
              understanding of how cis-acting sequences  function in initiation of DNA
              replication in mammalian cells.  %%%  A fundamental prerequisite to cellular
              reproduction is the precise  replication of the genetic information encoded in
              cellular DNA  molecules.  Replication of these molecules begins at specific 
              locations of the chromosome which are apparently determined by  sequence
              information at these locations.  This project will  determine what sequence
              information is required for initiating DNA  synthesis in a particular region of
              the hamster genome where  initiation of DNA replication has been observed to
              occur.   Determining what these sequences are will allow us to address the 
              question of how they work, and of how initiation of DNA replication  is coupled
              to regulation of cell proliferation.  ***
