Title       : Zebrafish Development and Genetics Meeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9317903

Award Number: 9317903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317903  Grodzicker    Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories proposes to organize the 
              first open-invitation meeting to be devoted to  research on  zebrafish.  The
              meeting will focus on the cellular,  molecular, and genetic regulation of
              embryonic development  and growth.  Because the field of zebrafish research is
              so  new and is expanding so rapidly, this is a perfect time for  a general
              meeting of all the researchers working on  zebrafish to share their ideas and
              experiences and to foster  future communication.  The meeting at which most
              zebrafish  research laboratories will be represented, will function to  educate
              significantly the investigators in this field, will  serve to facilitate the
              exchange of materials and  information about evolving technologies and
              methodological  approaches, and will greatly influence the future directions 
              of research in this field.  Enthusiasm within the zebrafish  research community
              for the 1994 meeting is extensive:  350  individuals from over 100 labs in 16
              countries are expected,  representing both beginning and established
              investigators.  Each participant will have the opportunity to present their 
              work with a poster or in a talk.  The scientific content of  the meeting will
              focus primarily on the early embryonic  development of the zebrafish.  Sessions
              will be devoted to  the following areas of inquiry:  (1) gastrulation, body 
              patterning, and morphogenesis; (2) determination of cell  fate; (3) development
              of the nervous system; (4) growth  control; (5) organogenesis; (6) genetics and
              genomics; and  (7) gene transfer, gene expression and new methodologies.  In
              addition, a session on community organization will serve  to discuss common
              goals of the zebrafish research community  and to establish means for the
              collection and dissemination  of information and research reagents throughout
              the  community.  This meeting on zebrafish will have a critical  function in
              the growth and development of this exciting area  of vertebrate research.  ***
