Title       : Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food-Web Structure in the Ross Sea:
               The Irradiance/Mixing Regime and Diatom Growith in Spring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9317538

Award Number: 9317538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440056             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Nelson nelsonda@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis I. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1315,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317538  Nelson  The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
              but  intense.  There is an increasing body of evidence that in many  Antarctic
              habitats, the most active period may be very early in the  season, a period
              that has not been emphasized in previous  investigations.  This project is part
              of an interdisciplinary  program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
              phytoplankton  bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the
              Ross  Sea.  The overall program will test hypotheses related to the  initiation
              of the phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of  ice melt, the mechanisms
              controlling phytoplankton growth and  productivity in spring, the implications
              and short-term fate of  high productivity in spring, and the transition from
              spring to  midsummer conditions.  This component will test the closely related 
              hypotheses that: (1) phytoplankton growth is controlled primarily  by the
              relationship between solar irradiance and mixed-layer depth  throughout the
              spring (2) diatom growth rates are much higher in  spring than at any other
              time of year, in response to the more  favorable irradiance/mixing
              relationships, and (3) persistence of  diatom blooms in summer results from the
              diatoms' ability to  outcompete other groups under the light-limited conditions
              that  develop in turbid, high-biomass waters.    These hypotheses will be
              tested by (1) obtaining the first reliable  estimates of the Sverdrup "critical
              depth" in the Antarctic so that  the changing relationship between the critical
              depth and the mixed-  layer depth in spring can be defined, and (2) estimating
              diatom  growth rates and the gross and net production attributable to  diatoms
              throughout the spring.  The results will provide  information critical to an
              understanding of phytoplankton bloom  dynamics in the Ross Sea.
