Title       : DNA Polymorphism and Divergence of Glucose-6-Phosphate Isomerase in Five Species
               of Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9317949

Award Number: 9317949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Therese A. Markow                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. McDonald mcdonald@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9317949  McDonald   In several species of animals, the enzyme
              glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (Gpi) has differences in allele frequency between
              northern and southern locations.  Natural selection may  be the cause of these
              geographic patterns, with one allele being favored in warm environments and
              another allele in cool environments.  It has been difficult, however, to rule
              out other explanations for geographic patterns in allele frequency, such as
              random drift of frequencies in isolated populations.  The DNA for the Gpi gene
              in five species of invertebrates will be sequenced, and several statistical
              tests will be done which can determine whether natural selection is important
              in affecting the gene.  The data will also help determine whether the
              differences between closely related species are due to natural selection, or to
              the accumulation of random mutations that are not affected by selection.   The
              results of the project will address two basic questions in the genetics of
              natural populations: how important natural selection is in determining gene
              frequencies within a species, and how important natural selection is in
              determining the differences between species.  When differences are observed
              within or between species in protein and DNA sequences, it is of obvious
              importance for a wide range of genetic researches to understand whether natural
              selection has caused the variation, or whether the variation is due to
              mutations that are unaffected by selection.  In addition, the research may
              provide insights into genetic and biochemical basis by which populations of
              organisms adapt to different environments.  This is importa nt to understanding
              how species will respond to changing environments, adapting or going extinct,
              and in designing new genetically engineered organisms.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      R   T                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              "   $   &   (  
              *   ,   .   0   2   4   6   8   :   <                                          
                                                                           !         !       
               !         !    <   >   @   B   D   F   H   J   L   N   P   R   T              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                !         !              F                   
                                     L                                             T        
              <   T       (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial       g   g         g      
                  "             h        E c e c e          k         7        Crystal
              Blackshear Crystal Blackshear                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
