Title       : Ozone Depletion, UV-B Radiation and Vascular Plant Performance in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1994  
File        : a9317019

Award Number: 9317019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Day   (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. McGraw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1318,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9317019  Day  The presence of well-documented stratospheric "ozone hole" events 
              and enhanced ultraviolet-B radiation levels in Antarctica provide  a unique
              opportunity to assess the effects of ultraviolet-B  radiation on plant
              performance.  There are several reasons to  expect the ultraviolet-B radiation
              may be a significant, and  increasingly important limitation to the performance
              of Antarctic  vascular plants:  Levels of terrestrial ultraviolet-B radiation 
              in Antarctica have increased considerably in recent years, and  are likely to
              continue increasing, particularly in austral  spring; Recent research on marine
              phytoplankton in Antarctic  waters has found that enhanced ultraviolet-B
              radiation levels  associated with ozone hole events are responsible for
              significant  reductions in phytoplankton productivity; Research on vascular 
              plants in other regions has shown that supplemental ultraviolet-B   radiation
              levels can limit the performance of many plant species;  and Recent
              investigations have show that the leaves of many  grasses and forbs from other
              regions are particularly ineffective  at screening ultraviolet-B radiation
              before it reaches  potentially-sensitive mesophyll tissue in the leaf interior.
                Thus, one would suspect that the grass Deschampsia antarctica and  the forb
              Colobanthus quitensis, which are the only two vascular  plants native to
              Antarctica, are likely to be relatively  ineffective at screening ultraviolet-B
              radiation.  Surprisingly,  apparently no research has addressed the impacts of
              ultraviolet-B  radiation on Antarctic vascular plants.    The proposed research
              attempts to answer the question of whether  ultraviolet-B, particularly
              ultraviolet-B radiation associated  with ozone hole events, affects
              photosynthesis, growth, and  reproductive performance of D. antarctica and C.
              quitensis.  The  relative magnitude of this limitation will be assessed by
              using  experimental field treatments to compare ultraviolet-B radiation  to
              other potential limitations.  Selective filte rs will be used  to remove UV
              components from sunlight over naturally-growing  plants, while additional water
              or nutrients will be supplied to  other plants.  These field experiments will
              be complemented with  more detailed investigations using supplemental
              ultraviolet-B  radiation treatments in West Virginia.  Recently developed 
              techniques such as fiber-optic microprobes will be used to  examine the
              UV/visible optical properties of leaves and  reproductive structures in D.
              antarctica and C. quitensis, and  assess how these change in response to
              enhanced ultraviolet-B  radiation levels.  This approach will elucidate some of
              the  underlying mechanisms responsible for Antarctic plant responses  to
              ultraviolet-B radiation in the field.
