Title       : Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9317625

Award Number: 9317625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Hartl dhartl@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi E. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Gelbart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Lewontin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317625  Hartl  Five senior faculty at Harvard University are applying for an
              Applied Biosystems Model 373A-01 Automated DNA Sequencer with associated
              hardware and software.  Harvard is in a unique position to lead a new synthesis
              of molecular biology and evolutionary biology because of its long tradition of
              excellence in both fields.   Indeed, among the priorities for academic growth
              and development in the life sciences is the overlap between molecular biology
              and evolutionary biology.  The Department of Organismic and evolutionary
              Biology (OEB) at Harvard is already expanding with new faculty representing
              this type of integration.  Among the five OEB faculty participating, four
              (Hartl, Donoghue, Kellogg, and Pierce) are new to Harvard, and three (Hartl,
              Donoghue, and Pierce) are senior appointments.  The need for automated DNA
              sequencing in the participating groups is immediate and acute.  There is no
              automated DNA sequencer available for shard use.  Among the applicants, no
              group alone is large enough or its needs extensive enough to justify purchase,
              maintenance, and exclusive use of an automated sequencer.  However, in the 
              aggregate, the groups can make use of an automated sequencer essentially to
              full capacity (estimated sequencing needs approximately 1 million bp per year).
               The automated DNA sequencer will be set up in the Hartl laboratory, which is
              centrally located among the participating users, and will be supervised by Dr.
              Elena Lozovskaya, a member of the Hartl group who has extensive practical
              experience in automated DNA sequencing.   Most of the participating groups have
              already had relevant experience  using automated DNA sequencers and their
              projects are funded and ready to be implement.  Therefore, the automated DNA
              sequencer is a familiar piece of equipment that will be set up in a central
              location among the users, supervised by an experienced investigator, and used
              immediately to essentially full capacity. OEB will contribute to the purchase
              of the instrument and support of the major portion of the recurring service 
              contract.  at Harvard University are applying for an Applied Biosystems Model
              373A-01 Automated DNA Seq                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  !              F                             $             $               
                               (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                       
                       "             h        E   E   E  +   <   !         =    abstract   
              Deseree King, BIR Deseree King, BIR                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
