Title       : RUI: Structure and Function of Subunit II of Cytochrome c Oxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9317071

Award Number: 9317071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Cameron cameron@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9317071  Cameron  Subunit II of cytochrome c oxidase is a highly conserved
              protein  required for respiration in all eucaryotes and some procaryotes.   The
              enzyme complex is the terminal member of the electron  transport chain
              responsible for transferring electrons from  cytochrome c to oxygen.  Subunit
              II binds to cytochrome c and  accepts electrons via the CuA redox center. The
              protein has  several highly conserved features including two hydrophobic 
              regions, a conserved aromatic region, a number of negatively  charged amino
              acids thought to interact with lysines on  cytochrome c and a copper binding
              site like those found in blue  copper proteins.  To understand the function of
              this protein,  yeast mutants defective in subunit II have been generated.  We 
              have identified strains defective in function due to alterations  in the CuA
              binding region and due to codon substitutions in the  aromatic region.  We are
              finishing our analysis of the mutants  and to extend our investigation to
              revertants of these strains  that have recovered function.  We expect to find
              true revertants  that restore that wild type sequence; pseudo revertants where
              one  amino acid is substituted for another and strains carrying extra-  genic
              suppressors.  Among the latter group, we expect to identify  gene products,
              both nuclear and mitochondrial, that interact  directly with subunit II.  This
              analysis will yield information  concerning functionally critical amino acids
              in the protein and  possibly about interactions between oxidase subunits.  %%% 
               This is a continuation of the genetic studies on the yeast  protein, subunit
              II of cytochrome c oxidase.  This protein is a  highly conserved protein
              required for respiration in all higher  organisms.  This research has the
              potential to broaden our  understanding of respiration.  In addition, the
              project is  providing college undergraduates with the opportunity to 
              understand the process of scientific research and to participate  in it.  ***
