Title       : Mechanisms of Retrotransposon Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9317281

Award Number: 9317281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jerry D. Johnson                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abram Gabriel gabriel@cabm.rutgers. edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317281  Gabriel       Trypanosomal CRE1 and human L1 are members of the little 
              understood family of mobile genes known as non-LTR  retrotransposons that are
              widely distributed in mammals, insects,  plants, trypanosomatids, and fungi. 
              While evidence suggests that  this class of transposon is involved in such
              diverse and  fundamental processes as insertional mutagenesis, genetic disease 
              initiation, pseudogene formation, and genome evolution, almost  nothing is
              known about the mechanisms by which these elements  transpose other than that
              they use RNA intermediates.  Most non-  LTR retrotransposons are dispersed
              throughout their host's  genome.  However, CRE1 and related elements in other
              trypanosomes  have the unusual feature that they are inserted at a specific, 
              conserved site within a set of tandemly duplicated genes.  We  propose to
              utilize a novel yeast expression system to study the  biochemistry of the
              reverse transcriptase encoded by human L1 and  to identify the basis for CRE1
              site-specific insertion.   Accomplishment of our specific aims will advance
              knowledge of the  mechanisms involved in the replication of this poorly
              understood  but biologically important class of retrotransposons.  On a 
              broader scale, the results will be relevant to questions  concerning eukaryotic
              genome organization and evolution, as well  as the pathogenesis of human
              genetic disease.  %%%  A variety of transposable genetic elements ("jumping
              genes") are  found within the DNA of all organisms.  Over 10% of human 
              chromosomal DNA is made up of sequences that were copied from RNA  into DNA
              using the enzyme reverse transcriptase (RT).  This  enzyme, first found in
              retroviruses, is now known to be essential  for a large class of transposons to
              copy themselves and move to  new genomic locations.  We have shown that a
              functional gene for  RT is normally found in human DNA as part of the
              transposon L1.   We propose to study the biochemical properties of L1 RT to 
              determine how it recognizes its own sequences and how  it can copy  other RNA
              back into DNA.  Further, we propose to study an unusual  property of a similar
              transposon, CRE1, from a protozoan  parasite.  CRE1 is only found inserted in a
              single region of its  host's chromosomes, and the basis for site-specificity
              may give  clues to the mechanisms it employs in its jumping.  Our studies  will
              help elucidate the workings of a poorly understood class of  genetic elements
              which have been implicated in creating  mutations, causing genetic disease, and
              stimulating species  evolution.  ***
