Title       : Supporting primary care: Building universal Internet accessfor the education of
               the generalist physician
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9317705

Award Number: 9317705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley A. Bader sabader@gwuvm.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold R. Parry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9317705  Bader  This project proposes expanding Internet access from the main 
              academic campus of The George Washington University to the entire  George
              Washington University Medical Center (GWUMC) including its  affiliated faculty
              at primary care sites throughout the greater  Washington, D.C. metropolitan
              area.  GWUMC is committed to the  education of the generalist physician and
              through this project,  which will connect the computer network at the Medical
              Center to  Internet, can offer universal access to all members of the Medical 
              Center's extended constituency, those working at the academic hub  as well as
              those in the more remote primary care sites.  The  connection will enhance
              communication and collaboration between  physicians, researchers, librarians,
              students, and staff at GWUMC  and their colleagues around the world.  Students
              will learn that  service in a primary care setting does not mean isolation from
               colleagues, access to information and the latest advances in  medical
              practice.  The Internet will be demonstrated as a bond  which can balance the
              scales between academicians at universities,  major teaching hospitals , and
              research centers with their  counterparts in community hospitals, urban or
              rural clinics, and  the solo practitioner's office.  The Medical Center as part
              of its information management strategic  plan is installing an FDDI network
              named MedNet, which will  integrate the hospital and faculty practice plan
              information  management systems, the academic computing system (including 
              library, bibliographic and clinical information systems), and all  departmental
              LANs.  Current access to the Internet for the Medical  Center is limited to
              dial-access to the University computing center  for researchers, physicians,
              and students based at the School of  Medicine and Health Sciences.  This
              project will establish desktop  connectivity with the Internet for all faculty,
              staff and students,  including connected to the GWUMC network (MedNet) from all
              on and  off-campus locatio ns with the Internet by installing FDDI cards  which
              will link its routers to the George Washington University's  fibreoptic network
              (GWIN) and its Internet gateway.
