Title       : Effects of Expert Science and Technology Testimony in the Legal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9317646

Award Number: 9317646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70023              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Cooper jcoops@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               WPC2               2           B     V   T     W                  #| x   10
              pitch      z N x x x ,             x            @      ;                       
                           HP LaserJet Series II (Additional)   HLSEIIAD.PRS   x            @
                             0   Z      2           5     V   G     W                 Courier
              10 pitch      z N x x x ,             x            @      ;                    
                              HP LaserJet Series II (Additional)   HLSEIIAD.PRS   x          
               @                0   Z      2           (         J         0              #|
              x     9317646 COOPER In our society, the legal system is where many decisions
              that affect the implementation of technology arise.  This study a step in
              determining how such decisions are made and what their impact is on the
              creation and implementation of technological innovation. Technological and
              scientific innovations that are supported by good data can withstand legal
              tests    provided that scientific and technological testimony introduced into
              courts of law or other legal proceedings can be understood by lay jurors and
              judges.  If not, juries and judges are likely to make decisions on scientific
              and technological matters on grounds that may be at variance with expert
              testimony.  In addition to being potentially unjust, the fear that such an
              event might occur may cause technologically based companies to refrain from
              introducing innovations.  This is a study of the production, delivery and
              reception of expert scientific/technological testimony.  The research is
              divided into two phases.  The first phase assesses the degree to which industry
              is concerned about not being able to convince the judicial system of the
              scientific and technological underpinnings of its innovations and consequently
              errs on the conservative side in producing such innovations.  This will be
              accomplished using focus groups composed of individuals from relevant
              professions, patent attorneys, and technical managers.  The second phase is an
              experimental research approach to unders tanding some of the issues involved in
              presenting complex scientific and technological testimony to lay juries.  Using
              the methods of experimental social psychology, the studies test hypotheses
              derived from theories of attitude change.  It is predicted that jurors or other
              decision makers may not always be able to comprehend the scientific and
              technological testimony of experts.  Consequently, rather than attempt to
              process the arguments, the decision makers avail themselves of peripheral or
              heuristic decision rules.  For example, they may base their decisions on the
              background of the expert rather than  the substance of the expert's arguments. 
              In the experiments, juror subjects watch a videotape recreation of a civil
              trial involving the  expert testimony.  The first two experiments examine the
              effects of complexity of the testimony and whether increased  complexity does
              indeed drive jurors to rely on peripheral cues when making decisions.  The
              third experiment tackles the  question of the persuasiveness of paid expert
              witnesses and examines the hypothesis that, regardless of the validity of 
              testimony, experts are discounted relative to an expert selected by the court.
