Title       : The Contractile Vacuole Complex of Dictyostelium Discoideum: Role of 100-KD
               V-ATPase Subunit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1996  
File        : a9317286

Award Number: 9317286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Clarke margaret-clarke@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317286  Clarke      It is proposed to clone and characterize the cDNA for  the
              100 kD vacuolar ATPase.  Preliminary studies in the PI's  laboratory resulted
              in the isolation from a Dictyostelium  expression library of a 1.1 kb cDNA that
              encodes the epitope  that is recognized by the anti-100 kD monoclonal antibody.
               The ORF of 326 amino acids encoded by this cDNA is 39%  identical (77%
              similar) to the amino terminus of the 96 kD  subunit of the rat coded
              vesicle/sinaptic vesicle V-ATPase.  The complete cDNA for the 100 kD protein
              will be cloned, and  its predicted amino acid sequence and protein structure
              will  be compared to those of the homologous mammalian V-ATPase  subunit. 
              Secondly, gene targeting experiments will be used  to explore the function of
              this protein.  Dictyostelium  cells will be transformed with vectors designed
              to disrupt  the gene for the 100 kD protein through homologous  recombination,
              or to reduce its mRNA levels through  antisense mutagenesis.  The resulting
              mutants will be  characterized to determine whether or not proton pumps are 
              correctly assembled and targeted, and whether the mutant  cells are defect in
              their ability to cope with hypoosmotic  stress.  These studies will help to
              elucidate the role of a  highly conserved and poorly understood subunit of
              V-ATPases.  They may also reveal functions beyond osmoregulation that  are
              carried out by the contractile vacuole complex.  %%%  Contractile vacuoles are
              osmoregulatory organelles found in  freshwater amoebae and protozoa.  The means
              by which they  accumulate, sequester  and expel water remains mysterious.  They
              may also serve other functions such as regulation of  intracellular ion levels,
              but this has not been  demonstrated.  The most distinctive feature of
              contractile  vacuole membranes is  their extremely high content of  vacuolar
              type proton pumps , which are likely to play an  essential role  in water
              accumulation and other transport  activities carried out by the contractile
              vacuoles.  Monoclonal antibodies  are available  that recognize two  subunits 
              of the vacuolar proton pump (V-ATPase)  in  Dictyostelium.  One of these
              subunits is an integral  membrane protein of approximately 100 kD whose
              mammalian  counterpart has been postulated to be responsible for the  targeting
               of proton pumps to the correct endomembranes.  The present project will employ
              molecular genetics to  explore the role of this V-ATPase subunit in
              Dictyostelium.  ***
