Title       : Dissertation Research: Amino Acid Stable Isotopes and Ancient Diet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9317579

Award Number: 9317579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11795              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. O'Connell james.oconnell@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Stafford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317579  O'Connell    Under the direction of Drs. James O'Connell and Thomas
              Stafford,  Ms. Joan Coltrain will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. 
              She will determine the carbon isotopic ratios of amino acids  extracted from
              the bone collagen of seven Native American  skeletons. All are well dated and
              derive from secure archaeological  contexts. For 6, it is known whether or not
              corn formed part of the  diet and these will serve as partial controls. The
              seventh is an  unknown of archaeological interest.    For some time
              paleoanthropologists have realized that the diet of  an individual is reflected
              in the chemical composition of the  skeleton and this archaeological tool has
              been used to great  advantage. Attention has focussed on the introduction of
              corn into  prehistoric Native American diet in part because it is amenable to 
              such analysis but also because archaeologists have postulated that  the growth
              of complexity in such societies may be directly tied to  corn cultivation. In
              the Midwest, where corn has a distinctive  carbon isotope signature this
              approach has worked relatively well.  In the drier West however other plants
              also have cornlike carbon  isotope ratios and the procedure has proven more
              difficult to  apply. Ms. Coltrain will deal with this by analyzing the isotopic
               ratios of individual amino acids rather than use bulk collagen as  is normally
              done. She believes that on this micro-level it should  be possible to a pattern
              which is unique to corn.    This research is important for several reasons. The
              technique being  developed should be useable in a wide range or archaeological 
              situations. It will also shed new light on the prehistory of the   U.S. West
              and contribute to the training of a promising young  scientist.  ***
