Title       : Regulation of ER Stress Protein Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9317238

Award Number: 9317238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Green   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317238  Green     The ability of cells to control the synthesis and  assembly
              of their membranes plays a critical role in the  efficiency with which they
              perform specialized functions or  to adapt to a changing external environment. 
              This proposal  focuses specifically on the regulation of the synthesis and 
              assembly of components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in  response to an
              increase in the secretory load of the cell  and on the role of the ER stress
              proteins in this pathway.  An experimental system has been established which
              can be  used to explore "signaling" from the ER and which can be the  basis for
              more refined systems in which to study the  molecular mechanism of the
              generation and transduction of  this "signal".  In addition, a new ER stress
              protein has  been identified and th ecis-acting elements that control its 
              expression have been analyzed.  This work has led to the  development of
              reporter constructs which represent the  ultimate targets of  regulatory
              signals generated in teh ER.  These data provide an excellent basis for the
              investigation  of two aspects of the regulation of the ER stress response:  1)
              the cis-acting regulatory elements and the trans-acting  factors that are the
              ultimate targets for the stress signal;  and 2) the molecular interactions
              responsible for the  transduction of the signal from the ER to the nucleus.  
              In  this project, experiments will be designed to identify and  characterize
              the trans-acting regulatory elements of the  ERp72 gene, a target for the
              signal generated in the ER, and  to determine the mechanisms of both signal
              generation in the  ER and signal transduction across the ER membrane.  The 5' 
              upstream sequences responsible for both basal and stress  signal stimulated
              transcription have already been defined in  earlier work.  A combination of
              DNase I footprinting an  mobility shift DNA binding studies will be used to
              extend  these results and to identify trans-acting factors  recognizing these
              elements.  The identification of these  el ements will allow us to accomplish
              their purification and  cloning and, in turn, should provide us with valuable
              new  insights into the regulatory pathway used to transduce the  ER signal.  A
              second focus of these studies will be  pharmacological studies involving the
              use of inhibitors of  intracellular signalling to probe the ER stress protein 
              regulatory pathway and the functional analysis of purified  and cloned
              trans-acting factors.   Each of the specific aims  is designed to produce
              significant, new information  independently.  It is our hope that each aim will
              augment  the other a produce a deteailed definition of the  intracellular
              signal pathway used by the ER stress response.  %%%  In order for an organism
              to survive, its cells must be able  to adapt to accomodate changes in its
              circumstances or its  external environment.  This entails sensing the changes 
              (signals) and then responding to them in an appropriate  manner.  This project
              focuses on the ability of a cell to  recognize an increase in the amount of
              secretory proteins it  is producing and to respond to this by increasing the 
              amounts of the cellular machinery required to deal with  secretory proteins
              appropriately (cellular stress response  to increased secretory load).  The
              eukaryotic cell is efficiently partitioned into  functional compartments, many
              of which are delineated by  intracellular membranes.  One of these
              membrane-enclosed  compartments, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is the place 
              where newly-synthesized proteins are initially placed if  they are destined for
              secretion.  The new secretory proteins  undergo some post-translational
              processing within the ER,  and are then shuttled to additional intracellular 
              compartments before their ultimate secretion from the cell.  When the amount of
              secretory protein coming into the ER is  increased beyond the system's ability
              to handle the load, a  "signal" is transmitted to the nucleus to up-regulate 
              production of certain ER resident proteins which are  involved in the prope r
              "handling" of transitory secretory  proteins.  This project focuses on the
              question of how  synthesis of those resident proteins become up-regulated as  a
              result of secretory load.  The project has two-fold  significance.  First, a
              better understanding of how cells  handle newly-synthesized secretory proteins
              is critical to  efficient exploitation of eukaryotic cells as bioreactors  for
              the large-scale production of specific proteins of  interest, and therefore
              this project has direct relevance to  biotechnology.  Second, a better
              understanding of how  different functional compartments communicate with each 
              other as well as with the external environment is essential  to a general
              understanding of how organisms adapt to  changing circumstances.  ***
