Title       : The Organic Matrix Associated with Calcium Oxalate Formation in Vitis labrusca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9317366

Award Number: 9317366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9317366  Webbab      Calcium oxalate formation is the predominant form of 
              biomineralization in plants.  Crystals of calcium oxalate  form in higher
              plants in species-specific anatomical and  developmental patterns, indicating
              that their formation is  biologically controlled.  Crystals generally form
              within the  vacuole in association with an organic matrix, which  accumulates
              prior to crystal formation and provides cellular  control over the
              crystallization process.  The long term  goals of the proposed research are to
              understand what  induces particular cells to form crystals, and how the 
              organic matrix controls the crystal development.  Because  expression of the
              organic matrix is a key event in crystal  initiation and differentiation, the
              proposed studios focus  on the organic matrix associated with crystal formation
              in  Vitis labrusca leaves.  In particular, research is aimed in  characterizing
              proteins in membrane enclosures which  surround developing crystals.  These
              membrane enclosures  form prior to crystal initiation, and are in direct
              contact  with the crystal s during development.  In the proposed  research
              polyclonal antibodies will be used that were  developed against membrane
              envelope proteins in rabbits.  The specific objectives of the research are: 1)
              to identify  and characterize immunoreactive proteins in the membrane 
              enclosures, and 2) to determine the specificity of  antibodies for these
              proteins and for the membrane  envelopes.  Antibodies produced against the
              membrane  proteins are used to isolate the individual protein  components.  The
              isolated proteins will be subjected to  amino-terminal sequencing and their
              sequence compared with  other protein sequences already present in data banks.
              The  specificity of the proteins will be examined by  immunoblotting crude
              protein extracts and solubilized  membrane envelope proteins, as well as by 
              immunoelectonmicroscopy.  %%%  Biomineralization is an important process both
              in plants and  animals.  Presently little is known of ho w crystals are 
              initiated in plants, and about their growth.  The proposed  research deals
              primarily with fundamental problems of cell  differentiation and calcium
              regulation in plant growth and  development.  It has also broad relevance
              outside this area  as wll, and will provide information about the mechanisms of
               biomineralization in plants and other organisms.  ***
