Title       : Acquisition of 200 KeV Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9317781

Award Number: 9317781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266382             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Greenough wgreenou@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel I. Stupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise C. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Belmont  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice M. Juraska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this proposal is to request funds for the  purchase of a
              Philips CM- 200 Transmission Electron  Microscope to be housed in the
              Visualization Facility (BVF)  of the Beckman Institute on the University of
              Illinois  campus.    The Principal Investigators will be using this electron 
              microscope for a variety of studies including (i)  neuroplasticity and its
              relationship to underlying cellular  and system level processes (William
              Greenough), (ii) the  study of monodisperse rod-coil block copolymers (Samuel 
              Stupp), (iii) analysis of nuclear and chromosome  architecture (Andrew
              Belmont), (iv) sex differences in the  organization and behavioral function of
              the brain (Janice  Juraska), and (v) the characterization of morphological and 
              functional abnormalities in cerebellar neural circuitry in a  genetic animal
              model of movement dysfunction (Louise  Abbott). In addition to these core
              projects there are 6  other research projects from a variety of disciplines for
               which this instrument provides immediate or long term  benefits.    The
              purpose of obtaining a new instrument is twofold.  Firstly it will provide
              access to an intermediate voltage  instrument for biological research on the
              UIUC campus.  The  only intermediate voltage instruments in this region are 
              exclusively devoted to material science research and  biologists with projects
              for which higher voltages are  necessary have to travel to remote sites. 
              Secondly it will  replace an existing 18 year old instrument currently located 
              in the BVF that is suffering increasingly from age related  problems.  In
              addition to providing unique capabilities for  imaging thicker specimens this
              microscope will have a number  of other important advantages over the existing
              instrument.  The ability to control the instrument through a computer 
              interface and to collect micrographs using a CCD camera will  greatly aid, and
              in  certain cases be essential for several  applications.  Specifically, for
              techniques such as serial  sectioning, quantitative  stereology and single axis
               tomography which  involve the collection or examination of  large numbers of
              images, semi-automatic acquisition  procedures can be devised that not only
              simplify the process  but also ensure that the electron dose is minimized and
              the  region of interest is maximized. Furthermore, certain  applications of
              these 3-dimensional reconstruction  techniques require literally hundreds of
              images per data set  and these applications for practical  considerations will 
              only be feasible given the availability of direct digital  data acquisition. 
              These control and imaging capabilities  will also greatly improve the  routine
              acquisition of high  quality images.    Further advantages of the new
              microscope arise from the  advances in technology  over the past 20 years. 
              These have  led to simplification of alignment procedures, improvements  in
              beam coherence, lenses and goniometer stages and the  implementation of
              techniques for acquiring images at low  doses in order to limit beam damage.   
              The microscope will be located in the Beckman Visualization  Facility which
              houses  a number of other related instruments  (including a confocal
              microscope, a stereology workstation  and various light microscopes) as well as
              supporting  equipment (wet lab, microtomes, darkrooms) and excellent 
              facilities for the digital processing and analysis of  images.  The location of
              the microscope in the multi-  disciplinary environment of the Beckman
              Institute, which  also includes part of the  National Center for 
              Supercomputing Applications, provides an excellent  environment to take
              advantage of some of the latest  technology available for the on- line
              processing and  analysis of electron micrographs.  We are strongly committed 
              to  providing access to this instrument and its associated,  special facilities
              to the  campus wide user group whose  research wholly or partly depends on the 
              application of  electron microscopy.    There is enthusiastic commitment to
              this project from both  the Beckman In stitute  and the University as a whole. 
              This  has been demonstrated by the contribution of  50% matching  funds for the
              project as well as the supporting  infrastructure for the  equipment provided
              by the Beckman  Institute Visualization Facility.
