Title       : Selective Gene Regulation by Manganese and Iron in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9317425

Award Number: 9317425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Helmann jdh9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9161,BIOT,UNKN,
Abstract    :
              9317425  Helmann  This project seeks to define the role of two environmentally 
              important elements, iron and manganese, in gene regulation in the  genetically
              well-characterized soil microbe Bacillus subtilis.  In  preliminary studies,
              gene fusions repressible by iron or manganese  or both were identified.  Three
              of these metal-regulated genes were  cloned and analyzed using molecular
              genetics.  In B. subtilis, iron  regulation appears to involve a regulatory
              protein similar in DNA  binding specificity to the enteric Fur protein.  There
              have been no  Fur homologs described to date from any gram positive organisms. 
               Unlike the enteric Fur protein, the B. subtilis iron-regulatory  protein
              appears to discriminate against manganese.  In the enteric  organisms manganese
              can mimic iron and repress siderophore  biosynthesis and other iron-regulated
              functions.  In contrast,  production of sideropheres in B. subtilis is
              insensitive to  manganese repression.  Conversely, our detection oh highly  
              sensitive manganese-specific transcriptional control suggests the  presence of
              a novel type of metalloregulatory system.  This system  may account, in part,
              for the many striking effects of manganous  ion on production of secondary
              metabolities in Bacilli and other  gram positive organisms.  In Bacilli, iron
              and manganese appear to  control distinct, but overlapping regulons.  For
              example, we have  identified sets of promoter fusions that respond selectively
              to  iron but not manganese or to manganese but not iron.  In one case,  we have
              genetically separated the iron and manganese responses.   These results suggest
              that these elements exert specific and  independent transcriptional control. 
              However, the mechanisms  allowing cells to selectively detect these elements
              and mediated  appropriated transcriptional responses are largely unknown.  We 
              will define the global effects of iron and manganese on gene  regulation and
              determine the molecular basis of selective gene  regulation.  Using protein gel
              electrophores is, we will identify  sets of metalloregulated proteins and
              determine the extent of  cross-talk among the different metal ion regulons.  
              Metalloregulated genes will be isolated using transposon Tn917-lacZ  and the
              DNA sequence determinants of metalloregulation defined.   This will provide the
              tools necessary for the genetic and  biochemical identification of the relevant
              metalloregulatory  proteins.  Characterization of these regulatory proteins
              promises  to shed light on how proteins can discriminate chemically similar 
              metal ions to effect selective transcriptional control.  %%%  This grant
              provides information on how bacteria respond to their  environment, especially
              as regards the presence of metals.  ***
