Title       : Ultra-High Resolution Structure and Dynamics of Bilayer Bound Polypeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9317111

Award Number: 9317111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Cross cross@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9317111 Cross Dr. Cross will continue the development of solid state NMR
              spectroscopy for the determination of macromolecular structure and dynamics in
              samples experiencing an anisotropic environment.  The efforts here focus on
              peptides bound in lipid bilayers where the global motions are restricted to the
              axial rotation about the bilayer normal.  Local motions will be characterized
              in detail and a thorough investigation of correlated motions that may extend
              beyond the peptide into its environment will be sought.  Very high resolution
              structural information will be obtained from orientational constraints which
              have already been shown to have a very level of accuracy.  Through such a
              dynamic and structural characterization it is hoped that a more detailed view
              of the potential energy surfaces of the polypeptide backbone can be achieved. 
              Furthermore, correlations between dynamic rates and kinetic rates may lead to
              unprecedented descriptions of relationships between structure dynamics and
              function.  To achieve these goals a variety of solid state NMR techniques will
              be refined and combined with unique sample preparation schemes that both orient
              lipid bilayers and their host peptides as well as specific site isotopically
              labeled molecules. %%% The development of methods for the determination of
              macromolecular structure for those proteins and other molecules that are not
              easily studied by the more traditional methods, such as x ray diffraction will
              be continued.  The approach taken here will utilize Nuclear Resonance
              spectroscopy of samples that have one dimensional order, such as an oriented
              film.  In this way all molecules are aligned with respect to the magnetic field
               of the instrument and structural constraints are readily achieved.  Membrane
              bound proteins are a very important class of biological macromolecules that are
              responsible for much of the communication between cells in living tissue.  For
              x ray diffraction it has been very difficult to form cocrystals of these
              proteins and the lipid molecules that make up their membrane environment. 
              However, it has been possible to form uniformly aligned samples for the NMR
              spectroscopy and therefore, this method is expected to play a very important
              role in the structure determination of this important class of proteins. ***   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
