Title       : The Maturation Process of Dinitrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9317059

Award Number: 9317059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary P. Roberts groberts@bact.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9181,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9317059  Roberts  Dinitrogease is an important enzyme because of its role in the
               global nitrogen cycle.  Because it is also one of the best  understood complex
              metalloproteins, it is an excellent system for  understanding how metal cluster
              are formed and inserted into  apoproteins.  This proposal addresses a central
              issue in that  phenomenon, namely, the requirements and role of a protein
              (termed  gamma) that associates with the apo-dinitrogenase (ApoI) and is 
              necessary for the insertion of the iron-molybdenum cofactor  (FeMoco) which
              serves as the active site of the enzyme.  The  results will have broad
              implications for protein folding and  maturation,  as well as for the
              mechanisms by which trace metals  are efficiently utilized by cells.  Active
              dinitrogenase is a A-2-B-2 complex comprised of the products  of nifKD.  The
              gene products of nifKD, N, E, and H are necessary  for the synthesis of FeMoco
              and strains defective in any of these  genes accumulate an active, apo-form of
              dinitrogenase.  In the case  of nifB, N, and E mutants, the apo-dinitrogenase
              is an A-2B-2  hexamer that is capable of being activated by purified FeMoco. 
              In  the case of nifH mutants, the apo-dinitrogenase exhibits as A-2B-2 
              structure and requires treatment with dinitrogenase reductase and  MgATP before
              it can be activated by FeMoco.  Because FeMoco is  "buried" approximately 15A
              below the surface of active  dinitrogenase, this insertion process must involve
              substantial  alterations of Apol conformation.  In Klebsiella pneumonia the
              gamma is the product of the nifY gene;  in A. vinelandii, the identity of the
              gene encoding gamma is  unknown, but it is not nifY.  We have evidence that
              gamma is  critical for insertion FeMoco in vitro and that it serves to 
              stabilize Apol in vivo.  We have also demonstrated that d  dinitrogenase
              reductase is necessary to promote the association of  gamma with Apol . 
              Finally, we have partially purified an activity  that stimulates the
              dissociation of gamma from the whole complex  follo wing activation by FeMoco. 
              We therefore have substantial body  on information on the entire pathway by
              which FeMoco is added to  ApoI and the aim of this proposal is to further
              define each of the  steps in this pathway at a molecular level. The goals of
              this  proposal are to (i) Define the mechanism by which gamma becomes 
              associated with ApoI.  This will involve purification of gamma from  A.
              vinelandii, characterization of other proteins and small  molecules that are
              involved in the association reaction, and  identification of the gene that
              encodes gamma. (iii) Define the  nature and requirements for the dissociation
              reaction.  For this  aim, we will purify the dissociation factor to
              homogeneity,  characterize the requirements of the reaction, and identify the 
              gene that encodes the protein.  In each case, the proposed analysis  specific
              will both address the specific aspects of dinitrogenase  maturation and lay the
              groundwork for determining the larger  cellular roles for the proteins
              involved.  The information gained  will provide a uniquely defined insight into
              metalloprotein  maturation, but it will also addressed larger questions in the 
              growing area  of how certain proteins help others attain their  final active
              conformation.  %%%  Dinitrogenase is an important enzyme because of its role in
              the  global nitrogen cycle.  It is also one of the best understood  complex
              metalloproteeins and is an excellent system for  understanding how metal
              clusters are formed and inserted into apo-  proteins (proteins lacking their
              metal centers or cofactors).  This  proposal addresses a central issue in that
              phenomenon, namely, the  requirements and role of a protein (termed gamma) that
              associates   with the apo-dinitrogenase (Apol) and is necessary for the 
              insertion of the iron-molybdenum cofactor (FeMoco) which serves as  the active
              site of the enzyme.  The results will have broad  implications for protein
              folding and maturation, as well as for the  mechanisms by which trace metals
              are efficiently util ized by cells.  The information gained by this project
              will provide a uniquely  defined insight into metalloprotein maturation, but
              will also  address larger questions in the area of protein folding which is an 
              active area of scientific investigation.  In these studies the  proteins and
              genes encoding the proteins will be isolated from  bacterial models such as
              Klebsiella pneumoniae and Azotobacter  vinelandii which are easily manipulated
              systems and part of the  global biosphere involved in the nitrogen cycle.  ***
