Title       : Internet Access for South Dakota Health Professionals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9317700

Award Number: 9317700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Scheer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen Battistella  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dan Whittle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Hulkonen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9317700  Battistella       Grant funding is sought to improve access to the
              University of  South Dakota mid-level Internet node for those health
              professionals  and students who are in medical research, clinical practice, and
               medical education outside of Vermillion, especially in Sioux Falls,  Rapid
              City and Yankton.  Access to the University of South Dakota  Internet node will
              also be extended to health professionals  practicing in rural and frontier
              areas of South Dakota, reducing  geographic barriers to communication and
              obtaining information.   Access to the Internet is an important element of
              medical research,  teaching, and clinical care.  Electronic mail improves 
              communications between health and information professionals for  consultation
              on patient care and administrative issues.  Access to  the Internet's online
              databases, full text files, electronic  journals, special interest groups, and
              software achieves will  enhance research and teaching productivity.  Funding
              will cover the cost of a router, terminal server, modems,  communications
              costs, and computer storage.  Librarians at the  Lommen Health Sciences
              Library, University of South Dakota (USD)  School of Medicine and also
              librarians at remote clinical training  sites will serve as the primary agents
              for Internet training.  The  Lommen Health Sciences Library will also play a
              major role in  product development, creating and maintaining databases on South
               Dakota health issues and assisting in the design of the USD wide  area
              information system.  ***
