Title       : Functional and Evolutionary Analysis of an Inducible, Phenotypically Plastic
               Feeding Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9317293

Award Number: 9317293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianna K. Padilla   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9217293  Padilla  Some organisms are able to respond to changing environments
              during their lifetime, while others are not; their morphology, physiology, or
              behavior may be fixed, not allowing quick responses to their environmental
              changes. The objectives of the proposed research are to understand the
              conditions favoring the ability of an organism to change the way it is built
              (its morphology) during its lifetime as opposed to having a fixed morphology.
              This will be accomplished by direct experimentation and observation as well as
              the use of mathematical and computer models. The PI will use the feeding
              structures of the marine snail, Lacuna, as a model system for this study. The
              animal is abundant, easy to breed and use for laboratory and field experiments,
              and is known to have a feeding morphology that can change when these snails
              move to different environments and eat different foods. The environmental cues
              that are used by these snails to induce new feeding structures and measure the
              consequences of these changes for an animal's feeding rate, growth rate, and
              lifetime reproduction will be determined.. With the use of mathematical and
              computer models the PI can make predictions about conditions that would favor
              individuals that can change their morphology as opposed to having a fixed
              morphology. These would include how often the environment changes (or
              individuals move from one environment to another), how long it takes for a new
              feeding structure to form, and what the cost (for example in reduced feeding
              rate) of having a feeding structure mismatched to the environment. These
              predictions will be directly tested on th ese marine snails. The PI will also
              determine if there is a genetic basis for differences in these features among
              snails, and examine closely related species to determine the evolutionary
              patterns associated with being able to change morphology with changing
              environments.  ***      ~                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  !         !
                        !              F                                                     
                                     4    CG Times    Symbol  & Arial    Tms Rmn  " Helv     
                         8 8                           h                                    
              /        Rochelle D Ray Rochelle D Ray                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
