Title       : High Resolution Crystallographic Studies Using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1995  
File        : a9317770

Award Number: 9317770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Coppens coppens@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9317770  Coppens  In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the 
              Chemistry Division, Prof. P. Coppens of the State University of  New York at
              Buffalo will engage in crystallographic research  using the National
              Synchrotron Light Source at the Brookhaven  National Laboratory and also
              perform experiments using advanced  conventional facilities.  The research
              consists of several  parts: application of anomalous scattering of X-rays to 
              selectively identify site ocupancy, to determine the oxidation  states of atoms
              in solids and to identify spectroscopic  transitions; to study the response of
              crystals to external  perturbations, such as laser-induced molecular
              excitation; and  the analysis of modulated and composite solids, which are 
              aperiodic in at least one direction.  Very low temperature  single crystal
              techniques are to be used in the analysis of  charge densities in crystals, and
              in the investigation of the  temperature-dependence of the structure of
              low-dimensional  conducting solids.  Area detectors are to be applied to charge
               density studies and other fields after new software development  aimed at
              maximizing accuracy of the area-detector intensity  data.    X-ray diffraction
              by single crystals has been used for many  years to study the structure of
              organic and inorganic  materials.  The conventional techniques are based on the
              use of  x-ray tubes, which emit monochromatic radiation of relatively  low
              intensity, thereby limiting their use to large size  crystals and strong
              scatterers.  X-radiation emitted by  synchrotrons has a continuous range of
              wavelengths, a low  spatial divergence, is polarized, and is much brighter than
              the  radiation emitted from conventional x-ray tubes.  These  properties allow
              the determination of the structures of very  small crystals, not heretofore
              possible with conventional  techniques, in a much shorter time and with greater
              accuracy.  The new methods are, however, partly still in the development 
              stage.  The research to be done in this project i s directed  toward
              improvement of the new technique and the solution of new  crystallographic
              problems in physics and materials science.  ***
