Title       : Molecular Biology and Developmental Functions of Wall Extension Proteins
               (Expansins) in Plant Cell Enlargement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1997   
File        : a9317864

Award Number: 9317864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Cosgrove fsl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9317864  Cosgrove      The PI's laboratory has identified and characterized two
              proteins ("expansins") from cucumber hypocotyl walls that appear to mediate the
              acid-extension response of isolated plant cell walls.  This proposal outlines a
              five year plan to investigate the developmental functions of these proteins and
              to elucidate the mechanism of their action.  The proposal has five major
              objectives.  These are:  a) to clone and sequence the two expansin genes from
              cucumbers and one expansin gene from Arabidopsis, and to identify conserved
              sequences that may code for the active site of the expansins;  b) To analyze
              the spatial and temporal patterns of the expansin gene expression at the mRNA
              level and to relate these to developmental patterns of growth;  c) To construct
              transgenic plants with reduced or enhanced levels of expansin expression and to
              analyze the resulting alterations in phenotype;  d) To map the Arabidopsis gene
              and test whether previously identified Arabidopsis growth mutants are deficient
              in expansin production;  e) to express an expansin gene in E. coli as a means
              of verifying gene identity and as source for protein for studies on isolated
              cell walls and living cells.  %%%  This study is important because it will
              establish the role of this novel class of proteins in plant growth.  Expansins
              are the only wall proteins found to date that have the ability to induce
              extension in isolated plant cell walls.  The growth response these protein
              mediate seems to be common in cells with cellulosic walls and it may contribute
              to auxin-stimulated growth.  The understanding of  the role of expansins and
              their mech anism of action will most likely lead to important discoveries of
              the molecular basis of plant cell wall changes during plant growth.  ***       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  {          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          7   <   u   {                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     !   Z       !   Z           Z       !              F                    
                                                      {         {     (    Times New Roman   
              Symbol  & Arial                 ` `         U   "             h            %   
                <                 5        Dr. Geza Hrazdina Dr. Geza Hrazdina               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
