Title       : CONACYT: Design and Implementation of a Wireless Communication System using
               BiCMOS Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9613722

Award Number: 9613722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar Sanchez-Sinencio sanchez@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Costas N. Georghiades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1069,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9613722  Sanchez-Sinencio  The main goal of this proposal is to identify,
              characterize, model, and design algorithms and devices that are essential in
              wireless system applications, using a unified approach.  This involves a
              (top-down) hierarchical design all the way from the system point of view, to
              the transistor level implementation.  Tradeoffs between system architecture,
              BiCMOS circuit implementations, cost, power consumption, and performance at
              different levels will be identified.  This research will yield important
              practical results that form the basis for many wireless communication products,
              and specifically those to be used for the upcoming personal communication
              systems (PCS) and in communication over the industrial, scientific and medical
              (ISM) bands.  The tradeoffs in building complete wireless communication
              products in integrated circuit form, versus hybrids (with off-chip components)
              will be a key component of the proposed research.    This work proposed in this
              proposal encompasses theory, software simulation, and hardware implementations.
               The uniqueness of the approach is based on the coordinated effort of two
              groups with proven accomplishments in communications and microelectronics
              circuits.  Heavy interaction between both faculty members and graduate students
              from the two institutions proposing this project is expected.  The Texas A&M
              University contribution will be in the communication system architectures,
              multiple-access techniques (i.e. CDMA, TDMA, etc.), signal processing
              algorithms, mixers, and active and passive filters.  The INAOE contribution
              will be mainly in the BiCMOS circuit design of key building blocks.  These
              blocks include the front-end low noise amplifier (LNA), power amplifiers,
              channel encoders/decoders, and correlators.  The feasibility and performance of
              the proposed designs will be verified first by software simulation involving
              tradeoffs, experimental verification b silicon chip-prototypes of important
              building blocks, and some system applications resul ts.    A successful
              conclusion of this proposal research will lead to practical, unified design
              methodologies for designing wireless communication systems, especially those
              for PCS and unlicensed devices operating in the ISM bands.  Contributions at
              the system, building block, and hardware levels and their interrelations are
              anticipated.  This research will have an important effect on the infrastructure
              of wireless research and education in our universities, since a significant
              number of students are already involved.  Funding for these students will come
              not only potentially from the support requested in this proposal, but also from
              present support, exceeding half a million dollars, from the College of 
              Engineering and the Department of Electrical Engineering at Texas A&M
              University, as well as from Texas Instruments, over the next three years.  The
              utility and relevance of the proposed research is based on substantial
              industrial ties, and strong exchange of ideas between academia and university. 
              ***
