Title       : Two-Stage Fermentation of Whey Permeate for Biodegradable Deicer Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9613273

Award Number: 9613273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander P. Mathews alex@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9613273  Mathews    Biomass wastes such as liquid whey effluents from the dairy 
              industry are a burden on the environment due to their high  biochemical oxygen
              demand (BOD). Treatment of these wastes  to meet environmental standards is
              both capital and energy  intensive.  This proposal examines the use of whey
              permeate  in the production of a road deicer substitute for sodium  chloride,
              since currently used deicers cause extensive  corrosion-related damage to the
              highway infrastructure and  environmental damage to water supplies and soils.
              The  proposed research will examine the use of biomass wastes in  the
              production of substitute deicers, calcium magnesium  acetate (CMA) and calcium
              magnesium propionate (CMP), via a  two-stage bacterial fermentation process. 
              In addition,  a  mathematical model  will be to describe continuous cell- 
              recycle fermentation in coculture systems.    Growth kinetics studies will be
              conducted using the bacteria  Propionibacterium acidipropionici and
              Lactobacillus  plantarum in monoculture and coculture systems.  The effect  of
              substrate concentration, pH and other parameters on  growth and organic acid
              productivity will be determined.  A  synergistic growth kinetics model that
              includes substrate  and product inhibition kinetics will be developed, and 
              kinetic constants will be obtained from the data.  Continuous flow cell-recycle
              fermentation studies will be  conducted for coculture and two-stage
              fermentation systems  to determine acid productivity and product
              concentrations.  A model will be developed to describe continuous flow cell- 
              recycle fermentation for single and coculture systems, and  the model will be
              verified with the experimental data.    This research will develop data and
              basic knowledge required  in the design of an innovative fermentation system
              for the  conversion of whey effluents to useful chemicals.  The  methodology
              and approach developed can be utilized in  processes to convert a variety of
              inexpensive sugar  substrates and biomass hydrolysat es into low-cost 
              biodegradable deicers.
