Title       : NSF/EPA: Environmentally-Benign Processing Low Dielectric Constant Polymers for
               Microelectronics Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9613377

Award Number: 9613377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. Raupp raupp@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Beaudoin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1238,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Raupp - 9613377    This research is motivated by the need for
              enhanced thin film materials' performance in microelectronics devices and
              cost-effective environmentally benign processes for producing these materials
              in microelectronics manufacturing.  The global objective is to investigate
              critical fundamental processing and materials science barriers related to
              implementation of vapor deposited polymers, a promising dielectric option which
              addresses these performance, cost and environmental technology drivers.    The
              research targets low dielectric constant thin film parylenes and polyimides for
              intermetal dielectric applications in multilevel interconnection.  The PI's
              will simultaneously investigate chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of polymer thin
              films and associated CVD chamber cleaning and polymer etching.  In
              collaboration with industrial professionals at Motorola, Inc. and Olin
              chemicals, the practical process integration issues and the environmental,
              safety and health impact of this alternative technology will be assessed in
              each step of this study.  This integrated approach will provide a comprehensive
              technology transfer package to facilitate implementation in industrial
              practice.    The expected principal environmental benefits of the technology
              are as follows: (1) vapor deposition avoids solvent-based spin-on processes and
              their associated air emissions and liquid waste; (ii) vapor deposition
              employing recovery and recycle of monomer has a high potential for near zero
              emission operation; (iii) the need for CVD chamber cleans should be reduced
              through appropriate reactor design and process control; and (iv) chamber
              cleaning and post-deposition etching of polymer films can be performed with
              oxygen-based plasmas, eliminating the need for perfluorocompounds (PFCs) 
              commonly employed to etch inorganic dielectric films.
