Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis with Boronic Esters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9613857

Award Number: 9613857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Matteson dmatteson@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Support is provided by the Organic Synthesis Program  to continue   Professor
              Donald S. Matteson's studies of asymmetric synthesis with   boronic esters in
              the Department of Chemistry at Washington State   University.  Professor
              Matteson will examine the cyclization of   asymmetric boronic esters to obtain
              chiral cyclobutanes, providing a new   route for the synthesis of natural
              products, typified by the boll weevil   pheremone, grandisol.  Reactions
              allowing the conversion of boronic   esters to alkyldihaloboranes will be
              developed, and these reactions will   be modified through intramolecular
              delivery of nucleophilic centers to   afford new syntheses of nitrogen- and
              oxygen-containing heterocycles.    Catalytic chirality control in the formation
              of carbon-carbon bonds will   be assayed, as will reactions resulting in the
              conversion of carbon-boron   bonds to carbon-nitrogen and carbon-carbon bonds. 
              These studies will   open the doors for the preparation of C2-chiral diamines
              and the study of   retroracemization reactions, allowing complete conversion of
              racemic   boronic ester substrates to a single diastereomeric product.  Many
              molecules exist which bear the same relationship to their mirror   image as a
              right hand bears to a left hand - they look the same, but they   are not
              identical.  Often, one form of a molecule will display different   properties,
              particularly with regards to biological activity, than those   of its mirror
              image form, and thus synthetic organic chemists must devise   methods for the
              preparation of single forms of desired molecules.    Professor Matteson will
              explore such `asymmetric` syntheses by developing   the chemistry of compounds
              containing boron, exploiting the unusual   chemical reactivity of such
              compounds to facilitate the formation of new   carbon-carbon and
              carbon-nitrogen bonds.  He will develop routes to broad   classes of compounds,
              providing a general foundation on which to build   the field of asymmetric
              synthesis, and also will highlight the practical   utility of the chemistry
              through the synthesis of a molecule which may   serve as an agent for the
              control of boll weevil infestations.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
