Title       : DNA Computation on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9613799

Award Number: 9613799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max G. Lagally lagally@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              (1) This multi-disciplinary project concentrates on  developing computation at
              the molecular level, via  manipulation of DNA strands on surfaces. An 
              experimental demonstration of DNA-based computation by  Adleman(a) has changed
              the view of what computation is,  (b) offers the potential for unprecedented
              computing  power at the molecular level, and (c) raises  fundamentally new
              research problems in chemistry,  computer science, and material science.  This
              project  represents a concerted attack on these problems which  involves close
              collaboration between chemists, material  scientists, and computer
              scientists.(2) This research  will help answer two major questions on
              DNAcomputation.  First, does computation at the molecular level have the 
              potential to provide computing power that is orders of  magnitude greater than
              foreseeable extrapolations of  current technology? Second, is this type of
              computation  suited to solving NP-hard problems (problems that are  well beyond
              the limits of current technology?(3) The  potential for huge computing power
              rests on the use of  DNA strands to encode information and the manipulation  of
              these strands in a massively parallel fashion,  involving as many as 2^70 (2 to
              the 70th power)  distinct strands.  The premise of this project is that 
              surface-based chemistry is a critical technology in  approaching this scale. 
              With this approach, DNA  strands are immobilized on a surface, thus allowing a 
              much greater degree of control in chemical processes  that manipulate the DNA
              than is achievable via the test  tube based methodology of Adleman. While
              surfacebased  chemistry is the basis for recent strides in  combinatorial
              chemistry, this project is the FIRST to  fully exploit surface-based
              manipulation of DNA strands  for the purposes of DNA computation.(4) Scaling up
               current surface chemistry to approach the requirements  of DNA-based
              computation requires high-quality research  at the interface of materials
              science and chemistry.  Improvements in the nanoscale morph ology and chemical 
              makeup of the surface is key to ensuring that a high  density of information
              can be obtained and reliable  chemical manipulations performed.  Good surface 
              attachment chemistry and control of chemical  ``operations'' or enzymatic      
                   processes are also extensively developed. This project  should result in
              significant advances in the state of-  the-art in surface chemistry and should
              provide a solid  basis for predicting the limits of surfacebased DNA 
              computation.(5) An eventual goal of DNA-based  computation is to perform
              massivelyparallel searches  for optimal solutions of NPhard problems.  However,
              the  differences between DNAbased computation and  conventional technology
              require that radically new  algorithms be developed for this paradigm.
              Tempering  the potential for unprecedented parallelism (up to 2^70 
              simultaneous operations) is extremely slow and  errorprone nature of the
              operations themselves. Novel  strategies for generating and searching solution
              spaces  for NPhard problems are investigated.   These  strategies embody sound
              algorithmic principles that can  be applied to a range of problems.  Using a
              combination  of analysis and simulations, the effectiveness of these 
              strategies are tested on selected applications. This  work provides new ways of
              attacking NPhard problems  that, while designed for a hypothetical DNA based 
              computer, are valuable for massively parallel computing  paradigms, other than
              the DNA-based paradigm studied  here.(6) Thus this comprehensive program will
              provide a  deep understanding of the potential and limitations of  DNAbased
              computation, from both the chemical and  algorithmic viewpoints.***
