Title       : NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: Environmentally Conscious Design
               and Manufacturing with Input-Analysis and Markovian Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9613076

Award Number: 9613076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter W. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Sutherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudhakar M. Pandit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1238,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9613076  Olson      This award is made under the NSF/EPA Partnership for
              Environmental Research. The research explores and creates a mathematical
              computational tool which when used with Life Cycle Analysis provides a
              quantitative Impact Improvement Analysis. A quantitative state space model of
              industrial products or processes will be created. The model, as a discrete
              finite Markov chain, will predict the impact of a proposed design decision and
              optimize that decision for its impact upon both sustainable development and the
              environment on the firm and its industry. Using time history data, a
              multivariate data dependent system (DDS) will be developed to further refine
              the analysis so that decision makers can order their decisions to have the
              least disruptive effect upon their operations. The research tools will be made
              available on the World Wide Web.        If successful, this research will
              provide to industry tools to allow decision makers to apply Environmental Life
              Cycle Analysis at the facility level. Currently these tools do not exist and
              restrict or prevent decision makers from taking advantage of Life Cycle
              Analysis in planning both products and processes. Among these tools is an
              effective means to compute the anticipated changes in materials on a facility
              due to the attempt to meet specified environmental goals for material reduction
              and prevention of pollution. Additionally, these tools provide a dynamic, time
              structured, analysis of the effects of incremental decisions. This is enhanced
              by the ability to compare and optimize decisions to meet industrial competitive
              objectives. This research extends Life Cycle Analysis to allow manufacturers to
              better quantify their inventories and to provide pathways to reducing material
              usage where desired.    ***
