Title       : HACU National Internship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1996  
File        : a9613801

Award Number: 9613801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moria A. Lenehan-Razzuri hacuhnip@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hispanic Assoc of Col & U
	      4204 Gardendale Suite 216
	      San Antonio, TX  782293140    /   -

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the National Science Foundation will enable the the   Hispanic
              Association of Colleges and Universities to place seven students   with the
              Foundation through the HACU National Internship Program (HNIP).    HNIP
              enhances the awareness of federal sector professional opportunities   among
              Hispanic college students. The program is comprised of a fully   administered
              and managed ten-week student internship program. It places   college students
              in stimulating and challenging professional and   educational roles within the
              federal sector. Utilizing an intensive   summer model, HACU and the sponsoring
              departments/agencies provide   academically qualified students with
              experience-based learning. Student   interns are placed in federal offices and
              laboratories located in the   Washington, D.C. metropolitan area and in field
              sites throughout the   United States and Puerto Rico. Student placements are
              based upon position   descriptions provided by supervisors which detail the
              academic   preparation, work experience and special skills required to perform
              the   job.  HACU also provides a parallel set of developmental activities for  
              students placed in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area geared to   enhance
              the understanding of and interest in federal career initiatives   and other
              educational information, cultural diversity issues, community   service, and
              leadership and networking opportunities.  The internship program is
              specifically designed to achieve the following   objectives:  To provide
              professional experience for Hispanic students that will enable   them to make
              educated career choices;  to expose students to research,   development,
              technology, and administrative career opportunities in the   federal
              government;  to supplement academic study with practical   applications for
              students majoring in relevant fields and related   disciplines;  to extend and
              strengthen the relationship between   government agencies/bureaus and  HSIs and
              other institutions that have   significant Hispanic enrollment and that offer 
              related academic   programs. These ties will continue to offer an expanded
              recruitment   resource to the federal departments;  to encourage students to
              explore   and possibly pursue careers relevant to offerings found with the
              federal   sector;  to present or make available to both Washington D.C. and
              field   site interns  information that reinforces the departmental outreach
              efforts that   assist, train, and prepare Hispanic students for potential
              federal career   opportunities and service.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
