Title       : NSF/EPA: Nearcritical Water for Environmentally Benign Chemical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9613063

Award Number: 9613063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Eckert cae@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Liotta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9613063  Eckert    Nearcritical water (NCW) is an environmentally-benign solvent
              that offers tremendous opportunities for pollution prevention for a wide
              variety of manufacturing processes in the chemical, petrochemical,
              pharmaceutical, and plastics industries.  In the range 250-350C, NCW has a
              density and dielectric constant similar to that of ambient acetone, permitting
              the dissolution and reaction of both organic and ionic species, as well as the
              swelling of polymers.  Unlike supercritical water, which is used for complete
              oxidation (usually     >400C), the more moderate temperatures permit a wider
              range of useful reactions.  Finally, NCW has an ionization constant which is
              three orders of magnitude greater than water at ambient temperatures and
              pressures.  This latter property should facilitate promotion of acid- and base-
              catalyzed reactions in the absence of added mineral acids and bases.    This
              investigation proposed first to gather, evaluate critically, expand, and model
              the database of thermodynamic data (primarily solubilities) for organics in
              NCW.  Next kinetic data will be obtained for a variety of important reactions
              which are of industrial interest.  Such information will facilitate the
              commercialization of this technology by industry, especially by the active
              collaborator on this proposal, DuPont.  The reactions that will be run will be:
                  o Friedel-Crafts alkylation reactions   o Friedel-Crafts acylation
              reactions   o Oxidation of alkyl aromatics   o Hydrolytic depolymerization of
              condensation polymers   o Isomerization reactions   o Hydrolysis of cellulose  
               We already have preliminary kinetic data that demonstrate that one alkylation
              reaction can be run successfully without any added acid catalyst, and that an
              acylation reaction can be run with only traces of a catalyst in place of the
              2-3 fold molar excess of AlCl 3 usually used.    As a result of these
              investigations, new processes will be available using "green chemistry" for
              sustainable development.  NCW will replace ma ny less desirable solvents, such
              as aromatic hydrocarbons and chlorinated compounds, it will avoid the use of
              polluting mineral acids and hazardous catalysts, it will permit the
              minimization of even the elimination of unwanted byproducts, it will provide
              better control of reactions which can be run homogeneously instead of
              heterogeneously, and it will facilitate closed processes by reuse of waste
              material.  ***
