Title       : NSF/EPA: Effective Environmental Policy in the Presence of Distorting Taxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9613458

Award Number: 9613458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dallas Burtraw burtraw@rff.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510201   Domestic Economic Modeling              
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the economic cost of policy instruments for
              environmental protection in the presence of preexisting distortionary taxes.
              Recent literature has identified the potentially significant indirect economic
              cost that an environmental tax has when there are preexisting distortionary
              taxes in factor markets such as capital and labor.  This cost counteracts the
              anticipated benefits that might follow from recycling revenue raised by an
              environmental tax to reduce preexisting taxes.  The insight that motivates this
              approach is that environmental policies that do not raise revenues nonetheless
              are likely to impose a cost through their interactions with preexisting taxes
              just as would an environmental tax.  However, regulations forgo the potential
              benefit from recycling environmental tax revenues. This research focuses
              primarily on the comparison of revenue-raising and nonrevenue-raising
              instruments in various settings, and evaluates their economic cost in achieving
              a stated environmental goal.  This research is supported by complementary
              funding by NSF and EPA under the Partnership for Environmental Research.  The
              part to be funded by NSF focuses on the regulation of a single pollutant in the
              presence of preexisting taxes in factor markets.  Investigators will use an
              analytical model to advance the understanding of the interactions between
              environmental policy and the tax system. The theoretical model will be
              complemented with numerical models to deal with some more complex
              interconnections that cannot be determined unambiguously. The numerical models
              will consider the costs of existing and potential policies for reducing air
              emissions of particular pollutants such as CO2 and SO2 in the U.S. economy. 
              The second part will be funded by EPA and will extend the analysis of
              preexisting distortions in factor markets to consider preexisting distortions
              in an industry that is immediately subject to environmental regulation. 
              Investigators will model the institutional setting of the U.S. electric utility
              industry to consider the regulation of multiple pollutants, other environmental
              policies special to the industry, and various forms imperfect competition and
              market structure that may characterize ongoing changes in the industry. 
              Initial research on this topic suggests there are striking and important
              differences between the economic performance of alternative instruments when
              they are evaluated in the context of preexisting distortionary taxes.  The
              results of this research project should advance the understanding of the
              economic cost of environmental regulation, and especially the design of
              policies to minimize that cost.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
