Title       : Computational Optimization in Collaboration with Mexican Researchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9613805

Award Number: 9613805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21424              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianer Chen chen@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficient solution to optimization problems is of great  interest and importance
              in practice and theory.  Unfortunately, many important optimization problems
              turn out  to be NP-hard, which implies that they do not have efficient 
              solutions based on current computer techniques.  However,  this does not
              obviate the need for solving these problems.  Approximation algorithms and
              heuristic algorithms for these  optimization problems have been studied. 
              Recent progress in  computational optimization has greatly advanced the 
              understanding of the approximability of optimization  problems.  In particular,
              recent study of the SATISFIABILITY  problem (SAT) and the MAXIMUM
              SATISFIABILITY problem  (MAXSAT) has played an important role in recent
              advances in  computational optimization.  Motivated by such an exciting 
              progress in the area, Dr. Jianer Chen from the Department of  Computer Science
              at Texas A&M University (TAMU) of the  United States of America and Dr.
              Guillermo Morales-Luna from  the Computer Science Section at the Mexican
              Research and  Advanced Studies Center of National Polythecnic Insitute 
              (CINVESTAV_IPN) of Mexico have formed a research team for  performing the
              U.S.-Mexico collaborative research.  The  primary objectives of this
              collaboration are: to establish a  long term cooperation among the theoretical
              computer science  groups in the computer sciences departments of TAMU and 
              CINVESTAV-IPN; to strengthen the graduate program in  Computer Science in
              CINVESTAV-IPN, and to increase the  international competence and
              accomplishments of the  theoretical computer science research group at TAMU; to
               develop new techniques for designing better approximation  algorithms and to
              develop new methods for analyzing existing  approximation algorithms; and to
              develop a computational  environment for testing and experimenting with
              approximation  algorithms, in particular, approximation algorithms for  MAXSAT,
              with special care to examine the efficiency and  approximation factors of the
              tested algorithms .
