Title       : The Role and Regulation of Chloride Cells in Antarctic Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9613738

Award Number: 9613738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114445             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Petzel dpetzel@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Dowd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. David Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9613738  Petzel  Antarctic fish have the highest serum osmolality of any 
              seawater teleost.  Maintenance of fluid balance is crucial  for survival.  Upon
              warm acclimation from -1.5o to 4oC the  fish lmse 20% of their serum osmolality
              through extrusion of  NaC1 across the gill.  NaC1 extrusion in fish is
              primarily  performed by chloride-secreting cells located on the gill  arches
              and gill opercula.  The driving force for NaC1  transport is the Na/K-ATPase. 
              To date, no information is  available concerning role and regulation of the
              elevated  serum osmolarity in Antarctic fish.  Questions which arise  include: 
              What role does the chloride cell play in mediating  salt extrusion?  Which
              hormones regulate chloride cell  activity?  The chloride cell physiology and
              regulation in  Antarctic fish will be compared with a New Zealand fish  which
              is eurythermal.    The goals of the proposed research are to determine the 
              plasticity of Antarctic and New Zealand fish gill function  at the
              physiological level (through studies of ion transport  activity) and molecular
              level (through studies of the  Na/K-ATPase enzyme), specifically this research
              will: 1)  determine the gill extrusion mechanisms underlying the  increase in
              gill Na/K-ATPase activity upon warm acclimation  in Antarctic fish and 2)
              determine the hormonal regulation  of the gill extrusion mechanisms. Previously
              it was shown  that upon warming of Antarctic fish there is an increase in  NaC1
              extrusion as a result of increases in gill total  Na/K-ATPase enzyme levels.   
              The proposed experiments will measure chloride cell  morphology, metabolism,
              physiolmgy and regulation in  parallel with effects of warming and cooling on
              the whole  fish.  Measurements of chloride cell morphology will include 
              changes in diameter and number of cells at different  temperatures.  In order
              to ascertain the role of Na/K-ATPase  in mediating the enhanced salt extrusion
              upon warming, we  will measure total enzyme activity and total number of 
              enzymes.  The role of the chlor ide cell in transport of C1  and Na will
              assayed by placing the gill opercula sheet  epithelia in Using chambers to
              determine the influence of  fish warming on short-circuit current, which is a
              direct  measurement of chloride transport through chloride cells.  Finally,
              regulation of chloride cell function will be  determined by altering palsma
              levels cortisol, prolactin and  endogenous endocrines.    The results from the
              proposed experiments will, for the  first time, describe in detail the
              underlying mechanism(s)  mediating the enhance hypo-osmoregulation observed in 
              Antarctic fish and will allow the comparison of these  results to those
              observed in a eurythermal New Zealand fish.
