Title       : Policy, Norms, and Values in Forest Conservation: Protected Area Buffer Zone
               Management in Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9613493

Award Number: 9613493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max J. Pfeffer mjp5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Schelhas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tropical deforestation is a substantial problem of worldwide concern.  National
              parks have been established by many nations to conserve forests, but their
              effectiveness in protecting forests is in doubt due to their limited size.  As
              a result, forests in adjoining agricultural landscapes are increasingly
              recognized as important components of protected area ecosystems.  This research
              focuses on human forest conservation behaviors that contribute to patterns of
              forest cover that enhance the conservation benefits of parks and protected
              areas.   The norms and values that may motivate forest conservation behavior in
              economically less developed countries are changing in important ways. 
              Surprising findings from recent research indicate that people in poorer
              countries value the environment as much as their counterparts in wealthier
              parts of the world.  But does the growing importance of environmental values
              lead to improved forest conservation behavior?  Exposure to an expanding array
              of sometimes conflicting values can lead to social fragmentation, value
              conflicts between individuals and uncertainty about socially appropriate
              environmental behaviors.   This project will evaluate the role of values in
              environmental behavior contrasting experiences in Costa Rica and Honduras.  The
              objectives are:  1) to determine the sources of environmental norms and values
              in economically less-developed settings, focusing on hypotheses posed in recent
              literature; 2) to specify relationships between environmental norms and values
              and forest conservation behaviors in protected area buffer zones; 3) to
              evaluate outcomes of self-reported forest conservation behaviors with objective
              measures of forest management and change; 4) to develop policy recommendation
              on protected area buffer zone management based on research findings.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
