Title       : Fitness Consequences of Avian Coloniality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9613638

Award Number: 9613638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209263             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Brown charles-brown@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9613638  BROWN  This project seeks to understand why animals live in groups. 
              Many different organisms, including humans, show different degrees of
              group-living:  some animals live in tiny groups or solitarily, whereas others
              in the same population may reside in enormous colonies.  To understand why some
              individuals prefer living in large groups and others in small groups requires
              knowing the reproductive consequences of such choices.  In what way do certain
              animals benefit from groups of one size while others apparently benefit from
              groups of another size?  This question is addressed in this research, which
              focuses on a colonially breeding bird, the cliff swallow (_Hirundo
              pyrrhonota_), that breeds on the sides of steep cliffs and canyons and
              underneath the eaves of bridges and buildings throughout much of western North
              America.  The objectives are to determine how different birds sort themselves
              among different sized nesting colonies and on what basis; whether there is a
              single colony size that is best for all birds (where reproductive success is
              greatest); whether a swallow's preference for a particular sized nesting colony
              is genetically based and thus inherited from its parents; and how the birds'
              nesting success   is affected if their nesting colony is changed in size.  The
              research uses primarily mark-recapture methods that involve bird banding: 
              birds are banded at a particular site and their subsequent activity and
              lifespan is determined by recatching them at that site or others in later
              years.  This study builds on 15 years of past work on this cliff swallow
              population.       This project will further our understanding of why animal
              group sizes vary in nature.  Group size affects many aspects of animal
              behavior: for example, the spread of disease, extent of competition for
              resources such as food, type of mating strategy, and extent of cooperation and
              altruism among individuals are all influenced heavily by the size of a social
              group.  We can   better understand these important conseque nces of group life
              if we know what causes groups to vary in size in the first place and if we know
              whether different groups are composed of different kinds of individuals.  The
              cliff swallow provides a well-studied animal model whose social behavior
              parallels that of other social species, and it will yield insight into
              fundamental   processes that govern group formation in many kinds of organisms.
