Title       : Molecular-Based Study of Reversed Micelles in Supercritical in Carbon Dioxide
               for Solvent Substitution in the U.S. Chemical Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9613555

Award Number: 9613555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Cummings ptc@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Beckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hank D. Cochran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George D. Wignall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. DeSimone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9613555  Cummings    It is proposed to use small angle x-ray (SAXS) and neutron
              (SANS) scattering plus complementary molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo
              (MC) simulations to develop a molecular-level understanding of the formation
              and stability of reverse micelles (RMs) in supercritical carbon dioxide
              (SC-CO2).  The results of this project will contribute to the fundamental
              knowledge base for the U.S. chemical industry to substitute SC-CO2 for many of
              the toxic or hazardous solvents presently used in most industrial chemical
              reaction and separation processes.    Despite its attractive features as a
              solvent substitute, SC-CO2  is not a good solvent for certain classes of
              substances, e.g. 1) water, water-soluble, and polar substances or 2) most high
              molecular weight substances such as synthetic polymers or proteins.  Techniques
              have been proposed, however, for processing these insoluble substances in
              SC-CO2  through the use of RMs.  Recently, after a decade-long search,
              appropriate surfactants have been discovered to disperse both aqueous systems
              and polymers in RMs andSC-CO2.  The aim of this work is to understand how the
              detailed molecular characteristics of the newly discovered surfactants
              contribute to the formation of RMs to understand what makes a successful CO2  
              -philic surfactant tail, to characterize the interfacial layer between the
              continuous SC-CO2  phase and the microscopic RM core, to establish the basis
              for predicting and measuring the size and shape of RMs, in short, to provide
              the molecular foundations for the needed knowledge base for widespread
              industrial utilization RMs in SC-CO2  as substitute for liquid solvents.    It
              is proposed to apply four molecular-based techniques to study RMs in SC-CO2: 1)
              SANS for its ability to vary contrast between specific molecular components
              through selective deuteration, 2) SAXS for its high productivity and different
              contrast compared with SANS, 3) MC for its efficient exploration of the
              configuration space, and 4) MD for its capability to  explore dynamical
              processes at a molecular level.  Scattering can tell much about the
              microstructure (spheres? rods? lamella? biocontinuous structures?) and
              macrostructure (clustering?) of RMs which is unavailable by other means. Both
              the 30-m SANS instrument at ORNL with the existing high pressure SAXS cell,
              will be used to characterize RMs with both polymer and water cores.  And the
              massively parallel Intel Paragon supercomputers at ORNL, will be used to
              simulate RMs from the newly discovered surfactants in SC-CO2  using accurate
              models developed from the OPLS parameter set.  The combination of the power of
              the Paragon supercomputers and the efficiency of our parallel techniques will
              permit determination of the stability of preconstructed RMs. A primary goal
              will be to make quantitative comparisons between the stable RM structures as
              determined by SANS and SAXS experiments and those determined by simulation. 
              Then, it is proposed to use simulation experiments, with available
              thermodynamic data, to understand the balance of interactions that is required
              to form stable RMs in SC-CO2, and thus to understand the molecular structure
              required for a successful surfactant.    With anticipated success in the
              proposed SANS, SAXS, MC, and MD studies, a full repertoire of molecular-based
              tools for study of RMs in SC-CO2  would be available.  With these tools it is
              proposed to test and adapt existing thermodynamic models of aqueous RMs, e.g.,
              those Nagarajan, Blankschtein, and Holland, to RMs in SC-CO2 .  With both
              molecular and thermodynamic models, it is proposed to suggest novel surfactants
              for synthesis and testing.      Achieving even a small fraction of this degree
              of success, will substantially enhance the knowledge base for widespread
              substitution of SC-CO2 to replace conventional liquid solvents in the U.S.
              chemical industry.  A more competitive industry with reduced emissions will be
              the ultimate result.   ***
