Title       : Factors Influencing Participation of Local Governmental Officials in
               Environmental Policy Making and Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9613626

Award Number: 9613626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Webler Twebler@crocker.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth Tuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Social/Env Rsch Inst
	      474 Norton Rd
	      East Otis, MA  010290020    /   -

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will explore the factors influencing the nature of the
              participation (whether or not they participated and how they participated) of
              local governmental officials in environmental policy making initiatives
              sponsored by the EPA.  Participation by local governmental officials is not
              give the same attention in the literature as that of citizens, publics,
              technical experts, or stakeholders.  And yet local governments are often a
              keystone to successfully implementing and enforcing environmental policies. 
              The project will examine three applications from the National Estuary Program: 
              New Hampshire Estuaries, Casco Bay in Maine and Massachusetts Bays.  Maine and
              Massachusetts cases were selected because they achieved very different levels
              of participation of local governmental officials and they used similar yet not
              identical procedural structures.  New Hampshire was selected because it is in a
              much earlier phase of operation, yet it draws upon the lessons learned in the
              Maine and Massachusetts cases.   Factors influencing the decision of local
              governmental officials to participate in national and regional policy making
              and implementation efforts will be examined through a direct interview protocol
              and responses to hypothetical policy scenarios.   Once it is better understood
              how local government officials interpret the messages they receive from
              decision making bodies, it will be possible to generate prescriptive advice for
              how to approach and involve this body of people in policy making and
              implementation efforts.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
