Title       : Conference on Evolution of Plant Development: to be held January 20-26, 1997,
               Taos, NM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9613640

Award Number: 9613640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Wessler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Ctr For Cont Ed
	      PO Box 606
	      Dillon, CO  804350606    303/468-5822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9613640  Wessler    The meeting goal is to bring together the separate
              communities of plant developmental and evolutionary biologists.  This will be
              only the second large conference devoted exclusively to this topic.  The first,
              held in 1993, was also a Keystone Symposium that we organized.  The excitement
              generated by this well-attended first meting led us to conclude that it is the
              same as those for this second meeting.  We continue in our attempt to join two
              fields that have just begun to collaborate.  The first field is molecular
              genetics of plant development where the most exciting work is currently
              focusing on (i) identifying the regulatory genes directing patterns of cell
              differentiation and (ii) understanding how genomic plasticity contributes to
              generating the vast morphological diversity observed in the plant kingdom.  The
              second field is morphological and molecular plant evolution, with exciting work
              both in the use of molecular methods to establish evolutionary history of
              higher plants, and on new ideas of how plant morphology has evolved. There have
              been profound discoveries in plant biology since 1993 including the isolation
              of the first plant resistance genes, the demonstration that floral induction is
              evolutionarily conserved in diverse species, the synteny of plant genomes, and
              the isolation of genes responsible for major morphological differences in
              closely related plants.  By concentrating on these and other recent advances in
              plant developmental biology that shed light on evolutionary history or
              mechanisms, our program is able to focus on an intellectually coherent and
              challenging set of topics.  Students and postdoctorals should benefit
              tremendously from the multidisciplinary tone of the talks and the discussions
              since they have a tendency to focus intensely on narrow research projects. 
              This meeting should be a well-spring of new research directions that can be
              integrated into their plans for the future.
