Title       : Modeling Lateral Flow and Liquefaction-Induced Ground Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9613906

Award Number: 9613906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronaldo I. Borja borja@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: CMS-9613906, Ronaldo Borja, Stanford U.    The objective of this
              research program is to develop a  mathematical model for analyzing the problem
              of lateral flow  and liquefaction-induced large ground movement during and 
              following an earthquake. The model is based on a two-phase  mixture theory, and
              involves the development of a finite  element code capable of representing the
              behavior of  saturated soils prior to and during liquefaction. Prior to 
              liquefaction, the soil is represented by an already-  validated
              effective-stress phenomenological constitutive  model based on an elastoplastic
              formulation with nonlinear  kinematic hardening. During liquefaction, the
              liquefied soil  is represented by a total-stress viscoplastic model whose 
              viscosity is determined from extensive numerical simulations  with random
              suspensions of spheres. The two constitutive  models are developed within the
              framework of a finite  deformation theory based on multiplicative plasticity.
              The  resulting finite element model is used to study the  mechanism of
              liquefaction-related large ground displacement,  including the lateral flow and
              prediction of the free ground  surface resulting from such flow.    Two case
              studies are considered in order to validate the  model. The first involves a
              loose saturated sample of  Toyoura sand submerged in water and sloped inside a
              test  subjected to dynamic excitation, causing the soil to liquefy  and flow
              like a viscous fluid. The second study involves a  re-analysis of the nonlinear
              ground response recorded by a  downhole array in Port Island (reclaimed ground
              near  downtown Kobe City, Japan) during the earthquake of January  17, 1995,
              focusing on the impact of this changed soil  behavior during liquefaction. The
              ground response is  simulated assuming a condition of vertically propagating 
              seismic waves, with a full kinematical coupling of the three  components of
              motion.
