Title       : NSF/EPA: A Process Analysis Approach to Pollution Prevention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9613561

Award Number: 9613561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urmila M. Diwekar ud01@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward S. Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1238,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - Diwekar - 9613561    With the growing concern for the environment, it
              is necessary to enhance process simulation capabilities and to develop design
              tools that account for environmental factors in the design and synthesis of
              large-scale chemical processes.  A major obstacle in the design and development
              of processes incorporating environmental control strategies involve
              uncertainties in some of the technical and economic parameters, which commonly
              lead to uncertainties in design, plant performance and cost estimates. 
              Incorporating environmental concerns in the design is a multi-objective problem
              satisfying a number of measures and constraints such as controllability,
              safety, compliance with regulations, cost and risk.  A conceptual design of any
              chemical process involves the identification of an optimal flowsheet structure,
              commonly called optimal design configuration, obtained typically form a large
              number of alternatives constituting the "superstructure".  In fact, synthesis,
              design, and optimization of large-scale processes involving uncertainties often
              requires considerable computational effort.  This work and validation of
              efficient algorithms for stochastic modeling, stochastic optimization and
              programming, multi-objective optimization, and synthesis under uncertainty.   
              The overall objective is to advance the state-of-the-art in the4 area of
              process design for environmental considerations by (a) providing an integrated
              assessment framework tool which can be used to insure that environmental issues
              are fully addressed in all phases of process engineering activities from
              synthesis to design to operations; and (b) developing improved  algorithms for
              stochastic modeling, stochastic optimization, multi-objective optimization
              which will enhance the applicability of the framework for large scale complex
              problems.  Real world problems in conjunction with participating industries
              will be used as test beds for these techniques.  The methodology developed will
              be applied to analyze compl ex process flowsheets and is expected to provide
              insights into process feasibility based on environmental considerations and
              optimal design, plant performance and uncertainty issues.
