Title       : GOALI: Intelligent Decomposition Heuristics for Scheduling Semiconductor
               Manufacturing Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9613708

Award Number: 9613708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reha M. Uzsoy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl G. Kempf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Haldun Aytug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9613708  Uzsoy  This GOALI award represents a combined industry-university
              research effort geared toward the development of optimization-based approximate
              scheduling procedures for complex manufacturing operations.  While
              optimization-based scheduling approaches for complex manufacturing systems are
              not new, they have found relatively little use in practice, primarily because
              they have focused on exact solutions to computationally intractable problems. 
              This research takes a different tack, employing a combination of heuristic
              decomposition methods and machine learning to develop effective approximate
              scheduling procedures for a general class of job-shops that encompass sequence
              dependent setup times, batching, and pipelining.  The investigators include a
              senior researcher from Intel Corporation, and they will use semiconductor wafer
              fabrication facilities and assembly and test facilities as the testbeds for
              their research.       The complexity of semiconductor manufacturing and the
              competitive pressures faced by the industry have made effective manufacturing
              management, in particular shop-floor control, essential to a company's
              survival.  An important part of shop floor control is scheduling the movement
              of material through the equipment in the factory to obtain the best possible
              system performance.  If successful, this work has the potential to reduce
              variability in lead times, thus allowing a company the ability to maintain
              lower floor inventories, respond rapidly to changing market conditions, and
              quote accurate and competitive lead times to their customers.  The strong
              intellectual involvement of an industrial partner in this research will further
              ensure its relevance to practical manufacturing environments.
