Title       : Sensitivity Analysis of Multidimensional Air Qualtiy Models Development and
               Application of a Direct Technique to the Mexico-Southwestern United States
               Border Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1997     
File        : a9613729

Award Number: 9613729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Armistead G. Russell trussell@pollution.ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9613729  Russell  The   major   focus  of  this  proposal  is  to  develop   a 
              computationally effective sensitivity analysis technique for  use  in 
              multidimensional air quality models, and  to  apply  that  technique  to  the
              border region between  the  US  and  Mexico.   As  part  of that application,
              the  research  will  quantify source impacts and develop sensitivity
              coefficients  for various model parameters (e.g. deposition velocities and 
              chemical rate constants). Because of  its climate and  rapid  growth and
              industrialization, the Mexico-southwestern United  States  border  area
              experiences elevated  levels  of  ozone  exceeding  the  national standards  of
               the  two  countries.  Addressing  this  air quality problem in the  region  is
               of  particular   interest  for  several  reasons:   first,   the 
              international nature of the problem, and the expected trans  boundary 
              pollutant flow, along with recent trade agreements  (e.g.  NAFTA and
              Maquiladoras); second, the high  population  growth in the area; and, third,
              the level of controls  which  differ  widely  between  the various  regions. 
              If  one  can  adequately  demonstrate the source-air quality relationships 
              through  the  application  of sensitivity  analysis,  it  is  possible  to 
              develop  much more cost  effective  integrated  strategies for air pollution
              control in the region.  It  is  proposed  to  develop  a computationally 
              attractive  sensitivity  analysis technique for use in  multidimensional  air
              quality models based on the direct decoupled sensitivity  method.    The  
              resulting  method  will  be  designed   and  constructed  in  such  a way as to
              be  easily  transportable  between  air  quality models that are in common 
              application  today, and are being developed for future use.  Furthermore,  the
              system will make use of parallel computing environments.  The method will be
              applied to air quality modeling along the  Mexico-southwestem   U.S.  border  
              to   better   understand  pollutant dynamics in that region, and  to quantify
              the model  responses  to inputs and model parameters.  Finally,  as  an 
              example of the power and uses of such techniques, the method  will  be  applied
               to  address  three  specific  issues   of  importance  in air quality
              engineering of interest  in  that  region:  explore the use of formal
              sensitivity analysis  for  model  evaluation  and intercomparison, quantify 
              how  ozone  concentrations respond to emissions of various compounds and 
              sources,  and  to  further explore the  use  of  sensitivity  analysis   in 
              studying  volatile  organic  compound   (VOC)  reactivity scales.  The expected
              results from this project are:  development  of  a  computationally  efficient 
              sensitivity  method  for  air  quality  modeling;  application of the
              sensitivity  analysis  method along the Mexico-U.S. border to better understand
              the  dynamics  of  air pollutants in that region,  assessment  of  model 
              sensitivities and uncertainties  in  the  application  along  the border
              region, and a growing relationship between  Georgia  Tech and Instituto
              Technologico Estudios Superiores  de  Monterrey  (ITESM) due both to the direct
               collaboration  between the two principal investigators, but also due to the 
              advanced  education  of a Mexican student  (from  ITESM)  at  Georgia Tech.
