Title       : Adaptive Power Control & Link Quality Maintenance in Wireless Communication
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9613817

Award Number: 9613817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Bambos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Wireless networking is rapidly becoming a major component of the  modern
              communications market and increasingly competes with wired  networking, in
              terms of business volume, driven by the demand  for personal communication
              systems & services.    The ubiquitous untethered access that wireless networks 
              provide to users, coupled with the high bandwidth of wired  networks, offers a
              comprehensive solution to modern global  communication requirements.   
              Contrary to the protected environment of the wire, the wireless  channel can be
              highly erratic and essentially stochastic;  interference is an omni-present
              fact one has to cope with.    Historically, networking science has evolved
              based on the wired  network paradigm, where concepts like routing, admission
              control,  packet & circuit switching, congestion management etc. first emerged.
               However, the advent of wireless networks introduces a whole new  dimension to
              the networking problem, which this project is exploring.    Modern applications
              (multimedia) are rapidly driving wireless  communication to the point where
              advanced networking capabilities,  previously limited to the wired world
              (active congestion control,  guaranteed quality of service etc.) need to be
              readily available;  yet, they have to be supported by the highly erratic radio
              channel  and under node mobility, making sporadic connectivity and 
              unpredictable propagation events (shadowing, fading etc.) the rule  rather than
              the exception.    This dichotomy introduces a number of interesting research
              issues  which this project explores. They are mainly centered around the 
              control of transmitter power of network nodes for the quality of  qervice
              maintenance of network links in the presence of interference,  node mobility
              and severe channel impairements. Such control results  in prolonged lifetime of
              battery powered (mobile) nodes, higher network  capacities, and more stable and
              efficient system operations, all of which  are of high practical importance.   
              --------------------  Details abo ut the project will be appearing on the web
              site:  http://www.netlab.stanford.edu/wirelss_nsf.html
