Title       : Multi-Modal Spatial Querying
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9613646

Award Number: 9613646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max J. Egenhofer max@spatial.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy M. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elise H. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott P. Overmyer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the use of two concurrent communication channels,
              graphics and speech, to achieve a successful interaction between a person and a
              geographic information system (GIS).  The objective is to construct a
              multi-modal spatial query language in which users interact with a geographic
              database by drawing sketches of the desired configuration, while simultaneously
              talking about the spatial objects and the spatial relations drawn.  This study
              will increase our understanding of multi-modal spatial interactions, and will
              lead to improved strategies for intelligent integration and processing of such
              multi-modal spatial queries in a GIS.  The key to this interaction is the
              exploitation of complementary or redundant information present in both
              graphical and verbal descriptions of the same spatial scenes.  A
              multiple-resolution model of spatial relations is used to capture the essential
              aspects of a sketch and its corresponding verbal description.  The model
              stresses topological properties, such as containment and neighborhood, and
              considers metrical properties, such as distance and directions, as refinements
              where necessary.  This model enables the retrieval of similar, not only exact,
              matches between a spatial query and a geographic database.  Such new methods of
              multi-modal spatial querying and spatial similarity retrieval will empower
              experts as well as novice users to perform easier spatial searches, ultimately
              providing new user communities access to spatial databases.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
