Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehispanic Settlement Patterns in the Palenque Region,
               Mexico: The Organization of Agricultural Production in a Classic Maya Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9613997

Award Number: 9613997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5343               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr Rodrigo Liendo will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research at the
              Mayan site of Palenque, Mexico which flourished at the height of classic Maya
              civilization. His immediate goal is to reconstruct the settlement pattern and
              agricultural system and to accomplish this he will first conduct a systematic
              regional survey of an area of 65 square km. This will include surface
              collection and recording of architectural data that will provide a synchronic
              view of settlement organization and distribution. It will also identify the
              likeliest locations of elite and non-elite households and show the relationship
              between these and administrative centers. Households will be classified
              according to status on the basis of qualitative architectural indicators and
              well as quantitative indicators such as size and number of associated
              structures. The survey will also incorporate information on agricultural
              features such as terraces and their relation to elite and non-elite residences.
              Local topography, household ecological zone location, site area, slope, soil
              and vegetation characteristics will be noted and the data will be recorded and
              manipulated in a Geographic Information System. During a second phase of the
              work, excavation will be conducted in a sample of 12 households to collect
              ceramics and other materials which will permit determination of household
              status. On this basis it will be possible to determine the relationship between
              agricultural organization and elite control.  One triumph of Maya civilization
              rests on the fact that it developed in a region which can support only limited
              populations today. The Mayans developed agricultural techniques which permitted
              dense population aggregations in a relatively hostile environment  and embedded
              them in a social structure which allowed the development of a complex
              hierarchical form of organization. As agronomists have learned, the central
              difficulties in developing small scale agricultural systems in the tropics
              involve `social` rather than `technical` factors. Because it was so successful,
              archaeologists wish to reconstruct the social context within which the Mayan
              agricultural system developed and have proposed very different hypotheses. Some
              believe that it was highly centralized and administered from either a single
              central place or from smaller dispersed administrative centers. Others think
              that much less vertical integration was present and that small farmers thrived
              in a relatively independent context. Mr. Liendo's research directly addresses
              this question.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              information on the management of small scale tropical agricultural systems
              which may prove of practical use. It will yield data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
