Title       : Multiuser Detection in Non-Gaussian Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9613108

Award Number: 9613108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold V. Poor poor@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The dramatic growth of interest in wireless communication systems has  motivated
              an attendant interest in signal processing  techniques for data  demodulation
              in multiple-access communication channels.  Multi-user  detection provides a
              useful theoretical basis for the study of optimum  signal processing in such
              channels.  One principle established through the  study of  multi-user
              detection is that multiple-access channels can be  reduced to
              ambient-noise-limited channels with appropriate signal  processing.      The
              primary framework within which multi-user detection has been developed  has
              been the Gaussian code-division multiple-access (CDMA) channel, in  which the
              ambient background noise is white and Gaussian.  Experimental  evidence
              suggests that the ambient noise in many channels of interest in  wireless
              applications (e.g., urban and indoor radio channels, and  underwater
              acoustic-modem channels) is significantly non-Gaussian.  In  particular, it is
              known that such noise environments can be better modeled  as being derived from
              more general linear processes, in which both Gaussian  and impulsive components
              can arise. It is further well-established in the  context of single-user
              communications that non-Gaussian noise can be quite  detrimental to the
              performance of systems optimized for Gaussian noise,  whereas it can be quite
              beneficial if appropriately modeled and ameliorated.     Thus, as work in
              multi-user detection moves closer to practice,  it is of  interest  to examine
              the multi-user detection problem in the context of  more realistic ambient
              noise models.  The proposed study will address this  issue in depth. 
              Specifically, three research problems arising in the area  of multiple-access
              communications in non-Gaussian channels will be  addressed - the analysis of
              extant multi-user detectors in non-Gaussian  ambient noise; the design of
              optimum and near-optimum multi-user detectors  for non Gaussian channels; and
              the design of waveform sets for  non-orthogonal signaling through non-G aussian
              channels.     The results of this study should be quite beneficial in practical
               communication systems, particularly in areas such as urban mobile  telephony,
              indoor wireless communications, and tetherless underwater  acoustic
              communications (which is of emerging interest in oceanographic 
              instrumentation). For the foreseeable future, there will be considerable 
              commercial and scientific interest in techniques that allow wireless  networks
              to operate with better performance for more users/subscribers and  with lower
              transmitter power requirements.  This means that signal  processing techniques
              that can significantly improve the performance of  wireless systems in real
              channels, such as those proposed for study here,  will be of significant
              interest to the commercial and scientific sectors.
