Title       : Optimal Experimental Design for Conjoint Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9613045

Award Number: 9613045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82563              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Kanninen barbkann@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1239,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              To assess the total value, including use and nonuse values, of nonmarket goods
              such as environmental amenities, researchers often apply survey techniques that
              allow them to explore public preferences for hypothetical goods or services.
              Until recently, the standard survey technique for this purpose has been the
              contingent valuation (CV) method. Recently, a similar but more complex
              technique, conjoint analysis, has been used in several environmental contexts.
              Conjoint analysis is a marketing technique that can be used to assess values
              for attributes of market or nonmarket goods based on survey respondents'
              willingness to trade-off different bundles of these attributes. In a conjoint
              analysis survey, respondents are presented with a set of scenarios that differ
              in terms of a series of attributes and are asked to rank the alternative
              scenarios, or choose their most preferred. The scenarios in the choice set
              differ by the levels of the different attributes.  A major cost consideration
              in conducting surveys for environmental valuation is the per-unit cost of
              survey administration. At current costs, sample sizes are often limited to the
              smallest researchers feel is necessary for a particular problem. By employing
              optimal survey design techniques, practitioners can increase the informational
              content of each observation, producing the equivalent effect of a larger sample
              size.  The goal of this research is to determine optimal attribute levels and
              choice sets for conjoint analysis questions that, given a fixed number of
              observations, will provide the most information possible about parameter
              estimators of interest, such as mean or median willingness to pay. This
              research will extend the existing literature on the optimal design of conjoint
              analysis surveys in two ways:  it will consider attribute levels as well as
              choice sets as variables in the optimization problem and it will derive
              `optimal` designs as opposed to ''efficient.'' The methods to be used in
              deriving the design results are optimization algorithms, principally, a search
              routine that searches over all choice set combinations to derive optimal choice
              sets and an analytical optimization algorithm to derive optimal attribute
              levels.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
