Title       : District Eleven Weather Study Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a9613103

Award Number: 9613103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39703              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Richards srichard@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Community Sch Dist 11
	      1250 Arnow Avenue
	      Bronx, NY  10469    718/519-2698

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The District 11 Weather Study Program (DEWS) is an innovative district-wide,
              weather-education project, involving all fifth-, and eighth- grade students in
              District 11 which is located in the northeast section of the Bronx.  DEWS
              capitalizes on the most-recent advances in satellite and Internet
              telecommunications technologies.  The predominant principle governing the
              project is that pupil participation in activities that are directed toward the
              utilization of near-real time weather information can help to motivate young
              students to develop an interest in science.  Current satellite-cloud imagery,
              radar graphics, and National Weather Service (NWS) numeric and text information
              are used extensively in lessons at the Northeast Bronx Weather Station (NBWS),
              the center for weather-education activities in District 11.  Current state and
              local forecasts, storm and flood advisories, warnings, and summaries,
              climatological reports, and hourly surface-weather observations are only a few
              examples of the national and international NWS information products available
              to pupils for study.  Each student activity at the NBWS is designed to take
              full advantage of the data streams available at the facility.  All of this
              information is accessible for display on four personal desktop computers.  The
              monitors presently on site, however, do not allow for effective full-class
              viewing of weather graphics and imagery.  The equipment requested for this
              project will allow for full-screen display of real-time data that will greatly
              enhance large group presentations both for student and staff programs at the
              NBWS.  In addition, partial support is requested of real-time data services
              that will enable the NBWS to maintain its present level of real-time weather
              data.
