Title       : Proton Transfer in Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9613962

Award Number: 9613962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob W. Petrich jwp@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Kraus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Dynamics Program is supporting Jacob W. Petrich, Mark S.   Gordon,
              and George A. Kraus of the Department of Chemistry of Iowa State   University
              in their collaborative studies of excited-state proton   transfer in
              biomolecules.  Through a combination of ultrafast   spectroscopy, ab initio
              quantum chemical calculations, and synthetic   organic chemistry, they will
              develop an understanding of excited-state   proton transfer reactions.  Two
              model systems, 7-azaindole and hypericin,   form the focus of these studies. 
              Although excited-state proton transfer   plays a key role in each of these
              systems, they represent two very   different cases, in that the proton transfer
              is strongly mediated by   solvent in 7-azaindole, but only negligibly
              influenced by solvent in   hypericin.  The interplay between theory and
              ultrafast spectroscopy will   lead to revelation of the relative contributions
              of intra- and   intermolecular interactions in these proton transfer reactions.
               Movement of positively-charged hydrogen ions (protons) from one atom to  
              another represents one of the simplest chemical reactions, yet such   reactions
              lie at the heart of an astounding variety of chemical and   biological
              processes.  In some cases, proton transfer may be initiated   through the
              action of light, which adds energy to (`excites`) the   molecule giving up the
              proton.  Despite their conceptual simplicity,   proton transfer reactions may
              in fact occur through rather complex   molecular-level processes.  These
              collaborators will examine two classes   of compounds displaying very different
              types of excited-state proton   transfer reactions.  One group of compounds,
              frequently used as probes of   enzyme structure and reaction chemistry, is
              influenced strongly by the   nature of the solvent in which the molecule is
              dissolved, while the   other, typified by hypericin, an intriguing compound
              which displays   anti-viral action when activated by light, is barely affected
              by the   solvent.  These studies will help to develop a molecular-level  
              understanding of these critical proton transfer processes.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
