Title       : Quantum Dynamics of Coupled Large Amplitude Intermolecular Motions in
               Hydrogen-Bonded and Rare-Gas Heteroclusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9613641

Award Number: 9613641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zlatko Bacic zlatko.bacic@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Professor Zlatko Bacic of New York University is being supported by  
              theTheoretical and Computational Chemistry program.  The project aims to  
              provide an accurate quantum mechanical description of the large amplitude  
              intermolecular vibrations and the intermolecular potential energy   surfaces of
              two hydrogen-bonded clusters, benzene-(H2O)n and (H2O)n, as   well as the
              ultraviolet photodissociation of H2O in argon clusters and   other rare gas
              matrices.  An efficient quantum 6D method will be   developed for the
              calculation of excited 6D intermolecular vibrational   eigenstates of a broad
              class of complexes between a large aromatic   molecule (e.g., benzene,
              naphthalene) and a small polyatomic molecule   such as H2O, NH3.  Vibrationally
              averaged structures and quantum   tunneling dynamics of larger benzene-water
              clusters will be explored   using a rigid-body quantum Monte Carlo method.  A
              methodology for   n-dimensional quantum calculation of the torsional energy
              levels and   far-infrared spectra of small (H2O)n (n=3-6) clusters will be
              developed   and extended to other intermolecular vibrations of the clusters. 
              Bound   state calculations of water and deuterated water clusters will  
              characterize their torsional vibrational dynamics, quantum number  
              assignments, and vibrationally averaged rotational constants.   
              Photodissociation of H2O in Ar_nH2O (n=1-12,54) clusters and rare-gas  
              matrices will be studied to gain an understanding of the mechanisms by   which
              the solvent modifies the photo-fragmentation dynamics of a   polyatomic solute
              (H2O), relative to that of the isolated gas-phase   molecule.  The
              photodissociation dynamics will be simulated using   classical trajectories,
              whereas the initial conditions will be generated   from the quantum 6D
              intermolecular eigenstates of the argon-water cluster   in the ground
              electronic state.    A quantitative understanding of the properties of, and
              processes in,   water and aqueous solutions ultimately depends on the detailed
              knowledge   of the water-water, water-solute, and solute-solute interactions. 
              The   quantum calculations of Professor Bacic for benzene-water and simple  
              water clusters are a tool for the determination of their intermolecular  
              potential energy surfaces from high-resolution spectroscopic data.  These  
              multidimensional potentials should allow characterization on a molecular  
              level of liquid water and water-benzene, systems which are of fundamental   and
              practical importance.  In addition, a deeper understanding will be   gained of
              the intricate dynamical properties of complex hydrogen bonding   networks,
              which shape the properties of condensed phases and biologically   important
              macromolecules.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
